* 9453092
* EPWG: Girls with Disabilities on Line
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Laura Koch, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 12/31/1998
* USD 298,812.00

9453092 Koch The work proposed addresses attitudinal and educational barriers
faced by girls with severe disabilities, grades K-8, in preparing them to
undertake demanding courses of study leading to career options in science,
engineering, and mathematics (SEM). The project involves the collaborative
efforts of the University of Minnesota General College, the Minnesota State
Department of Education, the Minneapolis Public Schools, the St. Paul Public
Schools, and the Parents Advocacy Coalition for Equal Rights. In order to
promote traditional self-determination characteristics of assertiveness,
creativity, self-advocacy, and decision making, this project seeks to achieve
its goals through a focus on the computer-based technologies which support self-
determination skills, taking full advantage of powerful computer technologies,
both extant and emerging. This should provide a structure through which girls
with disabilities can take more autonomous roles in their education, social
lives, and educational, occupational, and independent-living decision-making.
The project targets girls in elementary and junior high grades in view of the
need to make early adaptations and decisions, especially regarding mathematics
course success to permit students to be in a position to pursue rigorous
secondary and postsecondary courses of study in relevant fields. The project is
focused upon: (1) aggressive training in state-of-the-art and emerging adaptive
computer technology which makes the learning and doing of science, engineering,
and mathematics more possible for persons with severe disabilities; (2) peer
training, with mentor and role model interactions; (3) immersion via
telecommunications in opportunities to interact with other girls with
disabilities, as well as with mentors and school personnel; (4) training of
school-based personnel to better ensure early, meaningful accommodations in SEM
courses and co-curricular activities; and (5) aggressive dissemination to
promote ch ange in the ways in which the futures of girls with disabilities are
imagined by the girls themselves, their families, and those charged with their
education and futures planning assistance. The project builds on a history of
successful collaboration among the participant entities in serving the needs of
students with disabilities. It addresses the fact that these girls face barriers
of gender and disability, and thus often are blocked from pursuit of study and
careers in SEM, growing up to become women with disabilities--currently the most
underemployed segment of our population. ***