* 9453923
* The Wisconsin Staff Development Initiative
* EHR,DRL
* 11/01/1994,10/31/2000
* LeRoy Lee, Wisconsin Academy of Sciences Arts & Letters
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 10/31/2000
* USD 5,973,157.00

9453923 Stafford The Wisconsin Staff Development Initiative (WSDI) is a 5-year
project to effect comprehensive S/M/T reform through a program of systematic,
coordinated and continuous staff development activities. Each year Lead Teacher
Institutes (LTI) will prepare 60 teachers in grades K-12 to be change agents in
their schools and to staff the Summer Academy, modeled after the CRAY Academy,
at six sites around the state of Wisconsin. Several teams from nearest neighbor
states will pilot dissemination beyond Wisconsin in a phased approach to
national implementation. The LTIs consist of two 4-week sessions in each of two
consecutive summers. Teacher Enhancement activities include: Participation in
2-weeks of the CRAY Academy, one week preparing to lead a Summer Academy and two
weeks of teaching in a Summer Academy with the aid of a mentor. In the Summer
Academy teachers pick a single topic, from 40 or more S/M/T topics for each week
of participation. Topics include Operation Physics topics, Graphing Calculators,
Fast Plants, etc. Over a three or four year period teachers participate in 3-4
such sessions. Participation in these Summer Academies usually includes school
teams as well as principals. Each academy has a core series of workshops plus
others which reflect local needs. Teachers earn one-graduate credit for each
Summer Academy they complete. The LTIs are held in Chippewa Falls, WI the
original CRAY Academy site. New sites will be phased in as follows: Madison,
LaCrosse, Fennimore, Green Bay in 1994, Milwaukee in 1995, Racine & Hayward in
1996, Rhinelander in 1997, Beloit and Stevens Point in 1998 and Fond du Lac in
1999. The project will use the existing educational infrastructure to deliver
services to teachers and effect comprehensive change in local districts.