* 9453036
* Chinook:  A National Traveling Exhibit on Salmon
* EHR,DRL
* 06/15/1995,11/30/1998
* Linda Kulik, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Barry A. Van Deman
* 11/30/1998
* USD 516,900.00

9453036 Kulik The California Academy of Science will develop "Chinook: A
National Traveling Exhibit on Salmon." The main components will be a 3500 sq.
ft. and a 5000 sq. ft. version of an exhibit about salmon ecology and biology,
genetic diversity, and the science of species preservation. Futher, components
of the exhibit will be reproduced for a 500 sq. ft. exhibit for the new public
visitors center at the Bodega Marine Laboratory. The exhibit will focus on the
Sacramento River winter-run Chinook salmon. Several themes from the California
Science Frameworks and Benchmarks for Science Literacy serve as the foundation
for the interpretation. Benchmarks theme of evolution and the Framework theme of
patterns of change are woven throughout the exhibit and are illustrated by
salmon life cycles, genetic diversity, and physical adaptations. Benchmarks
theme of systems and interactions as well as the Frameworks theme of scale and
structure are also incorporated in the interpretive material. The exhibit will
be developed by the ichthyologists, educators, and exhibit designers of the
California Academy of Science and genetic researcher from the Bodega Marine
Laboratory of the University of California at Davis. Thirteen individuals have
been selected as project advisors. They bring a diversity of perspectives
including expert knowledge of the science concerns (salmon and habitats issues,
anthropology) to the educational interests (both formal and informal). The
various evaluation studies will be carried by CAS staff member Lisa Mackinney.
The complementary materials linking the exhibit with formal education that will
be developed are a Teachers Resource Kit and a Chinook Curriculum Guide. The
Teachers Resource Kit, available to each host site, will include a slide show, a
video tracing the story of salmon fisheries, a special issue of the CAS educator
newsletter, sample of fish scales and otoliths, a compilation of resources from
government agencies and env ironmental organizations, and a bibliography
produced by the CAS Biodiversity Resource Center. The Curriculum Guide will
include sixteen hands-on activities using readily available materials to
reinforce the educational objectives. A Chinook Family Activity Guide targeted
at families with children between the ages of five and ten, will provide parents
with specific steps to facilitate discussion what at the exhibit and to suggest
follow-up activities to do at home.