* 9453060
* Towards Nebraska's Statewide Electronic Library: Planning   the Future
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/1994,10/31/1995
* Joan Giesecke, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Arthur W. St. George
* 10/31/1995
* USD 100,000.00

9453060 Giesecke This planning grant, submitted by the University of Nebraska
and the Nebraska Library Commission, addresses two key barriers to implementing
an electronic library in Nebraska as identified in two recent statewide
conferences: compatibility of network systems and training for end users. The
project will also identify content that should be available through the network
system. Participants will include key stakeholders and agencies currently
involved in electronic delivery of information. The results will be incorporated
into ongoing planning efforts. The project goal is to advance planning for the
electronic library in the state by providing a structure to identify content,
training and software that will enable libraries and information centers
throughout the state, including those with special resources in law, medicine,
and science education, to contribute to the Nebraska Electronic Library. These
issues have not been addressed in the current planning efforts in the state. The
objectives of the plan are to: (1) develop recommendations on types of
information resources that need to be available electronically for the citizens
of Nebraska; (2) identify training needs and develop model training programs to
meet citizen needs; (3) test and evaluate options for advancing network access
through ATM technology, through use of the z39.50 protocol, and through
client/server technology in the medical area, and; (4) develop implementation,
assessment, and evaluation strategies for the recommendations and facilitate
transferability of these proposals to efforts by other states. This planning
process will build on planning activities already in place in Nebraska, and a
recently funded Corporation for Public Broadcasting grant to create pilot
Community Wide Education and Information services. Methodologies for development
of recommendations and for the testing of software/hardware pilots include: (1)
electronic survey of library and information centers to solicit input on content
and training; (2) a planning retreat of key stakeholders to formulate
recommendations based on input from the survey and from site visits to select
states working on electronic library issues; (3) testing of user acceptance of
software options through user surveys and obtrusive observation, and by
evaluating predetermined search question results, and; (4) testing hardware
options through time trials and reliability tests. By completing a statewide
plan for the content of an electronic library system and for a model training
program, the libraries will ensure that future development is compatible with
existing efforts and meets the information needs of Nebraskans. The model
developed as part of this plan will be applicable to other states.