* 9453938
* STAFF Leadership for Rural School Districts
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Dennis Schatz, Pacific Science Center Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 01/31/1999
* USD 711,713.00

9453938 Schatz Three rural school districts Riverview, Skykomish and Snoqualmie
Valley in conjunction with the Pacific Science Center will cooperatively change
how science is taught at the elementary level in the schools. The project will
prepare each district to develop a new vision for elementary science curriculum
establish mechanisms to implement and sustain the vision provide staff
development to all elementary teachers as a beginning to implement the vision.
Through extensive staff development 30 teachers, called STAFF leaders, together
with 10 administrators will become leaders in their districts. These STAFF
leaders with the involvement of the entire teaching staff and the community,
utilizing the best in quality science education will develop comprehensive K-5
curricula that reflects current research and national standards. The leaders
will provide 40 hours of science education staff development to each district's
entire elementary teaching staff, a total of 193 teachers. This 40 hours
provides just the beginning, as districts have committed to developing ongoing
support for both staff development and materials management. The goal is to
provide all teachers with a minimum 153 hours of professional development.
Principals and administrators will receive 121 hours and parents 32 hours. The
request is for $669,100 of NSF support with cost share estimated at $1,004,576.