* 9453741
* MPWG:  Idaho JETS--Pre-college Engineering Summer Workshops for High School Students
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Jean Teasdale, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 08/31/1996
* USD 62,530.00

9453741 Teasdale To change the perceptions that young women have about
themselves, as well as about the fields of engineering as career options, a two-
week summer engineering experience for young men and women will be offered by
the University of Idaho College of Engineering. The workshop will incorporate
strategies to improve: the instructional climate provided by the faculty; the
understanding of gender and cultural diversity issues by students, faculty, and
counselors; and the self-esteem of the young women. The new strategies and
approaches will be incorporated into an ongoing summer experience for high
school students which has been offered for a number of years, but which
previously had not been successful in attracting young women. This project will
offer the first opportunity for a university experience for most of the
students. They will register for a two-credit pre-engineering course, live on
the University campus, attend courses and work in laboratories in University
buildings, as well as use other University facilities. The college atmosphere
will provide a transitional experience for the students which will be valuable
when they attend college after high school graduation. It is anticipated that
not only will the young women develop more positive perceptions about their
abilities in math, science, and engineering, and change perceptions about
engineering as a career option, but that the young men will have a better
understand of diversity issues and profit from the enhanced learning
environment. ***