* 9453921
* Math/Science Enhanced Manufacturing Technology Training for Females and Minorities
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1999
* George Taliadouros, Minuteman Regional Vocational Technical School
* Continuing grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 08/31/1999
* USD 356,076.00

9453921 Amara A pilot manufacturing laboratory facility has been established at
Minuteman Science and Technology High School. A formal three year curriculum in
manufacturing technology has been developed. This project will over the next
four years develop an integrated manufacturing instructional model for thirty
(30) women and minority teachers grades 6-12. Participants will be introduced to
the project via 3 seminars held in the spring. The seminars will be on equity
issues, manufacturing technology and each summer over the life of the project
the participants will receive an intensive three (3) week workshop on current
trends and practices in manufacturing. Topics include automation, electronics,
mechanics and bio manufacturing. Emphasis will be placed upon integrating
mathematics and science, the importance of communication and human relations,
technology skills related to manufacturing, career awareness, hands-on
activities appropriate for junior and senior high student. Each academic year
the original thirty teachers will acquire more complex integrated math/science
and technology skills coupled with specific workshops on women and minority
issues as they begin to develop integrated projects suited to their teaching
environment. The project emphasizes a realistic view of science and technology
as problem solving activities which require skill in collaboration,
experimentation, writing, computing and the pursuit of exploration. The amount
requested is $361,116 for 54 months with cost share of $815,179.