* 9453257
* Texas Center for the Replication of Excellence in Advanced  Technological Education (Texas Create)
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Robert Benson, Austin Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/1995
* USD 48,362.00

9453257 Johansen Leading math, science, and technology educators from Texas are
forming a state-wide consortium, Texas Center for the Replication of Excellence
in Advanced Technological Education, or Texas CREATE. The consortium has
established Long-Range Goals for a Center: to link the consortium state-wide; to
establish partnerships in education, industry, and government that result in
regional science academies; to validate the skills requirements of regional
employers; to produce and implement interdisciplinary curricula and
methodologies for delivery of instruction in mathematics, science and technology
core courses; to produce and implement integrated curricula in environmental
technology; to strengthen enrollment, retention, and job placement for women and
minorities; to establish a network between industry and education that results
in internships and cooperative exchanges; and to disseminate the results of the
Center's activities. Texas CREATE anticipates the following activities during
planning year: organization of interdisciplinary teams; commitments from
regional partners that will lead to science academies; establishment of the
scope of investigation to be performed by the center; development of
communication links; brainstorming with partners at regional meetings;
development of a canvassing instrument for surveying industries; development,
testing, and refinement of a model instruction module; development of a model
for faculty enhancement and teacher training; development of a strategy for
recruitment, retention and job placement for women and minorities;
recommendation on several environmental technology programs and a plan for
integrating environmental technology into programs that exist; and a model for
curriculum development. ***