* 9453112
* EPWG:  Girls in Science:  Museum, University, School and    Community Connections
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Dyanne Tracy, Cranbrook Institute of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 06/30/1998
* USD 526,511.00

9453112 Johnson Inter-connected activities of Cranbrook Institute of Science and
Oakland University seek to help change the infrastructure of schools and the
University. The project aims to create a new generation of teachers trained to
be gender fair, and to make gender-fair teaching practices more pervasive. It
seeks to measure science club and other informal science experiences for girls
as vehicles for changing classroom climates; and it aims to assess the value of
a community-based resource center to help sustain support for girls in science
education. The project builds upon a NSF-funded Model Project for Women and
Girls at Cranbrook, which has addressed basic issues of gender equity through
informal science activities, as well as upon more than a decade of experience in
collaborative work with pre-service university students who will be the science
teachers of tomorrow. These students have not yet established their patterns of
classroom leadership behavior, and their attitudes toward younger students and
teaching practices can still be influenced to recognize and eliminate
conscious/unconscious discrimination against girls. Teams of experts on
classroom gender bias are to serve as trainers in gender-fair behavior, which is
then to be applied and evaluated in classrooms. A second thrust focuses on
girls' science clubs and builds upon accumulating evidence that informal science
activities for girls outside the classroom favorably impacts in-school science
learning. Intensive evaluation is to determine if middle school girls who choose
to join weekly science clubs in Pontiac demonstrate more positive behaviors in
their science and math classes, and if they contribute to changes in the
classroom climates. Trained Oakland University pre-service students and
Cranbrook staff will lead the girls' science clubs. The third element is to
provide continuing support for girls, teachers, and parents, through a resource
center at Cranbrook. Mentoring assistance, ref errals, workshops, information
and materials are to be readily accessible to help sustain connections among
girls, parents, teachers and SEMs (science, engineering and mathematics)
professionals. ***