* 9453744
* EPSCoR States Information Network
* EDU,ESR
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1996
* George Happ, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* James Hoehn
* 06/30/1996
* USD 218,792.00

Abstarct 744 Happ EPSCoR States Information Network The project, involving four
EPSCoR states (Vermont, West Virginia, Idaho, and Arkansas), will establish a
pilot electronic document delivery network utilizing transmission of digitized
information over networked telecommunications systems to meet the information
needs of over one hundred widely-disbursed EPSCoR researchers. By providing
immediate access to high-quality copies of articles from scientific journals in
multiple research collections, the base of scientific and technical information
accessible to these researchers will be greatly enhanced, thus stimulating the
development of competitive research in many arenas. Rapid access to essential
scientific information is a critical component in the development of a fully
competitive research environment. Although the resources of major research
collections in other states have long been available to institutions supporting
EPSCoR projects through conventional interlibrary loan arrangements and systems
such as OCLC, the time involved in processing such requests often lessens their
usefulness in the conduct of competitive research. Commercial document delivery
services based upon fax technology have recently emerged, but their viability is
limited by restricted coverage of the scientific/technical literature and
dependence upon a transmission medium which lacks the high resolution necessary
for accurate copying of critical plates, photographs, formulae, and tables. The
enhancement of existing resource sharing networks in the four participating
states with electronic transmission technology will be a one-time investment
with a lasting effect upon the quality and timeliness of information delivery in
support of research. Extending this access to the four states' pooled
collections and strengthening research journal holdings in specialized targeted
areas in each of the lead institutions will further augment the base of
available information. Once the i nitial investment in journal backfiles and
transmission equipment has been made, the enhancements introduced in this
project will be maintained by the institutions' base budgets, bringing about a
systemic change in the information infrastructure necessary for competitive
research. Once tested, this concept will be developed in later phases to include
the remaining fourteen EPSCoR states, many of which have expressed interest in
joining this project in the future. In addition, the opportunity for placing
receiving equipment directly into the laboratories of EPSCoR researchers and
partner corporations in the private sector may be considered, enabling
information delivery to the researchers' desktops.