* 9453620
* Project Connect
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/1994,05/31/1996
* John Dossey, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 05/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

DUE 9453620 Title: Project Connect Project Connect is a cooperative effort of
Illinois State University (ISU), Eastern Illinois University (EIU), and Western
Illinois University (WIU) to develop a network of universities, community
colleges, and public schools across Central Illinois devoted to the improvement
of teacher education activities in the region served. Specific efforts are
targeted in the project goals to increase the active role of faculty from pure
and applied mathematics and science in the teaching/learning process of
prospective and inservice teachers and to further communication among all
parties with an interest in mathematics and science education in the schools and
in teacher education. The project is providing for (a) a policy conference for
school administrators; (b) development of at least two new courses in
mathematics and science for prospective teachers of elementary and secondary
school mathematics and science on each of the three university campuses; (c)
creation of regional groups of university, community college, and school faculty
to plan and develop better programs of teacher education for each of the three
regions (ISU, EIU, and WIU); (d) development of distance education methods for
providing assistance to schools; and (e) dissemination of previous and currently
developed materials for teacher preservice education and faculty development for
practicing teachers.