* 9453491
* Presidential Faculty Fellows:  Research in Precision        Engineering, Machining Technology, and Quality Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1994,09/30/2001
* Jun Ni, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/2001
* USD 504,610.00

9453491 Ni The award is for research in precision engineering, machining
technology, and quality control in manufacturing. Research in precision
engineering is focused on cost-effective software-based error compensation
methods to improve machining accuracy, and development of methods to enhance
performance of coordinate measurement machines. Research issues to be addressed
include characterization of the thermal behavior of machine tools and coordinate
measurement machines, and development of statistical sampling and evaluation
methods for geometric dimensioning and tolerancing requirements based on
discrete measurement data. Research in machining technology would focus on
developing a science based for drills and drilling processes, and prevention of
chatter in machining. Research in quality control involves utilization of
advanced statistical techniques to deal with more extensive process measurement
data, and integration of automatic process monitoring and diagnosis techniques
with engineering process knowledge. Research in precision engineering is
important for both commercial applications and weapons systems, and offers great
potential for improving manufacturing competitiveness. Drilling is the most
commonly used material removal process, accounting for more than 80 percent of
chips produced. Chatter is a significant barrier to increase productivity in
machining in general. Research in drilling and chatter is thus of great
practical importance. The new generation of quality control methods proposed
here is important for industrial competitiveness, and is needed to accommodate
current production practices which result in more extensive measurement data.