* 9453617
* Portland Area Partnership for the Advancement of Preservice Preparation of Future Teachers of Mathematics and Science
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Carl Wamser, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1997
* USD 50,000.00

Eleven higher education institutions, including community colleges, private
liberal arts colleges, and public institutions, will collaborate with local
schools and community agencies in the Portland metropolitan area. The
overlapping goals of this partnership are three-fold: 1) develop a coherent and
coordinated plan to increase and support minority students in mathematics and
science education, and work to secure commitments from member institutions to
implement the plan; 2) develop a plan for establishing a Middle School Science
Program modeled on the successful Middle School Math Program at PSU; 3) develop
a plan for a coordinated program of mathematics and science courses recommended
for preservice mathematics and science teachers, and include plans for revision
and design of courses to be added. Anogher goal is to develop and disseminate an
inter-campus catalogue of course listing, descriptions of relevant faculty,
programs, placement affiliations, departmental strengths, enrollments, and
student demographics. Each goal will be met through task forces dedicated to
each of these individually, but with the collective efforts of all task force
members who will be informed of developments through electronic bulletin board.
The three task forces will each be chaired by teams of two members from the
Steering Committee. Each task force will have eight task force leaders
responsible for coordinating their task force's activities. Anb additional 22
members will join each task force to develop plans for change in their
respective focus area. All plans will be completed to the extent that member
institutions should be able to begin implementation by the end of this grant
period.