* 9453016
* READING RAINBOW
* EHR,DRL
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Lee Rockwell, Nebraskans for Public Television Inc (NPTV)
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 12/31/1996
* USD 838,849.00

9453016 Liggett ABSTRACT Nebraskans for Public Television are producing three
programs in the "Reading Rainbow" series that focus on mathematics and
developing and implementing a special math outreach effort aimed at parents with
a secondary audience of teachers. The programs will take a literature-based
approach to mathematics which helps make it possible ". . . for children to have
the same authentic experiences with math that they are coming to have with
language, social studies, science and the arts." (Read Any good Math Lately? by
Whitin and Wilde). The goal of the project is to expand the impact of the
"Reading Rainbow" series by: - integrating quality math-oriented books with
science and literary selections into the series, and - making quality children's
math-oriented books more visible to parents, public librarians, and teachers and
to engage children's interest in reading about and exploring math in the real
world. The outreach effort will develop a special math effort directed to
parents, children, and teachers. A special publication for parents and a teacher
guide will be created for the new math-focused programs. The producers will work
with the Family Math Project at the Lawrence Hall of Science in training parents
and children and will also direct community outreach efforts towards
economically and socially disadvantaged families. This effort will engage these
families in math related activities through partnerships with community-based
organizations and local public television stations involved in PBS's Ready to
Learn Project. Partnership organizations include the National Council for
Teachers of Math, Girls Inc, The Connecticut Academy for Education in
Mathematics, Science and Technology, EQUALS Family Math Project, and the Weekly
Reader Corporation. "Reading Rainbow" partnerships also have been established
between three SSI's -- Louisiana, Michigan, and Ohio -- and PBS stations in
those states.