* 9453099
* MPWG:  Development of a Southern Illinois SEM Women and     Girls Support Network
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Mary Wright, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

9453099 Shea The long-term objective of this project is to create a climate in
which parents, teachers and peers encourage girls to develop their own natural
interest in SEM, and to provide a sequence of exciting SEM activities
appropriate for age, experience, and skill levels. Geographically, the project
targets the Southern Illinois (SI) region consisting of 22 mostly rural
counties, including the 9 poorest counties in the state, where the percentage of
girls preparing for college is significantly lower than statewide or national
averages. The target populations are: pre-college girls, their parents,
teachers, and school counselors. The project is unique in that: (1) it
encompasses a wide geographic area; and (2) its long-range plan is to provide a
sequence of SEM experiences for girls, beginning with a broad "taste" of many
SEM disciplines, and leading through successively more intense experiences to a
level of mastery in chosen fields that will give the girls the self-confidence
to continue on to college. A sequence of SEM activities will be set up in
cooperation with the Shagbark Council of the Girl Scouts, in the St. Louis
Science Center, and in the Carbondale Science Center. In grade school, the
participants' curiosity will be piqued via Science Experiences for Girl Scout
troops, including visits to the St. Louis Science Center. Attending Expanding
your Horizons Workshops (EYH) will provide more intensive, hands-on experiences,
as well as role-models of women scientists at work. For somewhat older girls,
participation includes the Science Fair Cooperative Workshops; small-group work
on an exhibit for the Carbondale Science Center; and in-depth, hands-on science,
engineering, mathematics (SEM) experiences at a WISE summer camp. Guided by
female SEM faculty and graduate students, the participants are to interact with
older girls who already have experienced a more advanced phase of the project,
and with role-model women scientists. Participants also a re to give a helping
hand to younger girls in the pipeline. The involvement of parents, teachers and
school counselors is essential, in discussions of how females best learn
science, what career opportunities are open to women in SEM, etc., and in hand-
on SEM experiences that they can share with the girls. The climate change
envisioned for SI will be supported by a Database of Science Activities for
disseminating information about SEM activities to the community, available to SI
students, parents, teachers, and to public libraries, throughout the calendar
year. This database will be widely advertised through SI schools, libraries, and
community organizations. ***