* 9453762
* Treasure From The Cliffs:  Exploring Marine Fossils -- The  Calvert Marine Museum's Paleontology Exhibit
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1994,03/31/1998
* Michael Gottfried, Calvert Marine Museum
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Butler
* 03/31/1998
* USD 173,473.00

9453762 Gottfried The Calvert Marine Museum will develop an exhibit and
complementary programming interpreting the Miocene Age marine life. Treasure
from the Cliffs: Exploring Marine Fossils will use the world famous fossils of
Calvert Cliffs as the basis for the exhibit. It is their intention to convey a
strong sense of the personal process of discovery and the creative component of
scientific inquiry to the exhibit visitors. In their words, "The overriding
purpose of Treasure from the Cliffs is to model a new paradigm for natural
history exhibits: to take a humanistic and holistic approach that recognizes the
centrality of imagination to the scientific enterprise, and that engages
curiosity and creativity -- as well as intellect -- in the process of science
learning." Upon entering the exhibit, a visitor's interest will be peeked by
seeing the large, dramatically lit, fossil Great White Shark Tooth. Visitors
will get involved in the wonder and process of science at the beginning of the
exhibit in the Paleontology Office/Lab and Fossil Identification area. They will
then move on to see a replicated section of the Calvert Cliffs and cases
illustrating how fossil deposits form. Two recreated Miocene dioramas one of
which will include a full-size skeletal reconstruction of the giant fossil Great
White Shark come next. Visitors will then be able to investigate on their own in
a reading station and a video and demonstration theater. Visitors will exit the
exhibit after a section that shows how the modern Chesapeake Bay was formed.
This leads them seamlessly into the museum's next exhibit hall Estuary Patuxent:
A River and its Life. The museum will develop a series of complementary programs
in association with this exhibit to reach a wider audience that will include
formal educators among others. They will organize a speakers service, develop a
fossil field guide, and produce a video about the Great White Shark.