* 9453603
* The Nature of Science and Mathematics:  A Capstone          Experience for Preservice Teachers in Middle-Grades         Education
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1997
* Timothy Johnston, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 11/30/1997
* USD 100,000.00

The University of North Carolina at Greensboro will arrange summer research
internships for 10 middle-grades education majors and 10 experienced middle-
school science or mathematics teachers in faculty research laboratories.
Preservice and in service interns will work in pairs so that the preservice
students can benefit from the classroom experience of their service partners as
they assimilate the significance of their research experience for the practice
of teaching. A series of meetings will be held during the summer to facilitate
this assimilation. During the same summer, a working group of discipline
faculty, education faculty and middle-school teachers will develop a two-
semester interdisciplinary courses entitled "The Nature of Science and
Mathematics." The preservice participants will take this course during the
following academic year, when they will also complete their student teaching in
the Guilford County Schools. Every effort will be made to place student teachers
in the classrooms of their research internship partners. Assessment of the
graduates' first semester of independent teaching will be carried out in the
following fall semester to examine the effect of the research experience and the
interdisciplinary course on their teaching of science and mathematics in the
middle- school classroom.