* 9453180
* Physics Education in the Two-Year Colleges: A Neglected     Resource
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2001
* Michael Neuschatz, American Institute of Physics
* Continuing grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2001
* USD 409,640.00

Michael Neuchatz DUE 9453180 American Inst. of Physics FY95 $199,988 College
Park, MD 20740 FY96 $93,000 FY97 $92,692 Two-year colleges have the potential to
provide education programs which will produce a technically sophisticated
workforce able to respond to the changing needs of the U.S. economy. In
addition, there have been calls to reform and update the science and technology
programs at these institutions. Yet, surprisingly little is known about existing
programs or the faculty who lead them. In order to assess the success of the
reforms that are being proposed, it is essential to have an understanding of
current conditions in these programs. There are several reasons to examine
physics in detail at the two-year college level: 1) The existence of detailed
information about physics education at both the high school and four-year
college level will allow physics education at the two-year college level to be
placed in a broader context; 2) Physics courses are among the core requirements
for most technology-based programs at two-year colleges, and thus help define
the overall quality of these programs; and 3) Since physics is relatively well-
defined as a discipline and its two-year college faculty small in number, the
study will serve as a model that can be applied to other disciplines. The
primary vehicle for studying physics education at two-year colleges will be a
survey of all full-time and part-time faculty who teach physics. A two-stage
approach will be employed to define this population. Academic deans and
directors of vocational programming at each two-year college will be asked to
identify relevant department chairs, who will then be asked to indicate all fu
ll- and part-time faculty who teach physics. The project design anticipates a
high response rate from both groups. All faculty identified by the chairs will
receive a detailed questionnaire seeking information about their workloads,
education and employment backgrounds, the facilities and resources available to
them, opportunities for professional development, teaching methods and
instructional materials used, the nature of articulation agreements with nearby
high schools and four-year colleges, and other key indicators of their work
environment. In addition to the survey, face-to-face interviews with chairs and
faculty (both full- and part-time) will be conducted at twelve two-year
colleges, chosen to reflect the variation in institutional size and control,
academic orientation, and geographic region. The interviews will provide an
opportunity to probe issues which are not easily captured in a self-administered
format. In addition, 6 to 8 students at each institution will participate in a
student focus group. The students' perspectives on the quality and difficulty of
their physics courses, their interactions with the physics faculty, their
reasons for taking physics, and their educational goals will enhance the
information gained through the faculty survey and interviews. The results of
this research will be coordinated with other higher education studies and
disseminated to representatives of local industries, department chairs and
faculty at two-year colleges, high schools, and four-year colleges, and other
professional organizations active at the two-year college level. The
investigators will actively collaborate with two-year college groups to provide
relevant and timely information to current and proposed regional two-year
college development programs.