* 9453719
* MPWG:  Project Parity
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Lydia Gibb, Talcott Mtn Sci Ctr For Student Involvement
* Standard Grant
* Larissa Rogers
* 09/30/1996
* USD 115,304.00

9453719 Gibb Project Parity is to be a model for schools, community groups and
parents to interest young girls in science. The program is designed to bring
together a synergistic network of adults and children to increase the
involvement of young girls in science and mathematics, while heightening their
levels of enjoyment and self-confidence in these area. Ultimately, programs such
as this will serve a longer range goal to increase the number of women entering
into scientific and science-related fields. The focus is to provide
motivational, hands-on science experiences, both inside and outside the
classroom, to fourth and fifth grade girls, and to establish the support
necessary to maintain an interest in science. A positive change in attitude
toward science can be achieved by providing the girls with exciting, hands-on
materials, opportunities to experience success in science, and support from
teachers and parents. Thus, the project's overall goals are: to create a
supportive environment for young girls to pursue science studies; to provide a
model that can be replicated by schools, community groups and parents; to
foster, in young girls, a positive attitude toward science, technology and
related mathematics; to encourage participation in science and related math
activities; to increase teachers' and parents' awareness of social bias toward
women in science. Approaches will be employed to develop self-esteem and build
confidence in the use of scientific and technological equipment. Participants
will be directly involved in scientific investigation and cooperative learning.
Components of this program include: specific training for parents and teachers;
hands-on science workshops for girls in grades 4 and 5; classroom activities
with mixed-gender groups; and female role models in the sciences. Training
sessions for teachers and parents will consist of attitude awareness exercises,
teaching and patenting strategies, and hands-on science instruction. Parents w
ill participate in an initial evening hands-on science workshop with their
daughters. During the year there will be five additional, hands-on science
workshops at Talcott Mountain Science Center for the girls and their teachers.
Parents will be encouraged to attend and to work with their daughters on science
activities at home. Following each hands-on science workshop, the teachers will
conduct hands-on science activities in the regular classroom on related topics.
All participants and collaborators will be linked via an established computer
network through the Science Center. Students will have the opportunity to
dialogue with local female role models at work and explore applications of
science to potential career choices. Students also will have access to national
role models through Project PROMMISE, (Providing Role Model Minorities In
Science Education). Dissemination, with the goal of replication by others, is an
important aspect of this project. Vehicles of dissemination include a live
interactive telecast, and newsletter, a handbook for developing a model program
and an accompanying training video tape. ***