* 9453906
* CRCM  "The Comprehensive Regional Center For Minorities for the Greater Philadelphia Region"
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Stephen Cox, PATHS/PRISM
* Standard Grant
* Betty Ruth Jones
* 08/31/1995
* USD 500,000.00

HRD-9453906 Stephen R. Cox PATHS/PRISM Suite 700 7 Benjamin Franklin Pkwy.
Philadelphia, PA 19103-1294 "A Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities for
the Greater Philadelphia Region" The National Science Foundation's Comprehensive
Regional Center for Minorities (CRCM) in Philadelphia as a representative of the
Greater Philadelphia Consortium and PATHS/PRISM: The Philadelphia Partnership
for Education, is composed of four metropolitan school districts; seventeen
universities, colleges, and community colleges, museums; corporations; non-
profit partnerships;; and minority professional and community organizations. The
goal of the CRCM is to significantly increase the number of minority students,
(specifically African-Americans, Latinos and Native Americans, preparing for
science, engineering and mathematics (SEM) education and careers. The
fulfillment of the CRCM's mission and goal is being accomplished through the
integration of three principal components: pre-college professional development
programs, pre- college student programs, and college student programs. The CRCM
has functioned to strengthen the educational pipeline and to indirectly create
systemic impact through strategic intervention in the region. As of the end of
year III, the CRCM has serviced approximately 4413 students and 300 teachers. In
year IV, the CRCM is taking the strengths and experiences of the first three
years and applying these best practices to a K-12th grade cluster of schools, as
well as continuing programs which have been successful in meeting our goal. The
CRCM is working very closely with the school District of Philadelphia and other
Consortium partners to develop strong mathematics and science school clusters.
The real value of this system of strong clusters across the district will be to
sustain the long-term goals of moving students successfully through the pipeline
and strengthening teachers in future years. ***