* 9453764
* A Distributed Multi-Server Architecture for Scalable Educational Applications
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1994,03/31/1996
* William Barowy, Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 03/31/1996
* USD 523,030.00

9453764 Feurzeig The projected National Information Infrastructure will have to
accommodate a tremendous level of user traffic, with great dynamic fluctuations
in both user load and computational demand-and it will have to do this in a
user-transparent seamless fashion. At the same time, the system will need to be
a great deal more accessible and friendly than current networks, to better serve
users of widely varying degrees of sophistication. This calls for the
development of new networking technologies incorporating significant advances in
the underlying technological foundations. It also calls for a new and more
natural superstructure based on a distinctly different organizational paradigm
that will provide the required salability while supporting the rich, complex,
multi-media communication, computation, and collaboration essential for
distributed educational networking applications. We propose to develop and
demonstrate MuseNet, a sophisticated technological infrastructure for network-
mediated science and math education. MuseNet is a generic distributed computer
and communications environment simultaneously accessible by multiple users over
interactive computer network connections. The system will support instructional
interactions centered on student work with science and mathematics microworlds
including visual simulations and models. The programs will be distributed
through network servers for local operation on client machines. The enabling
technology will support the communication, computational, and educational
environments for supporting an extensive and diverse set of science education
projects. It will serve as a pilot facility for exploring and investigating the
technical and educational issues posed by high bandwidth networks such as the
projected NII system. ***