* 9453932
* Reshaping Mathematics in the Middle Grades in Missouri:     A Model to Improve Mathematics Curriculum, Teaching and     Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1995,09/30/2000
* John Beem, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* diane spresser
* 09/30/2000
* USD 1,053,400.00

9453932 Reys RESHAPING MATHEMATICS IN THE MIDDLE GRADES IN MISSOURI: A MODEL TO
IMPROVE MATHEMATICS CURRICULUM, TEACHING, AND LEARNING The University of
Missouri - Columbia, in collaboration with Missouri school districts, will
initiate and support the effective implementation of four NSF-funded middle
school mathematics curricula (Mathematics in Context, Connected Math, Seeing and
Thinking Mathematically, Six Through Eight Mathematics) in Missouri schools. The
three-year project targets directly 160 teachers and administrators representing
15 Missouri school districts. In Year 1, 60 middle school
teachers/administrators in teams and four regional associates explore the four
curricula through a one-week summer institute that emphasizes the vision of the
NCTM Standards; four three-day conferences, where each conference emphasizes one
of the curricular projects and is led by representatives of that project; and
implementation of at least one unit of study from each of the four curricula by
each middle school teacher. In Year 2, 100 additional "colleague" teachers from
the 15 school districts join the summer institute. The expanded teams receive
training on the specific curriculum chosen by their faculty to be used in their
school. In Year 3, the project focuses on dissemination conferences and
implementation of the new curricula. Evaluation of project activities includes
monitoring the professional growth of teachers/administrators as they interact
with peers and staff via project meetings and electronic communications, and the
impact of the new curricula on teacher views of mathematics at the middle school
level. Cost-sharing from the University of Missouri and from partner school
districts represents 59% of the NSF award amount.