* 9453534
* Presidential Faculty Fellow
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1999
* Derrick Rollins, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/1999
* USD 500,000.00

ABSTRACT - 9453534 Derrick Rollins/Iowa State University Because of the
"quality" revolution and global competition, engineers are finding a greater
need to learn and apply statistical techniques. However, statisticians and
engineers often find interaction difficult due to language barriers imposed by
differing academic cultures. As a result, engineers frequently rely on one
another to teach and apply statistical concepts. However, since the majority of
engineers have little formal education in statistics, their statistical
understanding is progressing slowly. Hence, the PIs main teaching goal is to
increase the proper understanding and application of statistics in engineering,
in particular, chemical engineering. Five areas in chemical engineering are
targeted for research in the next five years: industrial data reconciliation and
gross error detection, statistical modeling and sensor validation in space life
support systems, statistical methods to enhance neural networks, improving
powder mixture homogeneity, and statistical process control. These research
projects will involve faculty and graduate students from statistics, chemical
engineering, and a number of other engineering disciplines. The teaching and
research goals will be accomplished in the following ways. A new undergraduate
statistics course for chemical engineering students will be developed which will
be the basis for a new textbook. In addition, a graduate course in chemical
engineering on advanced statistical modeling that will come primarily from
research in modeling complex chemical engineering systems will also be
developed. The advanced process control course for chemical engineering graduate
students which the PI has recently developed will be updated to use a state-of-
the-art distributed control system. In terms of outreach, the PI will develop a
number of statistics courses that can be taught to a variety of engineering and
scientific disciplines. Research, as mentioned above, will be active in five
areas. In the areas of data reconciliation and gross error detection, major
progress is expected in the development of methods and their implementation into
industrial processes. Secondly, funds will be used to develop statistical
techniques that validate and improve measured variables in space closed-loop
life support systems (CLLSS), which is a major challenge because of the required
accuracies and the low concentrations of chemical species. Hence, this funding
will be used to develop a working algorithm (i.e. a computer program) to
validate sensor measurements for the initial phase of modeling CLLSS. Artificial
neural networks (ANN) have received considerable attention in recent years in
many scientific and human behavioral disciplines and the PI will attempt to: (1)
increase understanding of the strength and weaknesses of ANN as they apply to
chemical processes; (2) increase theoretical understanding of ANN as they relate
to model development in order to evaluate them against current statistical model
building techniques; (3) determine the best modeling approach for a given
application -- statistical or ANN and; (4) investigate the development of
statistical procedures to cross-validate ANN models Specific applications will
include modeling and controlling the product moisture content in industrial
grain dryers. The PIs research program to improve powder mixture homogeneity
will continue by looking at: (1) improving the ability to determine if mixtures
are significantly segregated; (2) increasing understanding of mixing phenomena;
(3) improving the ability to diagnose inhomogeneity and; (4) transferring
theoretical and empirical knowledge to the manufacturing processes in the form
of operating guidelines and process and equipment improvements.