* 9453898
* RCMS:Special Project: 1994 SACNAS Conference at Chicago, IL;  March 24-27, 1994
* EDU,EES
* 03/15/1994,08/31/1995
* Cecilio Barrera, Society for Advancement of Chicanos & Native Americans in Sci
* Standard Grant
* William E. McHenry
* 08/31/1995
* USD 27,104.00

9453898 Barrera This proposal for the SACNAS annual conference will be held on
March 24-27, 1994 in Chicago, IL. The objective of the conference is to
stimulate the interest of underrepresented minority high school students,
undergraduate students, graduate students, post- doctoral fellows seeking
science and engineering careers; and to attract faculty, research scientists and
university and government representatives interested in sharing their
experiences and eager to learn and demonstrate how one can succeed in a science
and engineering career. The conference will conduct symposia on recent Native
American and Hispanic advances and accomplishments in Science, Engineering, and
Mathematics fields. The conference will also have a series of workshops and
information on career opportunities in the science and engineering fields. In
addition, graduate students will conduct oral research presentations and
undergraduate students will conduct poster presentations. The conference will
provide a forum where peers and potential mentors or role models can meet,
network, advise and encourage students to be competitive and fulfill research
careers. This conference will conduct a special workshop on developing grant
writing skills and science careers outside the laboratory.