* 9453260
* Planning Grant for a National Center of Excellence for      Advanced Technological Education
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Leonard Ciaccio, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jack L Waintraub
* 08/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

9453260 Merideth A City University of New York (CUNY) consortium comprised of
its two-year colleges and other associate degree-granting institutions, the New
York City Board of Education and other public and private sector partners, seeks
an NSF planning grant to develop a National Center of Excellence for Advanced
Technological Education (ATE). Over the next year, our consortium will work with
outside experts and enabling organizations to refine the scope and activities of
the National Center. Center goals are: to establish a stronger national presence
for ATE in the region and nation; to develop innovative ATE collaborations with
business and industry in order to respond more effectively to technological
workplace needs; and to take leadership in the development of ATE curricula,
program improvement, and model student support programs. Our National Center of
Excellence will place special emphasis on responding to the needs of minorities
and women in urban ATE. A planning grant will help establish Center governance
and management procedures and to refine the Center's three-year implementation
plan. Our proposed National Center would: (1) create an ATE National
Clearinghouse which will conduct research, sponsor conferences, and develop
regional/national telecommunications links among NSF ATE Centers and the entire
ATE educational community; (2) establish criteria for the selection of exemplary
ATE curricula to be produced in multi-media formats and disseminated through the
National Center; (3) model ATE teacher and faculty enhancement activities and
devise non-traditional approaches to in-service education; and (4) form a model
business and industry collaborative providing leadership at every level of
Center activities. Other cooperating organizations are Education Development
Center (EDC); the National Center for Research in Vocational Education; IBM,
NYNEX; and the Institute for Education and the Economy. ***