* 9453159
* The KITES Project:  Kits in Teaching Elementary Science
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/1995,04/30/2001
* MacGregor Kniseley, Rhode Island College
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 04/30/2001
* USD 1,849,914.00

9453159 Kniseley This Local Systemic Change Through Teacher Enhancement project
is the result of a collaboration between the East Bay Educational Collaborative
(EBEC) and Rhode Island College. Resources from a consortium of higher education
institutions, the Rhode Island Department of Education, community organizations
and agencies, and the private sector will be combined to implement an
integrated, hands-on, kit-based science curriculum in the elementary schools of
the eight school districts in EBEC. The project will make a long term commitment
to bringing this curriculum into the middle and high schools. During the
project, elementary teachers will work cooperatively with academic and industry
scientists to learn effective science teaching methods through the use of
nationally acclaimed and validated modular units. Science professionals will
keep linked together with the teachers via the Internet throughout the project
so to build ongoing support and leadership for systemic change. During the five-
year project, there will be four two-year cycles of professional development.
Year one will consist of a seven- day summer institute to explore modular units
that will be implemented in the classroom. Direct support for project teachers
will be included throughout the school year. Year two will be a three-day "mini-
institute" to re-examine all four modules used in year one and discuss
instructional strategies and interests. Preservice college students will co-
teach with new project teachers during this year. Six hundred EBEC teachers will
be enhanced over the life of the project and 800 preservice college students
will have participated in the project. Cost sharing is 219% of the total NSF
requested budget. 9453159 Kniseley This Local Systemic Change Through Teacher
Enhancement project is the result of a collaboration between the East Bay
Educational Collaborative (EBEC) and Rhode Island College. Resources from a
consortium of higher education insti tutions, the Rhode Island Department of
Education, community organizations and agencies, and the private sector will be
combined to implement an integrated, hands-on, kit-based science curriculum in
the elementary schools of the eight school districts in EBEC. The project will
make a long term commitment to bringing this curriculum into the middle and high
schools. During the project, elementary teachers will work cooperatively with
academic and industry scientists to learn effective science teaching methods
through the use of nationally acclaimed and validated modular units. Science
professionals will keep linked together with the teachers via the Internet
throughout the project so to build ongoing support and leadership for systemic
change. During the five-year project, there will be four two-year cycles of
professional development. Year one will consist of a seven- day summer institute
to explore modular units that will be implemented in the classroom. Direct
support for project teachers will be included throughout the school year. Year
two will be a three-day "mini-institute" to re-examine all four modules used in
year one and discuss instructional strategies and interests. Preservice college
students will co-teach with new project teachers during this year. Six hundred
EBEC teachers will be enhanced over the life of the project and 800 preservice
college students will have participated in the project. Cost sharing is 219% of
the total NSF requested budget. *** ***