* 9453913
* Enhancing Mathematics and Science Teaching by Using         Computational Science
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1994,05/31/1999
* Gerald Mansergh, Educational Cooperative Service Unit of the Metro Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michael Haney
* 05/31/1999
* USD 594,286.00

9453913 Mansergh Educational Cooperative Service Unit of the Metropolitan Twin
Cities Enhancing Mathematics and Science Teaching by Using Computational
Sciences This 42 month leadership project trains teams of secondary science,
mathematics and computer science teachers in computational science techniques.
Two groups of 35 teachers from the Twin Cities area receive 18 months training
each. This includes three weeks in each of two consecutive summer summers and
periodic sessions during the school year. Participants work in teams of three
from schools or districts and support, enrich, and reinforce each other. These
teams in turn train other teachers through a variety of workshops, seminars, and
classes held around the state and region. They develop discipline-based
activities which are shared with their colleagues and made available on the
Internet nationwide. Continued support for the project is anticipated because
both ECSU and TIES, the project partners, are established region service
organizations which work closely with school districts, colleges and
universities as well as local businesses and industries. The project includes
involvement from many businesses in the area, all working to support the project
through speakers, site visits, resources, mentors, and other methods. Cost
sharing on the project is 100%. ***