* 9453879
* Hispanic Radio Network:  Self Reliance Through Science      Outreach -- A Planning Grant
* EHR,DRL
* 05/15/1994,04/30/1995
* Jeff Kline, Self Reliance Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 04/30/1995
* USD 50,000.00

Proposal No. ESIE 94-53879 Proposal Name: HISPANIC RADIO NETWORK - SELF RELIANCE
THROUGH SCIENCE OUTREACH PI: Jeff Kline NSF Commitment: $50,000 ABSTRACT The
Self Reliance Foundation is requesting a $50,000 grant to plan a nationally
broadcast Spanish language outreach program for science and environmental
education in cooperation with the Hispanic Radio Network (HRN). HRN currently
produce and distribute two Spanish language radio programs. Their plan is to
incorporate into these programs information about ways parents and other adults
can help children improve their math and science skills; about educational
resources, scholarships, and career opportunities in the sciences; about the
importance of science in everyday lives; and other information on current topics
in science and the environment. Special attention will be paid to information
relevant to Hispanic migrant workers. The PI for the planning grant will be Jeff
Kline, General Manager of HRN. Key HRN staff to be involved in the planning
include Consuelo Luz, producer of "Buscando la Belleze," and Enrique Gil, co-
producer of "Salvemos Nuestro Planeta. Vincente Llamas, Principal Investigator
for the Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities in Las Vegas will be a
principal consultant.