* 9453205
* The DataStreme Project:  Teacher Enhancement through the Use of Current Environmental Data Across the Curriculum
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2003
* Ira Geer, American Meteorological Society
* Continuing grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 06/30/2003
* USD 4,960,844.00

ESI-9453205 This national project brings together the American Meteorological
Society in cooperation with the National Weather Service, The Weather Channel
and members of the AMS professional society. During five years, 4,100 teachers
from grades K-12 will be trained directly, in an intensive course offered twice
yearly, on atmospheric and related Earth environments. The course is based on
electronically transmitted data streams and learning materials delivered in real
time. It will emphasize the teaching of integrated science through problem-
focused or event driven investigations of the natural environment. Leader
teachers, those who have completed the twenty two days of training, will act as
resource persons within their schools, reaching a second tier of at least 41,000
teachers. At the same time, they will work towards raising the awareness
administrators, parents and school board members of the educational potential of
electronically-delivered data streams in their schools. The course will be
implemented through 50 Local Implementation Teams composed of experienced
teachers, college faculty and professional meteorologists. The KEY to the this
aspect of the project is it will be its delivery via a combination of group
meetings, by Internet or more commonly using the Vertical Blanking Interval of
the Weather Channel.