* 9453136
* EPWG:  GET SET, GO (Girls and Educators Teaming in Science  Education to Generate Opportunities)
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Nancy Crouch, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruta Sevo
* 05/31/1999
* USD 796,798.00

9453136 Crouch To ensure that women will be an effective and integral part of
the scientific community, the Western Triad Science and Mathematics Alliance
(WTSAMA), a regional partnership in the North Carolina Statewide Systemic
Initiative (NC SSI), has forged a partnership of business, industrial,
university, community college, and school system leaders to provide direction,
energy for a broadly based initiative to recruit, encourage, and support
students to participate and achieve in science and mathematics. Input from the
WTSAMA collaborative partners has formed a solid ground for the planning of this
project as well as for continued monitoring to ensure consistency and quality of
effort. Project GET SET, GO (Girls &amp; Educators Teaming in Science Education)
will focus on four major objectives: (1) to build an awareness, raise
expectations, and change everyday practices among teachers, parents, and school
administrators at WTSAMA middle schools, thus assuring equal access to
opportunities and education in science; (2) to bridge the educational levels in
science through peer mentoring, cross-age teaching, and role modeling; (3) to
create a physical, social, and psychological environment within each school that
reinforces the importance and relevance of women in science; and (4) to
research, locate, modify/design hands-on science activities which complement the
science curriculum and are adapted to promote equal participation of all
students in the classroom. These objectives are to be matched with activities
specifically suited to the needs and population of the region. Activities are to
include the Teacher Institute for Gender Equity Training and Science Research,
Parents' Night Presentations and Activities, Saturday Science Symposiums, and
the Science Women's Studies Program. These activities should increase the
interest and involvement of students, teachers, parents, and administrators in
science, and create an environment that supports and encourages young wome n to
pursue studies and careers in science and related areas. Because this region is
representative, in microscale, of the entire state, this project serves as a
model for statewide implementation. The WTSAMA and its key collaborators provide
an essential operational structure and support network that ensures project
success. GET SET, GO builds on current successful programs, and introduce new
activities and opportunities, to create a cohesive whole. Extensive
dissemination is planned at regional, state, and national levels. ***