* 9453852
* PMSA:  "Sacramento Schools/MESA Partnerships for Minority   Student Achievement"
* EHR,ESR
* 09/15/1994,02/29/1996
* Jim Sweeney, Sacramento City Unified School District
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra King
* 02/29/1996
* USD 742,027.00

PMSA-9453852 Sacramento City Unified School Dist. Sacramento, CA Johnson, L. C.
and James Harold "Sacramento Schools/MESA Partnerships For Minority Student
Achievement" Building on a ling-standing collaborative relationship, the
Sacramento City Unified School District (SCUSD) and Sacramento MESA
(Mathematics, Engineering, Science and Achievement) propose to undertake a
systemic reform of K-12 science and mathematics education in 50 high-minority
schools. Multiple allies in this concerted effort are from industry, government,
education agencies, universities, the statewide MESA network, community groups
and parents of the 17,000 underrepresented minority students who are the SSM-
PMSA project's focus. Among the changes that SSMA-PMSA proposes to effect are:
increases in quality and quantity of hands-on science and math instruction,
availability of and access to college-preparatory courses, use of technology in
educational delivery, multilevel curricular articulation, and parent involvement
and empowerment; inclusion of cross-cultural curricula free of gender bias;
heightened multicultural understanding and sensitivity among constituents in the
school environment; institution of improved testing, measurement and assessment
techniques; and a strong emphasis on college preparation, academic counseling,
and math-based careers and career paths. Project activities will include a
variety of student enrichments; educational and training opportunities for
teachers, principals, parents, and students; provision and use of hands-on math
and science materials, summer programs; and industry participation. By year V,
over 35,000 students in SCUSD will have benefited directly and indirectly from
SSM-PMSA activities and the number of underrepresented students who are
motivated and qualified to enroll in SEM majors will double or triple. NSF/PMSA
funding will enable the partnership to initiate, expand, and continue meaningful
and lasting reforms that its individual member s could not successfully
accomplish. the accelerated standards, enriched education program, and upgraded
teacher skills.