* 9453905
* CRCM  "The St. Louis Regional Science and Technology Career Access Center"
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* Harvest Collier, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 08/31/1996
* USD 500,000.00

HRD-9453905 Dr. Collier, Harvest Melba Ware/Co-PI University of MO-Rolla Rolla,
MO 64501 "St. Louis Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities" The St. Louis
Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities is a consortium organized through
the cooperation of the University of Missouri-St. Louis, the University of
Missouri-Rolla, the St. Louis Community College, Harris-Stowe State College, and
the St. Louis Public School System. The center's mission is to develop and
conduct coordinated school-based and external strategies that result in the
academic preparation of urban minority students to enter undergraduate studies
in the sciences, mathematics and engineering. During the last 4 years, the
implementation of CRCM activities at the middle and high school levels has
provided opportunities for involving students in formal and informal science and
mathematics enrichment, inquiry based learning experiences, career orientation,
and scientific research activities. The high school research program has
resulted in dramatic increases in student interest and participation in
competitive science and mathematics programs. This includes historic
participation of St. Louis minority students in local, regional, state and
national science competitions. In 1992, 120 students exited the St. Louis CRCM
pipeline, as high school graduates. A recent survey of that group indicates that
85 students are in some level of post-secondary education; 62 students are
currently majoring in mathematics, a science or engineering related area 55
students are pursuing B.S. degrees in the hard sciences, mathematics or
engineering. These results and the growing participation of the community
strongly suggest that such efforts are needed and can be an effective means to
increase the pool of qualified minority students for SME careers.