* 9453773
* Special Effects
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/1994,03/31/1998
* Susanne Simpson, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 03/31/1998
* USD 1,750,000.00

Apsell 9453773 ABSTRACT This is a comprehensive project about the science behind
special effects in the motion pictures. WGBH, in association with eighteen
museums in the Museum Film Network, will produce a 35 minute IMAX/OMNIMAX film
showing the behind-the-scenes story of a group of filmmakers at Industrial Light
and Magic (ILM) as they create a special effects sequence in the IMAX/OMNIMAX
format. The film will illustrate how the eye and brain work together to process
cinematic illusions. The California Museum of Science and Industry (CMSI) will
create a 6,000 sq. ft. traveling exhibit that will focus on the science and
technical processes of special effect. The exhibit will travel to fifteen other
museums. A smaller scale lobby exhibit also will be developed for display in the
cueing areas of IMAX/OMNIMAX theaters that are showing the "Special Effects"
film. A collaborative educational outreach program will extend the reach of both
the film and exhibit. The project will be managed by the NOVA production unit at
WGBH under the direction of Paula Apsell. Ms. Apsell also will serve as
Executive Producer for the IMAX/OMNIMAX film. Diane Perlov, Curator of
Exhibitions at CMSI, will supervise the exhibit portion of the project. Kenneth
Phillips, Curator of Aerospace Science at CMSI, will develop video interactives
and oversee scientific content of the exhibit. Carol Valenta, Director of
Education for CMSI, and Beth Kirsh, Director of Educational Print and Outreach
for WGBH, will be responsible for implementing the outreach plan. Advisors for
the project include David H. Hubel, neurobiologist, Harvard Medical School;
Vilayanur S. Ramachandran, neurophysiologist, University of California, San
Diego; Richard Gregory, perception psychologist, University of Bristol; Sally
Duensing, Science and Museum Liaison, Exploratorium; Elizabeth Stage, Co-
Director for Science, New Standards Project, National Center on Education and
the Economy; and Robert Coutts, high school physics teacher, Los Angeles, CA.