* 9453162
* KEYSTONE:  A Rural Regional Training Program for Excellence in Science & Technology
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/1995,05/31/2002
* Terry Baldus, Bozeman Public Schools, District 7
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 05/31/2002
* USD 1,808,352.00

9453162 Miller The Local Systemic Change Through Teacher Enhancement project is
the Bozeman School district's comprehensive plan to implement a rural regional
K-8 teacher training program that was developed under an NSF planning grant. The
project will combine the resources of 14 rural school districts, four Indian
Reservations, Montana State University, professional scientists, local
businesses, parent groups and current NSF initiatives in the state to establish
self-sustaining science, and technology programs. The curriculum to be
implemented will include NSF funded EDC-Insights, FOSS and STC materials. Over
the life of the project, 518 participants will attend a summer workshops where
half of the time is devoted to hands-on units. Teachers will also learn how
better to serve the Native American population and how to interest females in
mathematics and science professions. Additional workshops will be offered
throughout the school year and teachers are required to participate in a minimum
of two professional development activities in the state or at universities.
Professional scientists will work side by side with the teachers and act as role
models during the workshops. After the workshops, teachers will be connected to
a resource scientist and to a learning circle, teachers of similiar interests,
through various methods of telecommunications such as Internet and 1-800
bulletin boards. Such telecommunications will be utilized extensively due to
distance barriers in these rural areas. The scientists will also serve as
advocates on local school boards and community groups to support implementation
of national reform at the local level. Cost sharing is 87% of the total NSF
requested budget. ***