* 9453182
* "The Consortium and Reform of K-12 Science and Math         Education"
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1997
* Alan McAdams, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 04/30/1997
* USD 49,991.00

9453182 McAdams The primary hypothesis of this Policy Study is that access to
networked resources, such as those available through the Internet, is essential
to reform of science and math education. From participation at recent
conferences on the National Information Infrastructure (NII), the Principal
Investigator (PI) has concluded that schemes being seriously considered for
pricing the Internet could effectively foreclose the Internet as a resource to
the K-12 community. On the other hand, little attention has been given in policy
circles to the consortium and asymmetric pricing (a "price" of zero to the
users; e.g., K-12 educators and students; and a positive price to the producers,
sufficient to get the good or service produced, and to keep the producers in
business). The consortium can permit asymmetric pricing of goods with the
characteristics of economic public goods (see below). In Part One of the Study
the PI proposes a collaborative analysis to be undertaken jointly with Staff
Members from NSF;s Education and Human Resources (EHR) Program. The objective is
to gather evidence to test the primary hypothesis; it is to be an overall review
of the likely effectiveness of the resources committed to reform of K-12 Math
and Science Education, given the economic market structures faced in this arena.
It will involve an assessment of those projects that have been highly
successful, and those that have not lived up to their promise. Special emphasis
will be given to the role of networked resources in each instance. In Part Two
of the Study, the PI proposes to make an evaluation of the consortium as a tool
to create, and/or permit asymmetric pricing for innovative products and
services, including, but not limited to, the internet. The working hypothesis is
that consortia represent a mechanism through which pricing schemes appropriate
to K-12 can be implemented, while assuring that required goods and services are
produced. The consortium has not been w ell studied, however; nor is it well
understood. Part Two of the study is focused on several important consortia,
each case with its own history and approach. Such case studies are required as a
step toward understanding the capabilities and limitations of the consortium as
an institution of efficient resource allocation. In Part Three the PI will
prepare policy papers relating to pricing schemes appropriate to the economic
market situation faced by K--12 and by suppliers to this and similar markets
that approximate the characteristics of economic public goods. An economic
public good is neither depletable nor excludable: its use by one party does not
diminish its availability to others; its availability to one, means that it is
available to all. These characteristics imply that there is no cost to society
for supplying the good to the next user; in economic terms, its marginal cost is
zero. Efficient resource allocation requires price to equal marginal cost; price
to the user must be zero. But to get the good produced requires a price equal to
cost, including a "normal return" on investment. This requires asymmetric
pricing: zero price to the user; positive price to the producer. In turn, this
suggests the use of consortia. ***