* 9454741
* Planning for Regional Technology Initiative
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1995
* William Beldham, Allegheny Intermediate Unit
* Standard Grant
* Arthur W. St. George
* 09/30/1995
* USD 98,165.00

9454741 Beldham Project Goal Any successful effort to restructure education
using technology will require substantial user involvement in the planning and
decision-making stages of that effort. The Regional Technology Planning Project
will bring together representatives of those interested in improving K-12
education in our region into a formal consortium that will develop a plan of
action for creating a flexible regional networking infrastructure and for using
that infrastructure to enhance teacher professionalization, student achievement
and school restructuring in the K-12 education community. Project Objectives 1.
To create a formal regional consortium out of the Technology Steering Committee.
2. To conduct an assessment of what is currently available in terms of
networking/distance learning hardware and software in the 10 intermediate units
in western Pennsylvania. 3. To conduct an assessment of the attitudes of
teachers, administrators, parents and students toward technology and its role in
educational innovation and reform. 4. To evaluate other regional technology
initiatives in terms of how we can apply their experiences to a plan of our own.
5. To write a formal plan for implementing a flexible regional networking
infrastructure including recommendations on equipment, personnel, teacher
training, cooperative projects among consortium members, projects for diverse
student populations, connecting to statewide, national and international
networks, administration, and funding.