* 9454098
* Graduate Research Traineeships in Hydrology:  Role of the   Hydrologic Cycle in the Coupled Earth System
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2000
* James Famiglietti, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2000
* USD 562,500.00

The hydrological cycle is the most fundamental of all earth system cycles,
linking together the solid earth, the oceans, and the atmosphere. The endless
cycling of water through these earth system components yields interactions over
the full spectrum of spatial-temporal scales. Only recently has the picture
emerged that the two-way nature of these interactions has profound impacts on
climate, weather, biogeochemical cycles and ecosystem dynamics. The view that
hydrological processes simultaneously affect and are affected by physical,
chemical, and biological processes, in all compartments of the earth system,
provides the framework for a multi-disciplinary GRT program in hydrological
sciences at UT Austin. With this educational and research theme, we hope to
impart to our students the scientific underpinnings which are currently absent
from traditional hydrology programs, while cultivating a pool of scientific
talent to provide long-term leadership in the field of hydrology. Given the
recent addition of new hydrology faculty in the Department of Geological
Sciences, including state-of-the-art analytical and computer modeling
facilities, combined with existing hydrological strength in the department-
affiliated Bureau of Economic Geology, the Institute for Geophysics, and the
Center for Space Research, as well as in the Department of Civil Engineering, a
critical mass now exists so that truly unique, interdisciplinary research and
education initiatives can be launched under the unifying theme of a GRT program
in hydrology-earth system interactions. Our GRT program includes a number of
structural innovations, including collaborative arrangements with federal
research organizations, progressive new course offerings, teaching effectiveness
seminars for fellows, teaching opportunities for fellows involving advanced
technology applications in the classroom, and opportunities for fellows to
mentor undergraduates in a local "partnership" institution. Recruitment pl ans
include a consortial arrangement with the local partnership institution, a
department-sponsored seminar forum and endowed lectureships, and an outreach
program to regional Texas colleges with large Hispanic or African-American
enrollments.