* 9454719
* Networking Infrastructure for Education Testbed Within the  Context of Statewide Systemic Reform in Mathematics, Scienceand Technology Education
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1998
* Gerald Goldin, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 09/30/1998
* USD 2,933,399.00

9454719 Friedman The establishment and assessment of the networking
infrastructure for education (NIE) testbed described in this document is an
integral component of New Jersey's Statewide Systemic Initiative (NJ SSI) to
achieve excellence in mathematics, science, and technology education throughout
the state. Furthermore, the activities described herein are guided by, and
central to, efforts toward the full implementation of New Jersey's State
Educational Technology Action Plan. The critical importance of NIE in achieving
statewide systemic educational reform is reflected in the rate at which new
materials are compiled, new instructional tools are applied and new
instructional methods are adopted. The curriculum alignment cycle has been
dramatically shortened. If we are to keep pace, NIE must be used to provide
opportunity for teachers who will create astounding instructional projects that
must be captured electronically and shared with colleagues at other schools to
support instructional reform throughout the state. Our goal is to learn more
about effective networking strategies and to develop a significant component of
a networking infrastructure which: 1) enhances student learning; 2) empowers
teachers, and; 3) supports statewide systemic school reform. Our objectives are:
1) to design and implement the technological infrastructure; 2) to design and
implement strategies for helping teachers to develop the knowledge, skills, and
ability to use the technological infrastructure to access information and to use
such information resources effectively in their classrooms; 3) to develop
broader public understanding of the educational benefits that result from the
effective use of the technological infrastructure and to consider public
policies which promote such use; 4) to assure that the benefits to be derived
from the use of the evolving technological infrastructure are available to
students regardless of gender, ethnicity, disability, and poverty level , and;
5) to document strategies and results so that others may learn from our
experience.