* 9454149
* Computational Aspects of Cognitive Science                  Focus Area:  Human Computation
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2001
* Barbara Lust, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2001
* USD 562,500.00

We propose to create a novel predoctoral training program at the interface of
Computer Science and Cognitive Science at Cornell University. While this
interface has been crowded lately with "fuzzy-engineering" approaches typically
identified as Artificial Intelligence (common-sense reasoning, neural nets,
etc.), we plan to focus, instead, on "formal-scientific" aspects, including the
formal modeling of computational and inference processes, computer- human
interface and computer science education studies, vision and robotics, learning
theory, and intelligent information retrieval. We argue that 1. both
disciplines, Computer Science and Cognitive Science, will benefit from such a
program, and 2. Cornell is uniquely suited to accommodate such a program.
Indeed, we hope that the proposed program would serve as a model of how and
engineering field and a liberal-arts field can leverage each other and
ultimately lead to both (1) engineering artifices that pay more attention to the
human user and (2) a better formal understanding of human thought process The
proposal is organized in four parts. First, we present several con=crete and
promising research directions. Each module is concrete in that at least one
current doctoral student or faculty member is interested in pursuing the topic;
each module is promising in that progress will depend on and advance both
participating disciplines. Second, we briefly portray the current infrastructure
at Cornell and we present the structure of the proposed program. Third, we
present a plan for recruiting and, fourth, we justify the need for funding.