* 9454377
* Harris County Alliance for Science, Mathematics and         Education
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Nancy Moreno, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 03/31/1999
* USD 699,586.00

9454377 Moreno This is a three year project which will provide intensive staff
development in integrated science, mathematics and technology for three, two
teacher teams from 12 elementary schools in Harris County. In turn, these teams
will be lead teachers in their home districts. The project will involve
principals and superintendents in each of the 12 districts. The project will be
accomplished by (1) involving participating district and school administrators,
teachers and parents in the 12 schools; (2) training three, two- teachers teams
from each to serve as lead teachers through participation in an intensive four-
week integrated science, mathematics and technology institute for three
consecutive summers and through workshops held during the school year (two per
year); (3) sponsoring school-year inservice sessions for all teachers in the
targeted schools to be conducted by program participants; and (4) providing the
teacher teams with additional activities and guidance during the school year to
increase the probability of success in achieving sustained improvement in
integrated instruction. The project will result in the professional development
of 72 teachers in the areas of science, mathematics and technology. These
teachers in turn will provide teacher inservice training and collaboration among
their teacher co-workers. Sustained improvement is expected as trained teachers
promote their schools. The project is supported by the 12 superintendents whose
schools are involved. The project requested $699,586 from NSF with
institutions/agencies and school districts providing 38% in cost sharing.