* 9454163
* Program in Visual Perception &amp; Motor Control
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2000
* Charles Fletcher, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2000
* USD 569,516.00

Human and other primates have the remarkable ability to use vision to program
and control skilled movements directed at objects in their environment.
Understanding the processes and representations underlying these skills is a
central problem in cognitive science. We propose to develop a focused program
for graduate research training in the area of visual perception and motor
control. In so doing, we will capitalize on the University of Minnesota's
impressive faculty strength in this area. Students in the program will be co-
advised by two of the 14 participating faculty, representing behavioral,
computational and neuroscience approaches. Students will learn about these three
approaches through a required distribution of classes and interdisciplinary
seminars. Students will have the opportunity to spend a summer in research at a
leading university of industry laboratory that specializes in vision and motor
control. The program will form a new topical focus within the Center for
research in Leaning, Perception and Cognition. The Center has an excellent
record for attracting top students and for supervising them to completion of the
Ph.D. The Center is also active in recruiting minority students. Our proposed
NSF program will build on the infrastructure already available through the
Center.