* 9454758
* A Community Learns On-Line: Planning Activities to Explore  the Use of Interactive Cable for Education
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1995
* Robert Kozma, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Arthur W. St. George
* 08/31/1995
* USD 99,986.00

9454758 Zozma SRI International's proposal is for a 1-year planning grant,
during which time SRI will work collaboratively with its partners - Viacom, the
Castro Valley Unified School District, and the Castro Valley, community - to (1)
identify needs that can be matched to educational products and services that can
be delivered through Viacom's experimental interactive cable system, and (2) to
specify product development, dissemination, and evaluation activities to be
undertaken by the team in subsequent years. The study's planning focus will be
on the use of Viacom's Castro Valley experimental cable system as a test bed for
developing models for using interactive cable to support education reform, for
developing products and tools, for evaluating the long-term impact of the system
on home and classroom learning, and for assessing the sustainability of
providing educational products and services through interactive cable. SRI
proposes: To determine the current and future educational and learning needs of
three sets of consumers in Castro Valley: students; school district teachers,
principals, and administrators; and parents and other community users. To
identify prospective matches between technological advances offered by the
Viacom system and those educational and learning needs. Through systematic
analyses, to specify educational products and services that (1) match the needs
of the consumers, (2) are in accord with Viacom's overall mission to the
community, and (3) are sustainable. To develop strategies for effective
implementation of educational products and services over time, including
preliminary recommendations on rate structure issues. These outcomes will be
achieved through a series of activities including a needs assessment, a review
of relevant literature, and a 2-day Innovation Search Workshop. During the w
orkshop approximately 20 participants - including persons from Castro Valley
schools, the community, and Viacom - will, through a series of workshop
exercises, focus on the needs indicated by the needs assessment, and freely
generate ideas. The set of ideas will then be converted by the group into a
smaller set of usable and structured ideas and concepts and finally reduced to a
small number of concrete ideas for viable, useful educational products and
services. Products from the project will include the results of the literature
search, the Innovation Search Workbook, the innovation search results, a summary
report of project activities, and a detailed plan for the work to be undertaken
in Phase 2 of the project. The plan will include a description on how SRI
proposes to explore the role of the network in support of educational reform and
innovation and to assess its impacts on classroom, home, and community learning
patterns.