* 9454382
* Supporting Teacher-Centered Reform:  The Exploratorium      Teacher Institute
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Linda Shore, Exploratorium
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 12/31/1998
* USD 2,392,346.00

9454382 Doherty This three-year regional and national teacher enhancement
project provides grades 6-12 teachers with in-depth physical science, life
science and mathematics content. Regionally, 700 teachers from the San Francisco
Unified School District and the San Mateo School District and 20 others are
included; nationally the project brings 50 TE-workshop providers, attending as
teams, into the program as teacher-leaders. The four integrated levels of the
project are: * a 100-hour introductory Teacher Institute where teachers receive
instruction science content as well as an introduction to inquiry based
learning, * a 90-hour Advanced Theme Based Institute with Follow-up Sessions
where teachers grapple with issues of theme- based teaching and implementing
standards-based systemic reform, * a program of Leadership Development for
Teacher Leaders who design and implement professional development workshops in
the Bay area and around the nation, and * follow-up Workshops in all areas plus
a Teacher Networking Program to provide an outgoing community of support. Each
year of the project 4-teachers who are alumni of the Teacher Institute will
leave their classrooms for 1-year and become Teachers-In -Residence at the
EXPLORATORIUM. These teachers-In- Residence will work with the EXPLORATORIUM on
a long term basis to sustain the Teacher Institutes.