* 9454757
* WhaleNet - Interdisciplinary Curriculum
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1996
* J. Michael Williamson, Wheelock College
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 08/31/1996
* USD 86,395.00

9454757 Williamson WhaleNet is an interdisciplinary, hands-on, collaborative
monitoring project to foster science education and interest in schools across
the nation utilizing telecommunications. WhaleNet will ultimately incorporate
continued contact among educators, students, scientists, and research programs
to enhance K-12 science education. Through interaction with cooperating
scientists and research institutions, students will be able to participate in
research projects on and utilize data from the marine ecosystem, including
marine mammal identification and migration patterns. WhaleNet Program Goals to
utilize telecommunications and other advanced technologies to allow cooperation
and communication among students, teachers, scientists, and marine research
institutions; to involve students in real-time interdisciplinary scientific
research and education, by using data collected on classroom whale watches, data
from existing research programs and data from new research projects by
participating organizations using high technology devices; to establish
collaboration (through a nation-wide network) among business, education and
research institutions, with the goal of enhancing student involvement and
interest in the marine environment; to establish a nation-wide network of
schools, students, educators and scientists who are interested in integrating
WhaleNet into the K-12 curriculum as an interdisciplinary theme; to connect
students to research data, students to scientists/naturalists, students to
students via telecommunications to stimulate interest in interdisciplinary
learning; to make related curriculum materials available to educators
electronically. Interdisciplinary K-12 curriculum units and interactive CD-ROM
materials will be available to participating educators and students so that they
can be used with the WhaleNet program. Throughout the academic year students and
educators will have access to volunteer WhaleNet scientists via the Internet for
their inquiries. Students and educators will also have access to past and
current data so that they can experience a more comprehensive academic program
on a year-round basis. WhaleNet will enable students to use research data in
real-time to generate involvement and interest in scientific investigations
while fostering an interdisciplinary approach to learning, research, critical
thinking, and problem solving.