* 9454355
* Teacher Enhancement in Molecular Biology and Recombinant DNA Technology
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Jnanendra Bhattacharjee, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 12/31/1997
* USD 106,282.00

9454355 Bhattacharjee The Teacher Enhancement workshop in molecular biology and
recombinant DNA technology supported by the NSF was initiated to provide high
school biology teachers with needed basic knowledge and proficiency in recent
advances of molecular biology and recombinant DNA technology. The objectives of
the project are to improve the teaching of biology, attract more students to
careers in biomedical sciences, and make Ohio high school graduates "DNA
literate." This summer workshop should involve two weeks of intensive lectures
(topics include structure and function of DNA, genome size and propoerties of
prokaryotic and eukaryotic genes, and the principles and applications of gene
cloning and recombinant DNA technology), discussions, special seminars (topics
include oncogene and career, human genome project, evolution and plant
biotechnology), field trip to an Ohio biotechnology company, lesson plan
development, and hands-on laboratory experiments involving simple recombinant
DNA techniques (E. coli transformation, plasmid DNA Isolation, restriction
digestion and gel electrophoretic analysis of recombinant DNA). Twenty teachers
would be selected for each workshop. Through expanded outreach efforts, at least
half of the teachers will be actively recruited from the inner-city high schools
of Ohio. Each participating teacher will be provided with a stipend, travel,
room and meal expenses as well as a textbook, accessories, video tapes, a list
of granting agencies and research resource laboratories in Ohio, an
electrophoretic gel box and power supply, and various laboratory supplies. The
instructional team would include the PI, one faculty associate, other Miami
faculty, graduate teaching assistants, high school master teachers, curriculum
and assessment consultants. In order to increase the impact of the project, the
PI and the faculty associate would conduct regional and annual summative follow-
up activities. Second-tier teachers from the sch ools and districts of the
participating teachers will be included in the follow-up activities. As a result
of this project, at the end of the current grant period more than 10,000
students in more than 100 high schools in Ohio woul be benefitted.