* 9454162
* Graduate Research Traineeship - Biological Sciences -       Environmental Biology                                       Limnology and the Integration of Lake and Stream Ecology
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2000
* John Magnuson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2000
* USD 562,500.00

The Universities of Washington and Wisconsin-Madison propose a collaborative,
integrated graduate training program in the study of freshwater ecosystems. The
program will emphasize important issues identified by an NSF-sponsored workshop
(The Freshwater Imperative). Revelations from this workshop point out that
freshwater ecology has become fragmented into separated programs, e.g., lakes,
wetlands, groundwater, or streams. This has reduced synthetic skills needed to
deal with the complex issues that face freshwater science. Our goal is to
created scientists who can work across environmental gradients and intellectual
barriers between studies in lakes and those in streams or rivers. Those now
occupy the ends of the epistemological gradient. We combined resources of two
excellent programs. That emphasizing lakes is based in the Center for Limnology,
Univ. Wisconsin, while that for streams is based in Center for Streamside
Studies, Univ. Washington. Each student will train at each University; half will
receive their degree from each. Each University is contributing Advanced
Opportunity Fellowships and other elements to increase the number of trainees
from 5 to 7. Trainees will join active research communities of faculty, post
doctoral researchers and graduate students. Both centers are fully operational
with a continuing history of research support from state, national and private
sources. Facilities and infrastructure are fully developed in support of student
research that will integrate stream and lake ecology.