* 9454627
* The Application-based, Technology-supported, One-Track      Mathematics Curriculum Program (ATO)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1998
* Pamela Matthews, Mount Hood Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/1998
* USD 469,923.00

The Mt. Hood Community College (MHCC) Mathematics Division is developing,
implementing and disseminating a comprehensive Application-based, Technology
supported, One-track Mathematics Curriculum (ATO) for all students
(baccalaureate prep and technical prep).The four levels of study incorporate the
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics Curriculum and Evaluation Standards
(NCTM) and the Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills (SCANS)
recommendations.ATO responds to the education reform movement in mathematics
while addressing: the lack of appropriate course materials targeting community
college students; the lack of a framework to train adjunct mathematics
instructors (on which the community college heavily relies); and, the lack of
articulated curriculum for the same level of mathematics taught in middle
schools, high schools, community colleges and four-year schools. The following
are the three objectives for development and implementation of the ATO
Program.OBJECTIVE 1. Develop and publish course materials for Levels II and III
(applications oriented algebra) of ATO: a textbook for each level that fully
integrates the use of technology; and, a hands-on activities and real-world
interdisciplinary applications supplement.OBJECTIVE 2. Develop a framework for
the ongoing staff development of community college adjunct mathematics faculty
to enable them to effectively deliver a coherent mathematics
curriculum.OBJECTIVE 3. Develop in collaboration with middle schools and high
schools in the community college district an articulated coherent mathematics
curriculum that addresses content-based proficiency assessment strategies, and
supports uniform implementation of the NCTM Standards in mathematics
education.Methods to accomplish these objectives build on previously-established
team efforts at MHCC, partnerships with industry, and collaborative activities
with other schools including middle schools, high schools, and four-year
colleges.Northwest Region al Educational Laboratory is instrumental in the
evaluation of the project, along with the Program Management
Evaluation/Assessment Advisory Team.