* 9454825
* A Digital Learning Center for Microbial Ecology for K-12    Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1994,01/31/1997
* Carrie Heeter, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 01/31/1997
* USD 461,568.00

9454825 Heeter The Digital Learning Center for Microbial Ecology will bring
together scientists, educators and multimedia designers to develop interactive,
computer-based active learning tools that motivate learners to explore,
discover, manipulate and interact with the microscopic world of organisms that
exist throughout our environment. Our intent is to spark an awareness of
microbes in nature for K-12 science education and to provide teachers and
students with credible and effective learning tools which focus on themes
pursued by the Center for Microbial Ecology which have broad public interest,
including biodegradation, microbial evolution and biodiversity. Microbes have
traditionally been portrayed in their role as disease-causing "germs," but they
also play many beneficial roles as essential agents in food production, waste
disposal, and other processes critical to the continuation of life on Earth. The
Digital Learning Center will be accessible to K-12 teachers and students over
the Internet and on CD-ROM, taking advantage of the ease of transporting large
interactive multimedia content with elegant user interfaces via CD-ROM and the
ease of updatable text and multimedia information access and electronic mail
communication available over the Internet. Components of the Center will
include: The Microbe Zoo - an ever-growing collection of microbes on digital
video on photos which can be explored through a multimedia "zoo ' interface or
searched and sorted as a multimedia database which links text, data, images and
digital video; Interactive Learning Experiences - multimedia interactive
software modules that provide teachers with learning experiences that can engage
students with various aspects of the science of microbial ecology; Meet the
Scientists - digital video clips of center scientists explaining in lay terms
their research and aspects of science they find fascinating, plus a moderated
bulletin board for communication among students, teachers and scientists;
Microbes In The News - digitized print and electronic stories in the news,
combined with commentary from scientists and topical lessons plans for teaching
about science in contexts that relates to students' lives; Digital Teaching
Assistant - suggestions and electronic lesson plans for using the Digital
Learning Center for teaching and learning; Hands-On Laboratory Resources -
lesson plans for teachers on conducting real world experiments where students
experience kinesthetic, olefactory and real time process of scientific inquiry
in their local environment; Digital Points of Interest - pointers to print,
electronic and software information resources related to microbial ecology. The
Digital Learning Center will serve as a pilot program for collaborative
development and delivery of K-12 interactive science learning experiences by
scientists, educators and multimedia designers that could ultimately be applied
to all of the NSF Science and Technology Centers' Education Outreach Programs.