* 9454790
* Planning Grant for the Development of the NIE MOST (MissouriSupporting Teachers) Electronic Support System to Promote   Problem-Based Learning Using a Computational Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1995
* William Mitchell, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 08/31/1995
* USD 96,020.00

9454790 Laffey The Missouri Supporting Teachers (MOST) project is a nine-month
grant to a consortium of statewide stakeholders to plan a program of educational
reform and technological innovation. The consortium holds a commitment to an
integrated teacher support system and network infrastructure designed around the
needs of teachers implementing an integrated math and science curriculum through
problem-based learning and computational science techniques. The MOST project
will support the needed systemic change by planning the implementation of: (1) a
network infrastructure which creates a community of educators and leverages
knowledge and experience across the community, (2) an electronic teacher support
system designed around the practices and challenges of teaching and learning,
and (3) a consortium of change agents with a cohesive vision and a common set of
tools for supporting teacher professionalization and school restructuring. The
planning grant will support four main activities. The first is to extend and
articulate a powerful model of problem-based learning and computational science
being developed in the Lee's Summit School District, as well as to learn from
other projects which are exploring and advancing these key principles and
methods. Second, preliminary designs for the electronic teacher support system
and network infrastructure will be developed and prototyped, in order to specify
the requirements for implementation and maintenance. Third, the consortium of
stakeholders will be extended and elaborated, so that a pathway is drawn for
including all major constituents. And fourth, the planning grant will enable the
development and articulation of a strategic and tactical plan which can draw
support for the long-term efforts. The restructuring of the teaching/learning
process to achieve meaningful learning of math and science as exemplified by
problem-based learning requires a radical reconceptualization of the way
teachers are developed and supported. The MOST project is well situated to build
and test a powerful and innovative model of teacher professionalization which is
implemented in the field, supported by a community of practitioners, and enabled
by a technology infrastructure. The MOST project leverages (1) Missouri's
continuing commitment to building a network infrastructure for schools and the
existing MOREnet services, (2) the exciting work and experience of teachers in
Lee's Summit, (3) a base of research and development in electronic support
systems, and (4) the commitment of key statewide stakeholders.