* 9454769
* Toward Universal Participation in the NII: Phase 2 of the National School Network Testbed
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1994,12/31/1997
* Denis Newman, Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc
* Continuing grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 12/31/1997
* USD 2,231,881.00

9454769 Huntley The proposed Testbed partnership, led by BBN, University of
California, Irvine, and Global SchoolNet Foundation, includes over 1000 schools,
within nearly 500 school districts and 19 states. Over 60 Testbed partner
organizations represent elementary and secondary schools, school districts and
regional collaboratives, state education agencies; vocational-technical schools,
community colleges; colleges and universities; science centers and museums:
several thousand homes; educational publishers; business/industry organizations;
and educational research organizations and service providers, collectively
working on all aspects of educational reform. The Testbed builds synergy among
partners sharing a common spirit of constructivism and a quest for equity. The
goal of the Testbed partners and activities is to achieve significant impact on
educational networking by providing empirical evidence to taxpayers, governments
and private industry that "scaling up" the NII requires active participation,
not just access, for everyone. The Testbed partnership will provide concrete
understanding of the design, construction and management of communications
networks and information services to support educational innovation in local
schools and communities. The Testbed will help communities make appropriate
investment in full-scale, self-sustaining educational networking by: 1)
developing tools and services to empower individuals and local groups to produce
value on the network - enabling the user-constructability essential to reform in
math and science; 2) organizing information access for people who share one
computer, 3) establishing and assessing technical and training support models
through a Testbed Exchange; 4) developing an evaluation framework and cost-
benefit assessments; 5) combining a wide range of high-quality educational
applications within and across schools and districts; 6) pro actively
disseminating the learnings of the partners to decision makers at loca l, state,
and national levels and linking to information agencies such as the InterNIC and
Ask ERIC. The partners bring hundreds of millions of dollars to the collective
test bed infrastructure through investments from local tax and bond levies,
state legislatures, private foundations, industry contributions, and
conservatively contribute $20 million to the Testbed agenda over three years
through many forms of cost-sharing.