* 9454803
* Planning for Virtual Schools in Electronic Villages
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/1994,02/29/1996
* Andrea Kavanaugh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 02/29/1996
* USD 99,824.00

9454803 Dodl This proposal for a one-year planning grant (8-16-94 to 8-15-95)
describes development of a partnership alliance among the Montgomery County
School system, commercial educational service providers, and the Blacksburg
Electronic Village (BEV), an established partnership among Virginia Tech, the
Town of Blacksburg, and Bell Atlantic-Virginia. The primary goal of the planning
period is to lay the groundwork for developing and documenting a virtual school,
an unbounded educational environment with no walls, no halls, no bells, where
(virtual) collaborative classrooms encompass the entire community and exploit
connections among diverse educational resources - schools, libraries, homes,
businesses, local and global networks. This virtual school, to be implemented
and evaluated over a three-year development period following the planning grant,
is enabled by the Blacksburg Electronic Village which, by providing high-- speed
full connectivity throughout the entire town of Blacksburg, offers a unique
opportunity for us to create a virtual school. In the one-year planning period,
we will undertake a series of planning meetings, workshops, and preliminary
evaluations of basic equipment, network links, and network services for an
emergent virtual school comprised of teachers and classes in one elementary
school, one middle school, and one high school in Montgomery County, Virginia.
This is a rural area with broad geographic and demographic diversity. Also in
the one-year planning period, we will plan for study of the sociological,
educative, methodological, economic, and political processes by which a
replicable, sustainable virtual school model for educational (and community)
networking can be constructed and maintained in a rural setting. We will also
begin documentation of our development efforts, and will formulate and initiate
studies to evaluate ensuing changes that occur, as well as begin documenting the
processes by which these changes occur. The prim ary output of this planning
period will be a proposal to be submitted to NSF for a three-year development
effort to create and evaluate a virtual school.