* 9454816
* Metropolitan Tulsa Education Network - Planning Grant
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1994,02/29/1996
* William Coberly, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 02/29/1996
* USD 99,776.00

9454816 Coberly The Metropolitan Tulsa Education Network (MTEN) Task Force,
composed of representatives of Tulsa area business, education, and government,
was formed in 1992 by the Metropolitan Tulsa Chamber of Commerce to build a
county-wide electronic network infrastructure to support all levels of
education. The task force is currently developing the technical specifications
for the metropolitan area network; undertaking a six-month demonstration project
connecting a few schools to the Internet; laying the legal and financial
groundwork for a multiple school district, multi-million dollar bond issue to
fund school technology initiatives; and outlining the structure of the governing
authority required to institutionalize the collaborative project. MTEN proposes
to use a one-year NIE Planning Grant to prepare the groundwork for a strongly
competitive infrastructure proposal in the following year. The objectives of
this planning exercise also include: The refinement of a metropolitan area
network design. The formal and legal establishment of a collaborative
organizational structure to manage the network. The development of public
support for local and state bond initiatives which will serve to secure the long
term funding sources needed to sustain networking infrastructure. Conveying the
vision of the "Information Super Highway" to a large portion of the public and
private sectors of the commnnity. The planning grant proposed herein proposes
the following tasks to achieve the above objectives: Offer a one day Community
Workshop which will heighten the awareness of all segments of the community to
the benefits of the network. Expansion of the current Demonstration Project in
duration and in scope. Offer network and curriculum integration training for a
cadre of 25 teachers who would become the champions of technological change in
their home school districts. Obtain le gal incorporation of MTEN together with
appopriate contractual agreements with participating educational entities.
Submission of a competitive NSF/NIE infrastructure grant proposal in 1995.