* 9454066
* GRT in Geosciences and Environmental Physical Sciences - An Interdisciplinary Effort Between the Program of Earth System Science and the Chemistry Department at UC Irvine
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2000
* Ellen Druffel, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2000
* USD 562,500.00

We propose to develop graduate training of doctoral-level students in specific
areas of Geosciences and Environmental Physical Sciences through the NSF
Graduate Research Traineeship Program. These Traineeships will be implemented
through the joint arrangement that exist between the Earth System Science
Program and the Department of Chemistry. In particular, we propose to pursue
graduate research training in five area: 1) coastal oceanography, 2) ocean-
atmosphere interactions, 3)hydrology, 4) development of state-of-the-art
instrumental techniques, and 5) modeling of atmospheric chemistry using high-
performance computing methods. Innovative aspects of the Program include 1)
recruitment of underrepresented graduate students using a variety of activities
including the pipeline established at UCI through the CAMP (California Alliance
for Minority Participation) Program, 2) participation of trainees in a monthly
research seminar series, 3) participation of trainees in field studies during
their first two years in graduate school, 4) completion by trainees of a
teaching assistant training program, 5) establishment of a Traineeship Oversight
Committee who will be responsible for choosing the GRTs, and for appointment of
a specialized committee to advise each trainee. Graduate Research Traineeships
will substantially increase the resources needed to help achieve our goal of
graduate education and research in the fields within Geosciences.