* 9454136
* An Integrating Research and Teaching Doctoral Program in    Environmentally Conscious Chemical Processing
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2001
* Timothy Barbari, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2001
* USD 562,500.00

The creation and dissemination of new knowledge are primary missions of the
research university. However, in engineering education, the knowledge created in
graduate student laboratories often seems far removed from engineering design
courses. We propose an innovative graduate research traineeship (GRT) program
that integrates fundamental graduate research activity with undergraduate design
projects. The uniqueness of this program stems from the formulation of design
problems by graduate students using their own fundamental research as the basis.
By serving as consultants, the graduate trainees will gain invaluable experience
in advising and monitoring other engineers. Ideally, the conclusions from the
design projects will help to guide the trainees' research. The focus area of
environmentally conscious manufacturing provides an ideal framework for this
program. Alternative chemistries or processes for pollution prevention
eventually must be compared to existing technologies to assess process
feasibility. Specifically, the research projects will be motivated by the issue
of waste minimization through solvent replacement. By producing doctoral
engineers with the ability to communicate with design and manufacturing
functions, the program will foster the critical area of international
competitiveness in addition to environmentally- benign chemical processing.