* 9454331
* Institute for Science and Technology
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1999
* Margaret Buchanan, Eagle-Union Community School Corporation
* Continuing grant
* Michael Haney
* 12/31/1999
* USD 1,132,307.00

9454331 Rush Eagle-Union Community School Corporation Institute for Science and
Technology This 48 month project provides five-week institutes for 290 inservice
and 40 preservice teachers of grades K-12. The goals of the project are to
provide pedagogical and philosophical foundations for improving science
education, develop strategies for increasing student learning of science, and
develop a significantly improved delivery system to encourage creativity,
problem solving, critical thinking, and communications. The project has four
activities. The first is the Institute for Science and Technology. Through these
summer institutes, teachers take two years to get fully trained and integrate
technology into the curriculum. The second is the internships and mentorship
program offered at places like the Indianapolis Zoo and Lilly Research. A third
component is the "Teacher in Residence" who is selected each year to work with
the project. Finally, there is a complementary preservice component with Purdue
University that is funded locally. Fifty teachers are selected in the first year
form Project INSITE. They receive 5 weeks of training over the two summers. This
includes formal training in science, work experience, research experience,
training on the Internet and telecommunications, etc. Several of these teachers
will be selected to help as trainers for subsequent groups each of eighty
teachers. Participants are initially from Indiana. Cost sharing is 30%.