* 9454371
* Middle Grades Teacher Enhancement:  Model Program           Development and Evaluation
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/1995,08/31/2002
* Richard Lesh, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Monica B. Mitchell
* 08/31/2002
* USD 1,904,888.00

9454371 Post, Cramer, Lesh abstract Middle Grades Teacher Enhancement: Model
Program Development and Evaluation This three-year project consists of three
primary activities: (1) initial development of the teacher enhancement program
to support the development of integrated mathematical, psychological, and
pedagogical content knowledge for a series of mathematical topics appropriate to
the middle grades, (2) trial and refinement of the teacher enhancement program
with several groups of teachers using teachine experiment methodology. This will
develop an exportable teacher enhancement program that will implement National
Science Foundation-sponsored middle grades mathematics curriculum projects. A
guiding principle for this project is the belief that what teachers know,
directly influences their ability to effectively implement any new program of
instruction. This teaching enhancement project will focus on enhancing the
participants' mathematical content background, their knowledge of how children
learn, and an in-depth review of new NSF mathematics curricula. An important
element of this project is its effort to study the teacher enhancement process
in order to articulate the dimensions of a model program for effective teacher
enhancement. This three site project (Minneapolis, MN, and Princeton, NJ),
involving a minimum of 285 middle grades teachers, will develop and implement
teacher enhancement programs of one and two year duration that reflect the
importance of teachers using integrated mathematical, psychological and
pedagogical knowledge in effective teaching. It will also design and conduct an
evaluation program that closely considers the teachers understanding a knowledge
base in the effective implementation of new curricula and new approaches to
instruction. A revised version of these programs will be made available, in
exportable modules, to others with similar teacher enhancement needs. After
initial implementation of specific NSF curriculum programs, the teams of
teachers involved in this project will assume leadership roles in their
respective schools and help with the implementation of the new curricula on a
larger scale and at other school sites.