* 9454007
* Graduate Research Traineeships in Democratization and       Democratic Politics
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2001
* Rein Taagepera, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2001
* USD 562,500.00

We propose a NSF Graduate Research Traineeship program on Democratization and
Democratic Politics at the University of California, Irvine. The recent
democratic transitions in the world and the continuing process of
democratization in established democracies are creating fundamental new
challenges for the social sciences. These experiences are prompting a
reconsideration of past models of political development and the lessons of
earlier academic debates on the social, cultural and institutional foundations
of democracy. In addition, these changes are "natural experiments: that provide
new data and new research questions that should result in new theoretical
insights. Past waves of democratization have stimulated some of the most
creative advances in the social sciences -- we expect the same of the present
democratization wave. Thus we propose an innovative, interdisciplinary
curriculum to train doctoral students in the principles of democratic politics,
the conditions fostering the development and maintenance of democracies, and the
expansion of the democratic process. We expect that the scholars produced by
this program will contribute to our understanding of the present democratization
wave, and the more fundamental theoretical questions involved in research on the
political choices and institutional arrangements made to sustain and nurture
democratic politics.