* 9454822
* HERN: Hawaii Education and Research Network
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1998
* Sharen Arakaki, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 08/31/1998
* USD 2,152,673.00

9454822 Bossert The Hawaii Education and Research Network (HERN) requests $4
million over three years for the statewide deployment of networking
infrastructure to support all public education in Hawaii. It does so through the
strength of an existing partnership: the Hawaii Educational Networking
Consortium. Founding members of the Consortium are: Hawaii State Department of
Education (DOE), which provides all K-12, adult, and community-based learning
services; University of Hawaii system (UH), which provides all public higher
education programs including community colleges and research institutes, and;
East-West Center (EWC), a Federally sponsored non-profit research and graduate
education institute. The Consortium's purpose is to develop and promote the use
of telecommunications technology in education and research in Hawaii. It
represents all public education and research in Hawaii, and has a proven track
record in collaborative applications of information technology including
distance education, site licensing, and the deployment of the Internet. The
technical networking infrastructure proposed includes the expansion of Internet
access to every public school and campus in Hawaii, largely through existing
resources and a unique partnership with the cable companies mandated through
Hawaii's regulatory environment. The infrastructure also includes a distributed
statewide Internet server architecture, a statewide Network Information Center
and a Network Operations Center, to be managed by the University of Hawaii, and
a training program for teachers in the middle and high schools. The goal of
deploying this network is to support educational reform. In the middle and high
schools, we will use the network to reform the school day. By building on the
existing School Community Based Management program, schools will have the option
and opportunity to move from a traditional class based schedule to a tea m
oriented, multidisciplinary project based program. In higher education, the
State's community colleges will use the network to collaboratively develop a
network-based curriculum in pre-engineering that will be delivered statewide to
students who have previously had no access to such courses. In both cases, the
network infrastructure will facilitate ongoing visions and programs within the
DOE and UH. By building on ongoing programs and the existing infrastructure
there is a significant cost-sharing component by the proposers. In the course of
Project HERN we will address the following types of research questions: What
types of organizational and management structures best support the deployment
and operation of a statewide educational network? What technological and
management issues will be faced in knitting together Ethernet-over-CATV networks
provided by cable TV companies throughout the state? What set of network
interfaces and filters will support appropriate educational access to the
Internet at all levels across an entire state? How can effective training be
provided to an educational community numbering in the hundreds of thousands? How
can collaborative curriculum development and delivery be supported over the
Internet?