* 9454048
* Graduate Research Traineeships:                             Innovative Programs in Cognition and Technology for         Mathematics and Science Education
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2001
* M. Kathleen Heid, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2001
* USD 562,500.00

The Penn State Graduate Research Traineeships focus on preparing Mathematics
Education or Science Education researchers in the areas of cognition and
technology. Increasing access to new technologies are suggesting fundamental
questions about the content and nature of mathematics learning and science
learning in these environments. The program includes courses and research
experiences which provide a firm foundation in research on mathematics or
science teaching and learning, a strong mathematics or science background (at or
beyond the masters level), a cutting-edge knowledge of emerging technologies, an
expertise in both qualitative and quantitative research methods (with special
emphasis on using interviews to probe student understanding), and a deep
understanding of cognition and learning. Trainees are involved in research on
the teaching and learning throughout their program. In addition, the program
centers on the establishment and development of an international dialogue on
research issues culminating in an international symposium on setting a research
agenda on the impact of technology on the teaching and learning of mathematics
and science. The program is designed to prepare individuals at all levels
(elementary through undergraduate) whose research can contribute to the
knowledge base regarding the impact of technology on the teaching and learning
of mathematics or science.