* 9454604
* Intergrating Technical Applications into the Learning of    Mathematics: A Collaborative Effort
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Reginald Luke, Middlesex County College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 09/30/1996
* USD 169,813.00

This project involves an interdisciplinary development of technical mathematics
instructional modules, emphasizing the problem-solving approach, the scientific
method and realistic, real-world problems. Representatives from business and
industry, in particular, those of the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory, are
providing technical and industrial perspectives on scientific and engineering
applications. The graphing calculator linked with a new portable sensor and
probe setup, called the Calculator Based Laboratory (CBL) system, are the
technological instructional tools chosen for classroom and laboratory use. Over
a two year span a total of 10 curriculum teams, comprised of Middlesex County
College mathematics and science/engineering faculty, working cooperatively with
teachers from local high schools, are producing 30 instructional modules, to be
used at the secondary school level as well as in technical college curricula. A
series of training conferences and workshops are being held to assist
participants in mastery of these technological tools, as well as the most
effective problem-solving and cooperative-learning strategies. The instructional
modules are being disseminated through the MCC network of local high schools, a
consortium of regional community colleges, the NJ Statewide Systemic Initiative
for Improvement of Math and Science, and professional mathematics associations.