* 9454637
* National Center for Excellence in Advanced Technological    Education Presented by Community College for Innovative     Technology Transfer (CCITT)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1995
* Dennis Bartow, Eastern Florida State College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

CCITT is a national consortium of twelve community colleges who are planning for
a National Center of Excellence in Advanced Technology Education. Consortium
members are: Brevard Community College, FL; Cuyahoga Community College, OH;
Foothill College, CA; John C. Calhoun College, AL; Pasadena City College, CA;
Pearl River College, MS; Prince George's Community college, MD; Thomas Nelson
Community College, VA; and Houston, TX - based Consortium Members San Jacinto
Community College, College of the Mainland, Alvin College, and Lee College.
These twelve community colleges are linked through their involvement with, and
long-term specialized instructional support for nine NASA Field Centers.
Linkages are established with area universities and school systems to maximize
articulation of technological education programs.The Center is developing plans
to establish a national clearinghouse for curricular and faculty development
programs as well as educational media supporting these programs to infuse
science and mathematics into technological education programs. Curriculum
design, faculty enhancement, outreach services, media development and product
dissemination activities are being designed to enhance the quality of advanced
technological education programs at community colleges and technical
institutions nationwide. An advanced national telecommunications and bulletin
board delivery system is being established to facilitate cost-effective sharing
of information among faculty on a national basis, and to support creative models
for distance learning.