* 9454375
* Project EMERGE:  Ecosystems Management Education through    Regional Generative Efforts
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/1995,12/31/2000
* Michael Jaeger, Eastern Oregon University
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 12/31/2000
* USD 1,257,823.00

9454375 Jaeger This project is for ten years with a request for funding from NSF
for five of those years. The project is a long term, collaborative commitment to
the schooling of a generation of people and communities facing complex issues of
human impact upon the environment: logging and forest health problems, rangeland
management decisions, endangered species restoration, regional economic
difficulties, and aesthetic and recreational needs of public lands. Designed to
reach teachers of elementary and middle school youth in the eastern region of
Oregon, the enhancement grant will provide institutes, extended studies,
telecommunications, and ongoing resources for educators as they study these
issues and as they provide analogous opportunities for their own students to
become problem solvers. This project is designed to give 200 teachers and
administrators in eastern Oregon the background, practice and ongoing support to
help become classroom facilitators of Ecosystems Management problem solving. The
first year will focus on Multimedia development, recruitment, organization and
arrangement for field sites, creation of resources, and training of faculty and
staff. After the project is in place, there will be summer institutes, year long
follow-ups, mini-sessions, evaluations, and research projects. The project
requested $1,249,325 from NSF with institutions/agencies and school districts
providing 27% in cost sharing.