* 9454748
* Keystone Community Network
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1995
* Ellen O'Hara-Mays, Keystone Central School District
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 08/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

9454748 Yoho The main objective of the Keystone Community Network planning grant
is to bring together the ideas and resources from individuals in a widespread,
diverse community to construct a network infrastructure accessible by everyone.
The planning process will involve visits to test sites, presentations and
consultation by experts, and structured release time for educators and community
members to put together the network infrastructure plan. While the technology
should be transparent in our network, its benefits will be seen everywhere. It
will provide for the following: (1) equal opportunity educational services to
our large geographic area community of schools. Schools in remote areas will
have access to the full scope of the KCSD curricula offerings via network
telecommunications. Educators in the district will be able to collaborate on
discipline-specific as well as interdisciplinary projects. And building walls
will disappear as students learn to access information as needed from global
libraries, data bases, and experts on-line. (2) It will be used to link pre-
service and in-service activities between KCSD and LHU to better prepare
tomorrow's educators, as well as updating present staff. Preview of lesson plans
and materials for student teachers and in-school participating University
students by the same University faculty who were responsible for their early
preparation will enhance continuity between theory and practice. Already in
place is a science program which provides for pre-service training with in-
service teachers who have been trained in specific elementary science benchmark
lessons. Other elementary teachers in the district can be participate in the
lessons via interactive TV classroom to classroom. (3) It will link members of
the community, both business and residential, to each other, to worldwide
networks, and to information resources in new and crea tive ways. From health
care to small business, accessing the network will bring connectivity urgently
needed in this rural community. There are so many positive possibilities. By
making it a community effort, and integrating it into the school curricula,
collaborative problem-solving will provide the ways for this community to best
utilize its network.