* 9454707
* Morse High School Networking Infrastructure for Education   Planning Grant
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1995
* John Shacklett, Morse High School
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 09/30/1995
* USD 91,690.00

9454707 Shacklett The NSF Networking Infrastructure for Education Planning Grant
will provide a process model for integrating a networking infrastructure into
the Morse High School Center for Technology and Pacific Rim Studies magnet. The
infrastructure will support Morse High School's effort to implement reform
concepts contained in the master plan for high schools in California: Second to
None: A Vision of the New California High School. The project centers on the
development of an interdisciplinary career path curriculum supported by
multimedia technology. The goal of the proposed educational reform is that every
high school graduate will have the knowledge and skills needed to make the
choice of entering a career path in the work force or to continue in post
secondary education. Statement of Objectives By the end of the planning grant
period, October 1994 through September 1995, the project will have developed a
process model for implementing Second to None that includes the following
components: a process for developing an interdisciplinary curriculum for one of
the five magnet career paths a process for delivering staff development for
teachers and other staff functioning in a Second to None teaching and learning
environment a process for involving industry as full partners in the Second to
None teaching and learning environment a process for integrating a networking
infrastructure that will support and enhance student learning, staff
development, industry and parent/community involvement, and
administration/classroom management. Methods to be Employed In developing the
career path curriculum, Morse will be working with the Education Committee of
the San Diego Biomedical Industry Council (BIC), an association of 60
pharmaceutical, biotechnology and biomedical device companies in S.D. County.
The BIC will provide an industry team to join with an interdisciplinary school
team in developing a c urriculum centered on producing a product related to the
industry. Students from various disciplines (industrial technology, marketing,
math, science, English, social studies) will be recruited for the new biomedical
career path to design, produce and market a product. The curriculum will be
based on the four areas of research and development, regulatory affairs,
manufacturing and marketing. In developing the curriculum, project planners will
develop new teaching and learning strategies which are supported by state-of-
the-art technology. Significance of the protect The project will result in a
process model that can be used by other schools which are integrating technology
and implementing educational reforms to improve the learning experience and
outcomes for students. The model can be followed by interested individuals,
schools, and other organizations through monthly progress updates posted to the
World Wide Web of the Internet. The project will also produce a course catalog
describing how courses incorporate career paths and use technology.