* 9454657
* Advanced Technological Education in Biotechnology: A Community College--Industry Partnership
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1998
* Jamie Deneris, Peralta Community College District Office
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 09/30/1998
* USD 209,074.00

Vista College proposes to develop an integrated and vocationally enriched
program for bioscience technicians. This proposal responds to a national need
for broad improvement in technical education as well as local industry needs for
bioscience technicians who have A.S. degrees or vocational certificates. This
project will develop a curriculum in biotechnology that provides students with a
strong scientific background and practical skills acquisition necessary for
success in the work place. Students will gain an in-depth understanding of basic
scientific principles and techniques, the ability to use sophisticated
scientific equipment and computers, and the ability to think critically. In
addition, this project will respond to the needs of a rapidly changing work
force by reducing embedded institutional barriers to women and other
underrepresented groups seeking to enter science and mathematics based
occupations, incorporating new instructional methods which address the diverse
learning styles of students, providing cooperative learning environments which
are more supportive for diverse learners, and developing an integrated
curriculum which provides students with practical skills acquisition and hands-
on application of knowledge. The Vista program is based upon a committed
industry-education-city partnership for the design and evaluation of the
curriculum and in support of student training through mentorships with industry
employees and internships in the work place. The program is based upon a set of
skill and knowledge requirements designed by industry scientists and the program
and curriculum development process has incorporated several review sessions by
an industry advisory committee culminating in general endorsement of the
program.