* 9454606
* North Central Center for Advanced Engineering Technology    Education in NDE/NDT
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1997
* William Lord, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 09/30/1997
* USD 50,000.00

Two high-priority national issues that will require a combination of new
technological and educational solutions are improving national competitiveness
and productivity and dealing with an aging infrastructure. A key element in
addressing both issues is a well-developed continuum of educational and training
opportunities that foster collaboration, interaction, and transfer of ideas and
technology among all sectors of education, industry, and government. A regional
center to improve technological education and to foster improved relationships,
communication, cooperation, and interaction among the various sectors of
nondestructive evaluation/nondestructive testing (NDE/NDT) education and
technology and their constituencies in the north central United States is being
planned. An informal consortium of Iowa State University (Ames), Hutchinson
Technical College (Hutchinson, Minnesota), Moraine Valley Community College
(Palos Hills, Illinois), Northeast Iowa Community College (Peosta), and
Southeast Community College (Milford, Nebraska) in collaboration with industry,
government, professional society, and regional high school partners is involved
in this planning initiative. To provide a model for a well-articulated continuum
of educational opportunities in areas of emerging technological importance, the
proposed center is designed to build upon the established research
accomplishments of the mature Center for NDE and College of Engineering at Iowa
State University, some of the leading technical and community college programs
in NDT/NDE in the United States, and selected existing educational development
and technology transfer efforts. Programs that will provide motivational
materials, instructional modules, curriculum materials, workshops, and shared
learning environments among students and faculty at all levels from junior high
school through undergraduate engineering programs are being planned.