* 9454390
* POLARIS:  Project on Leading Alaska Reform in Science
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/1994,04/30/2000
* Paul Reichardt, Anchorage School District
* Continuing Grant
* Rosalina V. Hairston
* 04/30/2000
* USD 2,064,705.00

9454390 Nanney POLARIS the Project On Leading Alaska Reform In Science is a four
year program to effect comprehensive science education reform in schools along
the length of the Alaska Highway, from Kenai to Fairbanks. Sixty leader
teachers, from grades seven through nine, will participate in a series of two
six-day academies each summer, a three day winter short course and ten follow-up
meetings during the academic year. Workshop content and pedagogy will be merged
so that teachers will learn in a format that their students are expected to use.
The science content will be guided by local needs, national science education
reform efforts and the emerging NRC standards. Reflecting its comprehensive
nature these teachers will also learn assessment techniques, applications of
technology and leadership skills and strategies. Other middle and high school
science teachers in the participating districts will be included in the project
through intensive workshop experiences lasting one hundred and five hours. These
second tier workshops sill be conducted by the leader teachers. The Anchorage
School District will be the lead district. The extraordinary contrast between
urban centers and road-accessible remote rural communities will be alleviated by
partnering the resources of each using electronic networks.