* 9454655
* Advanced Technical Education (ATE) Alliance
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* James Jordan, Consortium for Advanced Manufacturing International
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 08/31/1997
* USD 1,495,500.00

This is project will a pilot effort to develop, deliver, and evaluate national
curricula to educate the technicians who will be employable in the 21st century
manufacturing enterprise. Instrutional delivery will be assisted by distance
learning technology and the National Information Infrastructure. Added funding
will come from local, state, and other federal sources. CAM-I will lead the
Advanced Technical Education (ATE) Alliance, including as members Lawrence
Technological University, C.S. Mott Community College, and the Goodrich, MI,
area schools, and as affiliates other school districts in the Flint, MI, area,
clusters of community colleges, school districts, and CAM-I company members in
Oak Ridge, TN, Kansas City, MO and KN, Los Angeles, CA, and the Mescalero Apache
Reservation NM, and Lehigh University and National Technological University. The
knowledge and skill needs for a new breed of agile technicians, able to respond
knowledgeably, effectively, and quickly in highly competitive, rapidly changing
global manufacturing, are described. The ATE Alliance will meet these needs by
combining existing best practices modules, already developed by its members and
affiliates, with newly developed modules in an integrated, flexible, grades 11
14 program in math, science, communications, computing, and manufacturing
enterprise technologies in a pilot program centered on C.S. Mott Community
College and Goodrich MI area schools. The Alliance will share the modules using
nationally scalable distance learning techniques. The curricula will be
reinforced with teacher training, jobsite education for teachers and students,
and public information programs. The ATE Alliance will establish a virtual
school, combining a national network of educational resources to provide locally
and temporally optimized education for employability. The pilot curriculum
modules will be disseminated via distance learning techniques to the members and
the affiliated Associate degree grant ing institutions and school districts. The
curricula will be evaluated through performance based assessment. Successful
modules will be further disseminated throughout the United States by CAM-I in
publications, public fora, and through CAM-I's national network of industrial
members. The ATE Alliance will provide 21st-century education in clusters with
large, diverse minority populations, preparing students for employment in
challenging and rewarding careers.