* 9454615
* TechQuest: A Center for Advanced Technological Education    in Virginia: Planning Grant
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1994,02/29/1996
* Mary Sandy, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 02/29/1996
* USD 49,858.00

9454615 Bishara The Virginia State Grant Consortium (VSGC), in collaboration
with the Virginia Community College System (VCCS), 23 community colleges, 3
Space Grant universities, the State Department of Education, and a broad
spectrum of business and industry interests, is planning for the development of
an Advanced Technological Education Center (TechQuest) for the Commonwealth of
Virginia to address the needs of advanced technological education. Through the
TechQuest Planning Initiative, the Virginia Space Grant Consortium and its
partners is evaluating existing curricula at the community colleges, planning
appropriate revision and augmentation of curricula, and developing professional
enhancement activities for community college faculty, secondary teachers and
guidance counselors to support this curricular reform for advanced technological
education. Commitment to the TechQuest initiative of the VSGC, VCCS
administration, higher education, industry, and other partners is very strong.
The planning phase for the TechQuest Center is being led by project director
(Michael N. Bishara, D.Sc. Southwest Community College), project manager (Mary
Sandy, Director, VSGC), a steering committee, a team of technical, academic and
resource advisors, and planning teams for four advanced technology strands.
These content strands include: core- courses, high performance manufacturing,
electronics and environmental technology. The goal of the planning phase is to
develop an action plan for the implementation of the TechQuest Center through
which extensive curriculum reform will be instituted in Virginia's community
colleges along with the proposing professional development strategies to support
the renovated curriculum for advanced technological education.