* 9454129
* MIT/WHOI Joint Program Graduate Research Traineeships in    Coastal Ocean Processes
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2000
* John Farrington, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2000
* USD 562,500.00

GER-9454129 Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute Farrington ABSTRACT We propose to
increase and enhance the interdisciplinary training and graduate education in
coastal ocean processes within the MIT- WHOI Joint Program in Oceanography nd
Applied Ocean Sciences and engineering. The traineeship program will consist of
an introductory overview summer prior to the first academic year semester during
which trainees will be introduced to the broad range of oceanography and ocean
engineering research. The first summer includes participation in a ten day
cruise, and specific seminars by faculty involved in interdisciplinary coastal
ocean research. Trainees will enroll in the existing normal X of graduate
courses in oceanography or ocean engineering to gain a broad education in
oceanography or ocean engineering and an in- depth education in their
specialization. An intensive graduate level seminar offered each year between
the fall and spring semesters will provide a more detailed in-depth introduction
(for first year students) and progressively more intense involvement (for second
through fifth year students) in interdisciplinary coastal ocean research.
Trainees will undertake PhD thesis research within an interdisciplinary context.
A Science-Policy- Management Seminar for trainees who have advanced to PhD
candidacy will involve faculty of the Joint Program and external experts active
at the science-policy-management interfaces.