* 9454691
* Development of a Rural Networking Infrastructure in Support of Systemic Change in Mathematics and Science Education:    The Network Montana Project One Year Planning Grant
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1996
* David Thomas, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 08/31/1996
* USD 105,807.00

9454691 Thomas Network Montana is a collaborative, systemic research and
development project constituting Montana's response to NSF's Networking
Infrastructure for Education (NIE) RFP #94-5. The goal of the NSF/NIE program is
to build synergy between technology and educational researchers, developers, and
implementers in the use of network and telecommunications technologies in
education, with a particular focus on the development of flexible, sustainable
approaches to network infrastructure. This proposal seeks funding for a one-year
planning grant aimed at developing a systemic approach to K-16 networking in
Montana. The partners in this enterprise will include teachers, administrators,
and researchers from the state's educational system, leaders in state
government, and individuals from a variety of community, professional, and
private sector organizations. Commitments of talent and resources from all
partners will be focused on the development of a lasting infrastructure capable
of supporting the development of a variety of educational telecommunications
services. Specifically, at the end of the planning period, the Network Montana
Project will: 1. Define a state-wide coalition of partners from academia,
government, and the private sector responsible for directing a wide variety of
K-16 educational networking activities during the period of NSF/NIE funding and
in subsequent projects; 2. Make use of Montana Information Services Division
(ISD) leased lines and Big Sky Telegraph capabilities to pilot Internet access
for select K-12 schools and their local libraries; 3. Encourage and facilitate
long-term partnerships with computer equipment and software manufacturers,
aerospace industries, and other private sector organizations interested in
educational reform; 4. Facilitate cooperative partnerships with NASA, NOAA, the
U.S. Geological Survey and other national and international scientific
organizatio ns; 5. Cooperate with and support a number of nationally significant
mathematics and science education projects already underway in Montana; 6. Focus
on the development of educational and informational resources deliverable over
the Internet and of interest to Montanans of all ages, and; 7. Develop a
position paper on the networking implications for mathematics and science
education reform. The foundation of the Network Montana Project is cooperation
and collaboration. All major organizations and institutions involved with
mathematics education, science education, telecommunications, or networking
across Montana are participants in this planning grant. Industry support from
TCI, Digital Equipment Corporation, Microsoft, Square One TV and others also
plays a significant role.