* 9454045
* A Graduate Research Traineeship in Democratization at the   University of Iowa
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2000
* Jae-on Kim, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2000
* USD 562,500.00

The concept of democracy is dynamic and multifaceted. Because democracy had
been examined form a variety of intellectual perspectives, any graduate training
program in the study of democratization must necessarily be interdisciplinary if
it is to adequately prepare the students for conducting research or teaching on
the topic of democratization. The proposed traineeship program at Iowa would
meet this interdisciplinary goal by recruiting students onto both the Political
Science (three students) and the Sociology (two students) Departments and then
providing a training program that draws upon substantive courses in these
departments, as well as the Colleges of Law and Business Administration. The
formal course work will be anchored by two core seminar; one that present a
broad theoretical and methodological overview of studies of democratization and
a Coordination Seminar that acts to integrate the students into ongoing research
projects focused on the process of democratization in a number of Asian, East
European, former Soviet and latin American countries. The elective seminars that
add to the interdisciplinary quality of the proposed training program are
organized into four substantive topic areas: those focused on Institutions,
Economics and Markets, Socia-Political Culture and Elite Strategies. These
different areas reflect the major research traditions in the study of
democratization. Students would take at least one course from each of these
substantive areas. A research apprenticeship would be a required part of the
training program. This apprenticeship would directly involve the student in
research opportunities in countries currently experiencing a new wave of
democratization. In most cases, this research involvement would form the basis
for the students' dissertation research. The Political Science and Sociology
Departments of the University of Iowa are both highly rated graduate departments
that have small number s of graduate students relative to the size of their
faculty. Because these departments have traditionally provided the graduate
students with a good deal of individual attention and mentoring, they have had
very high rates of PhD completion. Enrollments in graduate courses in these
departments is relatively low, therefore, adding three to five more students in
these classes will not affect the quality of these courses in any way. The
University of Iowa faculty that would participate in this program are all
currently involved in ongoing teaching and research on democratization; they
stand ready to welcome a new set of graduate students interested in obtaining
training in this relevant and exciting area of study.