* 9454647
* Establishing and Transporting Science, Computer, and        Electronics Technology Curricula to Rural Minority Students through Simulated Labs and Telecourses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1998
* G. Robert Converse, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Gary L. Long
* 09/30/1998
* USD 499,938.00

The Maui Community College purpose of this distance education project is to
establish and transport science, computer, and electronics technology curricula
to rural minority students through interactive teleclass lectures and simulated
multi-media laboratory experiences. The first stage of the project encompasses
the development of multimedia instructional materials for a model Certificate
and Associate in Science Degree curriculum in Electronics and Computer
Engineering Technology (ECET). The program is cooperatively designed to provide
for technical certification and/or transfer opportunities to baccalaureate
degree programs at the University of Hawai'i-Manoa or distance education
offerings at the Maui Research and Technology Center from the University of New
Mexico. The second stage focuses on developing multi-media laboratory exercises
for the ECET curriculum in a format transportable to outreach by reducing
dependence on costly laboratory equipment and faculty travel. This innovative
format utilizes simulated lab experiments by developing, purchasing, and
integrating multi-media software for CAI workstations. The ECET program is to be
field-tested on the main campus and then extended to the college outreach
centers, and will formally recruit students from MCC's densely-populated Pacific
Island and Asian community. The third stage is the extension of the simulated
methodology to other science and mathematics courses at the college. The final
stage involves teacher and faculty enhancement. Effectiveness of this approach
is to be demonstrated through scheduled workshops for other college instructors
state-wide and to secondary school teachers; and the project results
disseminated on a national level.