* 9454782
* Discovering Community Networks
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/1994,03/31/1996
* Thomas Clark, Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 03/31/1996
* USD 96,248.00

9454782 Clark How can communities plan for and manage self-sustaining
telecommunication networks and other technologies? The Maine Mathematics and
Science Alliance, (MMSA), a nonprofit 501 (c) 3 organization, the administrator
of Maine's Statewide Systemic Initiative (SSI), is proposing an eight-month
planning project, Discovering Community Networks, where three diverse
communities, York, Houlton, Mt. Desert Island, will develop strategies for
building synergy for inter and intracommunity communication with electronic
networks to work toward systemic changes in mathematics, science and technology
education. Discovering Community Networks, through planning forums aimed at
sustainability of a network and educational reform, will build partnerships
within and across communities. The objectives are: 1. To develop community
technology plans focused on using telecommunications to improve science and
Mathematics education. 2. To develop plans for intra and intercommunity
communication. 3. To plan community links for appropriate use of electronic
technology. 4. To document the process of community technology planning for a
transferable model. 5. To research how mathematics and science reform is
enhanced by telecommunication. The co-principal investigators and a project
director will work in concert with the communities' coordinators, technology
teams and a cross-site team. Membership on the technology teams will represent
all community populations including teachers, parents, students, industry,
research laboratories, higher education institutions, municipal government,
cable television companies, retired people, and civic groups using and providing
network services. Three one-half time site coordinators will simplify the
planning and work with the project director and existing governance structures.
In response to our earlier question, the evaluation of the project will reflect
the answers we discover. Discovering Commun ity Networks will formatively assess
in the planning portion and a summative evaluation will conclude the project
with what we've learned about intra and inter community collaboration and the
products produced. This will be available to interested communities, the Maine
State Library as they work toward providing networking services for Maine, the
Maine Department of Education's State Educational Technology Task Force, and be
incorporated into funding requests to carry out the plans.