* 9454704
* Enabling Widespread Telecollaboration
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1994,12/31/1998
* Joseph Walters, TERC Inc
* Continuing grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 12/31/1998
* USD 2,835,229.00

9454704 Feldman Our understanding of excellence in science learning has changed
dramatically in the past decades. We now know that the concepts, skills, and
excitement of science are most effectively learned through students' direct
experience in real science activities- collaborating to plan an experiment,
collecting data, organizing and representing the data, and interpreting the
data. Students learn complex problem-solving skills by working with peers and
mentors to plan and carry out an investigation of a real science problem. Rather
than textbooks and lab exercises, this approach emphasizes authentic contexts
for learning, that is, doing science. To implement this approach, students need
access to resources outside their classroom-access to data beyond what they can
collect themselves, and access to scientists or other experts as they try to
make sense of their data. Teachers need access to experts, other teachers, and
additional resources as they grapple with a new way of teaching science. The use
of computers connected through wide-area networks provides an effective way to
access these resources for teachers and students, and enables students and
teachers to work closely with others who are geographically remote. TERC
proposes to create a paradigm for education, which we call telecollaboration,
that will build on the model of Network Science created in Alice/Collaborative
Inquiry Testbed. Telecollaboration reflects a major change in our use of
computers and telecommunications in education, and enables teachers and students
to engage actively in high quality teaching and learning. We will create a
Testbed through which we'll identify and encourage a range of telecollaborative
projects that will meet the needs of educators, support educational reform, and
create new, scalable classes of network collaboration. While the paradigm we are
developing is applicable across the curriculum, the Testbed will focus on
telecollaboratives with an emphasis on science and mathematics.