* 9454547
* A Partnership for Excellence in Engineering Technology      Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1997
* Wayne Hager, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Norman Fortenberry
* 09/30/1997
* USD 658,000.00

This project represents a partnership between the York County Area Vocational-
Technical School, the York City Schools, Penn State University (at its York,
Harrisburg and University Park Campuses), regional industry and the Pennsylvania
Department of Education. The partnership is developing a comprehensive model for
technological education for 11th grade through the associate degree level with
possible extension to the baccalaureate level. The model focuses on
manufacturing curriculum and educational processes. It will produce integrated
and interdisciplinary topical modules, teaching materials and resources for
seven courses. The modules will be developed collaboratively by teachers and
faculty. The modules, which will focus on technical topics, will be developed
within the context of teacher/faculty workshops on enhanced pedagogical
techniques. Use of the modules will reinforce technical topics within the high
school curriculum and bring enhanced teaching techniques to the college
curriculum. All educational levels will see better integration of topics and
clearly understand the interdependence of mathematics, science, and
technology.The project anticipates substantial dissemination to secondary and
postsecondary faculty at other Penn State locations, and then to faculty across
the state and nation. The project plan will capitalize on and integrate a
variety of current efforts to coordinate technological education in the state
and region.