* 9454633
* Environmental Technology Education Transfer to Native       American Tribal Colleges
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1999
* Karl Topper, Colorado Mesa University
* Standard Grant
* Robert K. Boggess
* 09/30/1999
* USD 399,778.00

Native American Tribal environments have often historically been neglected; and
tribes have inadequate resources and expertise to deal with cleanup and
prevention of further pollution. Because tribes need to know how to measure and
analyze their own environmental risks, a technologically educated and trained
Native American environmental work force is needed. This project is using
existing resources to create and transfer an interdisciplinary environmental
technology associate degree curriculum for tribal colleges and other community
colleges with roles in educating American Indians. It is also providing faculty
enhancement, instructional materials, and a rotating equipment program. The
curriculum focuses on those technologies used for environmental monitoring, site
assessment, solid waste management, and pollution prevention, as these are the
prominent environmental issues facing tribal lands. From incorporation of
support disciplines (mathematics, science, communications), students are
developing analytical skills for situations for which they are not specifically
trained. Mesa State College, Navajo Community College, and Northern New Mexico
Community College are the resource colleges, each with different established
environmental technology programs. The pilot group of tribal and tribally
related colleges are Navajo Community College, Northern New Mexico Community
College, Crownpoint Institute of Technology and Southwest Indian Polytechnic
Institute. Two additional tribal colleges may be added. The project methodology
is interactive, using workshops, site visits, iterative writing/review, and
hands-on training. The tribal colleges are part of the process from the
beginning and will take ownership of the curriculum. Baseline data on the tribal
colleges will be gathered and progress will be evaluated over a three-year
period.