* 9454643
* Southwest Center for Advanced Technological Education
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/1994,03/31/1998
* Oliver Hensley, Texas State Tech College West Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 03/31/1998
* USD 1,766,637.00

The Southwest Regional Center for Advanced Technological Education is a
collaboration among two-year colleges, four-year colleges and universities,
industries, and Tech Prep consortia in West Central Texas, New Mexico, and
Oklahoma to provide technical education in a vast rural region through distance
education. The project is developing the infrastructure and the pedagogy to
deliver many technical courses through distance learning. These include existing
courses in CAD/CAM/CIM which are being converted for delivery via distance
learning to two-year institutions and secondary school sites. Faculty at two-
year colleges are working with the Department of Education at Texas Technical
College to develop new instructional materials. In particular, the Center is
developing new AAS programs in polymer technology and electro- mechanical
technology to complement needs of industry in the area. Through an intensive
effort at developing distance education and electronic networking in the
consortium, the Center is enabling the member institutions to share their
substantial resources, to deliver quality instruction throughout the area, and
to exchange data and information rapidly and efficiently. This "center without
walls" addresses the intertwined problems distance, expense, and limited
resources inherent in delivering advanced technological education in such a
large region. Its findings, strategies, tactics, materials, and methodologies
constitute a significant contribution to technical education in the nation.