* 9454729
* The Co Vis Testbed:  A National Science Education           Collaboratory
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1994,03/31/1999
* Louis Gomez, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 03/31/1999
* USD 3,539,105.00

9454729 Pea The work in this proposal builds on the Learning Through
Collaborative Visualization (CoVis) Project, an NSF-AAT testbed. CoVis has
focused on three areas - project-enhanced science learning, collaboration, and
scientific visualization - as a means for transforming science education. Its
goal has been to use next- generation technologies to support the formation and
work activities of learning communities with media-rich communication and
scientific visualization tools in a highly interactive networked collaborative
context. The NIE testbed will transform the small-scale working CoVis model with
three hundred participants at the high school level into a large-scale
Collaboratory, for thousands of users in diverse settings. In exploring
networking infrastructures for education, it is essential to recognize that
"infrastructure" consists of more than network connections and transport
protocols. To be effective, support for networked learning communities requires
three interdependent components: technology infrastructure, educational content
infrastructure, and teacher support and development infrastructure. In order to
characterize costs and outcomes, a testbed also requires an evaluation and
dissemination infrastructure. The technology infrastructure will provide
students and teachers with an environment to support collaborative learning that
includes video teleconferencing, collaboration software, a video server,
Internet tools, and software environments for open-ended science investigations.
The educational resources infrastructure will take advantage of the technology
infrastructure to allow students and teachers to look up and exchange a broad
range of interactive multimedia learning materials and scientific datasets.
These resources will be developed by teachers, students, atmospheric scientists
at UIUC, specialists in hands-on learning at the Exploratorium Science Museum,
and other collaborators. The teacher development and supp ort infrastructure
will take the form of workshops for teachers conducted by project staff,
materials to support project-oriented pedagogy, and an emerging networked
community of teachers sharing their experiences as they transform their teaching
practices. The testbed evaluation and dissemination infrastructure will consist
of a substantial research framework combining cognitive science, survey methods,
and case studies to help expose the challenges for deploying high-bandwidth
networking infrastructures for education and clarify the ways in which these
infrastructures can improve the effectiveness of science education. The results
of this research will be disseminated through a variety of traditional and
network-based mechanisms to reach an audience of school administrators, policy
makers, corporations, and researchers.