* 9454815
* Project STAR-Students and Teachers Achieving Results
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1995,11/30/1999
* Daryl Hansen, Houston Independent School District
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 11/30/1999
* USD 1,348,326.00

9454815 Bryant The Houston Independent School District (HISD) proposes a project
called Students and Teachers Achieving Results, or STAR. The program will focus
on secondary teachers in HISD and the other Urban Systemic Initiative school
districts: Aldine, Alief, North Forest, and Spring Branch. STAR will provide
training modules at Focus Centers, as well as alternative staff development
materials developed by teachers to support the curriculum. These centers will
offer a variety of training models based on the successful practices used in the
district and the collaborating university centers. The training models will
stress the use of units using demonstration, inquiry/discovery,
experiment/laboratory, and cooperative learning models. STAR's intent is to
design models with assessment strategies incorporated into the activities.
HISD's goals of Project STAR are: Goal 1 Combine the use of telecommunications
with model classroom- based science and mathematics professional development and
preservice teacher education. Goal 2 Involve teachers in the continued
development of appropriate instructional and assessment models using resources
available on a district-wide network. The objectives of the STAR project are to:
increase students' academic performance; increase the quality of mathematics and
science pedagogy; develop advanced telecommunications support and information
nationwide, and; provide telecommunications information infrastructure
incorporating the widest variety of information technolgies.