* 9455061
* The Geometry of Multivariable Calculus
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Caspar Curjel, Eastern Washington University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Lightbourne
* 05/31/1999
* USD 149,712.00

The Geometry of Multivariable Calculus strengthens the multidimensional
geometric intuition that students need, but usually lack, to understand
multivariable calculus. To motivate students to learn the material, the project
includes live demonstrations by mathematicians from industry on the use of
multidimensional applied and computational geometry, for example, in the design
of automobiles, aircraft, and spacecraft. Many such applications involve five
dimensions: three for space, one for time, and one coded by color to plot
stress, pressure, or other parameters. To this end, community college and
university instructors may participate in annual week-long workshops and follow-
up activities. In the workshops, held at community colleges, participants will
spend most of the time researching and designing geometric material--exercises,
worksheets, test problems, and projects--ready for use in their existing courses
in elementary to advanced multi variable calculus, and in such related courses
as linear algebra and advanced calculus. Follow-up weekends will enable
participants to polish their material in a form suitable for publication, and
follow-up days will allow participants to prepare their material for
presentations at a regional or national conference. Participants who wish to
publish substantial projects may also request a summer stipend. Past workshops
have resulted in publications and videos on 3-D graphics, splines, and
differentials with several variables. Future workshops will focus on Computed
Tomography, Geometric Modeling, and Fractal Geometry. Each workshop will take
place in June in Spokane and in September in Seattle. Guest speakers from
industry come from Applied Geometry Corp., The Boeing Company, and the Ford
Motor Company.