* 9455292
* A Capstone Course in Statistics
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* John Spurrier, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 05/31/1997
* USD 29,960.00

Undergraduate statistics majors and mathematics majors with an emphasis in
statistics receive a broad education which includes training in mathematics,
applied and theoretical statistics, computing, communication skills, and general
education. Much of this training is done in a piecemeal fashion. Students are
seldom required to combine the various skills learned throughout the curriculum.
They also seldom gain hands-on experience by participating in real experiments.
They graduate with a vast array of knowledge but are often very inexperienced in
putting the pieces together. They are not ready to make their greatest possible
impact in the workplace. A pilot of a capstone course, which uses real world
problems, is being developed. The projects studied synthesize the lessons
learned throughout the curriculum and develop students' oral and written
communication skills to the level expected of professional statisticians. The
synthesis will be achieved by having teams of students participate in work on
projects from the industrial/real world arena. They will also study technical
writing and oral presentation modules. Students will prepare formal written and
oral reports. If a report is not of professional quality, the student will be
given considerable feedback and required to repeat the report. All students will
leave the course with a firm understanding of the communication skills required
of the professional statistician.