* 9455740
* Production of Short, Animated Audio/Visual Instructional    Aids for Physics Which Illustrate the Application of Physics to Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1998
* Stewart Ryan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 04/30/1998
* USD 34,215.00

9455740 Ryan The project is producing several SVHS video tapes containing short
animated sequences to illustrate the applications of physics in modern
technology at a level suitable for introductory physics courses. Although the
primary audience consists of undergraduate college students, the video tapes are
also useful for high school science students. The tapes are being prepared
primarily through the use of computer animation and SVHS video recording. Each
tape contains 5-10 minute expositions of several devices such as compact discs,
photocopier, telecommunication devices, computer chips, computer displays and
key boards, scanners, laser printers, fiber optics, medical devices etc. These
tapes will ultimately be converted into laser disks by a commercial agency.
Laser disks have been chosen as the final product since they offer the most
flexibility and usefulness as an instructional medium. This project helps bridge
the gap between physics and technology by bringing physics-based industrial and
practical applications to the introductory physics classroom. The teaching of
such applications in physics courses is essential in order that students
understand the value and use of physics in real life and should also make the
physics learning process more enjoyable and easier. Most physics instructors at
present do not devote much time to technological applications primarily because
of class time considerations. However with proper audio-visual means most
technological applications can be described in short animated sequences of about
5-10 minutes each. Once completed, these disks will be very useful for
supplementing physics instruction.