* 9455395
* Undergraduate Curriculum Development on Mechatronic Systems Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Nabil Ibrahim, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 07/31/1998
* USD 494,279.00

9455395 Hsu The short-term objective of this proposal is to develop five new
courses and two laboratories in mechatronic systems engineering by a Taskforce
that includes faculty members from Mechanical, Electrical, Computer, General
Engineering and Physics Departments at the San Jose State University, and from
local high tech industry. Two faculty members from Mission College, part of the
California Community College System which supplies 70% of the incoming studnets
to the California State University System, are also involved in the laboratory
development. In addition to new course development significant improvements will
be made in 4 exisiting courses and 5 existing laboratories. The long-term
objective of our activities is to establish a center for Mechatronics
engineering education built on the success of the above short-term effort. This
center will assist other institutions in the nation to establish mechatronic
curricula for single or interdisciplinary engineering departments, as well as
for human resource development for industry. The proposed curriculum will be
built on three pillars: (1) the fundamental principles of Mechatronic
Technology, (2) the hands-on experience, and (3) the application of Mechatronic
Technology to the industry in the region. Contents in Pillar (1) and (2) will be
made readily transportable to other institutions whereas the content in Pillar
(3) can be developed with assistance of local industry and can be transported to
other institutions in a similar industrial setting. This model will benefit
universities and industries in other regions who seek to develop similar models.
Instructional materials developed from this project will be disseminated to
other institutions and industry through computer links by means of multi-media
CD-ROMs. Every effort will be made to present results at conferences of various
professional societies, as well as publications in open literature. The Taskf
orce will also host a faculty enhancement workshop to disseminate initial
results and to gather additional input after the first year of the project. An
effort will be made to garner additional funding in the future in order to offer
workshops in the project's second and third years of the development.