* 9455616
* Conferences on Communicating and Assessing                  Innovative Strategies for Life Sciences Teaching to         Undergraduates
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1998
* Paul Williams, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 01/31/1998
* USD 110,992.00

The Coalition for Education in the Life Sciences (CELS), a network of life
science professional organizations, is requesting support for three conferences
in 1995, 1996, and 1997 on undergraduate life science education. These will be
the CELS IV, CELS V, and CELS VI conferences. The conferences will emphasize
assessment of educational programs, development of a life sciences electronic
clearinghouse, dissemination of information about exemplary programs, and ways
for improving faculty and graduate assistant teaching and course design. CELS IV
will be held in June, 1995, at The University of Wisconsin, Madison; CELS V in
1996 at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas; and CELS VI will meet in
Washington, DC. The conferences will be limited to 175 participants to promote
interaction and CELS encourages faculty and administrators from the same
institution to attend as teams. The format will include plenary sessions on
broad topics like assessment, smaller break-out discussions and hands-on
workshops, materials presentations and group discussions, and demonstrations
that show effective teaching. The outcome will be teaching materials and
conference proceedings, which will be disseminated through all the professional
societies supporting CELS and a self-sustaining CELS network for ongoing work in
this important area of undergraduate life sciences education.