* 9455288
* Career Direction through Integrated Introductory Biology-   Chemistry Laboratory and Research
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1999
* Robert Hausman, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 01/31/1999
* USD 162,000.00

This proposal is a three step sequential undergraduate biology-chemistry
experience to retain science majors and to inspire them to enter research
careers. Step I occurs in a student's first year with an integration of the
second semester laboratories of the majors' Introductory Biology and Chemistry
courses. Lectures remain separate. In order to follow the student experience of
the integrated laboratories and to retain and build upon student interest in
science research, Step II is a required Career Seminar course in Spring of the
sophomore year. Seminar speakers from academia, medicine, and industry serve as
hosts for students participating in Step III, a Summer Research internship
between the second and third years of college. Steps II and III function
together in the sophomore year to provide a practical application of the
integrated first year laboratories and to reinforce research career goals. Two
laboratory sections concurrently participate in Step I to pursue a number of
nontraditional, investigative laboratory modules which integrate concepts from
cell biology, molecular genetics, and general chemistry. Seven hours per week is
divided into formal laboratory investigation, discussion, and comeback time.
Over a 12-week period four modules are presented. These integrated, modular
laboratories will examine (1) Vitamin C Metabolism, (2) Reaction Dynamics of
Enzymes, (3) Sources of Energy for Life, and (4) Manipulation of Macromolecule.
During the final week of each module, students analyze data, draw conclusions
and in selected modules, design their own original investigations based on
previous experimentation. Mathematic tutorials are available. This integrated,
biological-chemical modular format directly relates to and prepares science
majors for modern research-oriented upper division courses and parallel a
realistic career research experience. One section of the integrated biology-
chemistry laboratories is comprised entirely of women for comparison with the
other two of mixed gender and with the traditional separate biology and
chemistry laboratories for the other students.