* 9455430
* Taking Ownership:  Science as Constructive Inquiry (SCI) -  An Interdisciplinary, Urban, Multicultural Curriculum       Development Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2000
* Paul Jablon, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2000
* USD 226,589.00

Brooklyn College of the City University of New York is developing, enhancing,
and disseminating an intensive, yet supportive, science preparation sequence for
urban preservice elementary teachers. For the past five years college faculty
from the four science departments - Physics, Chemistry, Geology, and Biology -
have collaborated with the science education faculty to design and pilot a
constructivist-oriented set of science and science education courses. It is the
purpose of this proposed project to consolidate the successes of this
preliminary program, to build upon pedagogic discoveries, and to strengthen and
disseminate a possible major contribution to the nation's infrastructure in
science. In the early part of the three year project, curriculum is highlighted:
(1) Quantitative thinking is being developed as a systemic strand through
science courses; this involves the use of lab-based science instruction as a way
of teaching mathematics, and using mathematics as a way of allowing active
learning to extend beyond the bounds of lab and human scales. This project
addresses the science and science education courses. The PI's are cooperating
with colleagues concurrently working on revision of the mathematics sequence for
elementary education majors. (2) Since teaching in the constructivist mode
involves a major shift for most faculty, the PI's are working to enhance
consistency in teaching throughout the science courses. (3) The science faculty
are developing a revised model for set-up of laboratory work, to allow for
flexibility and spontaneity in student activities. In the latter part of the
grant period, the PI's will prepare a book about their experiences in devising a
constructivist curriculum, including discussion of pedagogical, scientific,
philosophical, and political issues. In addition to curricular illustrations,
the book will demonstrate how faculty with traditional backgrounds can be
encouraged, motivated, and taught to develop teaching style s appropriate to
inquiry-based learning.