* 9455732
* Implementing Interactive Laboratory-Based Learning          Techniques in Second-Semester Introductory Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1995,09/30/2000
* Gay Stewart, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/2000
* USD 173,630.00

9455732 Stewart Research shows that students use formula-centered problem-
solving strategies that differ from those used by experienced scientists, and
that the knowledge students gain in introductory physics is a randomly organized
set of facts and equations, with little conceptual understanding and many
misconceptions. Many approaches have been developed to overcome these problems,
and have met with reasonable success in small institutions, or for a particular
professor. These approaches are often too expensive or complicated to transfer
to large comprehensive universities. Also, graduate students, the future
instructors of science, are in general inadequately trained as educators. A
teaching system designed to overcome these problems in a method that could be
standardized and made available to larger engineering schools, as well as being
appropriate for smaller institutions, will be developed. The method involves
leading the student from concrete "hands-on" examples to conceptual
understanding through group discussion, in the idea first, name afterward
fashion. Quantitative experimental results provide verification. Concepts are
related to everyday phenomena familiar to the student. Students are taught how
to think about physics problems. Cooperative learning, found to improve
retention of female and minority students, is emphasized. Graduate and advanced
undergraduate students are brought into the teaching process as apprentices,
with materials to acquaint them with the teaching strategies to be employed. In
a calculus-based introductory physics course (&gt;300 students annually), over a
three year period, the technique will be refined, using testing and interviews
to determine the most successful strategies. The results will be made available
in a format designed to facilitate implementation elsewhere. A standard of
evaluation for conceptual understanding for electromagnetism, similar to the
Hestenes mechanics evaluati on, will be developed. The "hands-on" Activity Guide
would be useful in non-engineering courses, particularly classes for educators,
and could be adapted for use in lower education.