* 9455601
* Coupling Mathematics and Life Science Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Michael Snow, University of Portland
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 08/31/1997
* USD 51,293.00

Every area of modern biology relies on quantitative concepts but the
quantitative training of life science students is rarely connected to biology
and many biology students fail to appreciate its relevance. The goal of this
project is to create a unified curriculum which develops the students'
quantitative approaches to problems in the life sciences. This project will
couple an introductory statistics course with a general biology laboratory
course at the University and develop teaching units for the middle school level.
The key to the long term benefits and widespread significance of this project is
that a teaching circle will be formed which is interdisciplinary and includes
middle school teachers. This collaborative team will be united by commitment to
teach science and mathematics from an integrated, project-based, problem-solving
approach. It brings together education and subject matter experts. Locally, this
project will revise the manner in which biology and mathematics are being taught
at the University of Portland and Portsmouth Middle School. It will impact
future teachers through student-teacher placements and through the University's
teaching methods courses in the School of Education. Because flexible teaching
modules which couple statistics and general biology and teaching units for
middle schools will be developed, field tested, evaluated, and disseminated, the
outcomes from this project will contribute to systemic reform of
science/mathematics education at the national level.