* 9455699
* A Multidimensional Computer-Assisted Course for Teaching the Fundamentals of Ethnographic Field Research Methods in a   Laboratory Environment to Undergraduates in Anthropology...
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/1995,03/31/1998
* Manuel Carlos, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 03/31/1998
* USD 200,000.00

9455699 Carlos Cultural anthropology is grounded in field research. Most
undergraduates never get the opportunity to explore the relationship between
ethnographic theory and field methods by applying research methods in a field
environment. This project addresses these limitations by developing an
undergraduate course that combines classroom-based instruction and computer-
based field research simulators used in a computer laboratory. The simulators
complement lectures, readings, and a course handbook that guides students
through the lesson objectives. These materials are integrated into a year-long
course on scientific field data collection methods and analysis and their
relationship to ethnographic theory. We propose to further develop interactive
cmmputer simulators (a prototype has been developed) to recreate key aspects of
the field research experience in an actual peasant communities. These simulators
allow undergraduates to actually "do" fieldwork, use theory as a framework for
field research, analyze their own data, and manage limited resources in an
interactive research environment. Development of curricular materials and
simulators includes peer review and extensive consultation with technical
experts available on campus to the Pl. The materials are scheduled for extensive
off-campus evaluation. The impact of this proposal is twofold: (1) scientific
research methods, analysis, and theory can be taught hand-in-hand with actual
field research assignments, and (2) students learn broadly applicable and
transferable social scientific research skills, including the management and
organization of computerized ethnographic data.