* 9455331
* Integrating Geographic Information Systems Into             Undergraduate Environmental Science Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/1995,12/31/1998
* William Cromartie, Stockton University
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 12/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

9455331 Cromartie Geographic Information Systems (GIS) computer programs are
powerful tools for spatial data analysis and mapping, widely used by
environmental professionals. Specific GIS curricula, however, are not available
for undergraduate environmental studies. The goal of this project is to design,
develop and test an integrated set of core environmental science modules,
incorporating GIS and related technologies. All components, lecture, laboratory,
and field, are linked through the GIS in a multi-media framework. An
interdisciplinary setting is provided for modules for the core courses. Advanced
students are involved in developing, testing, and implementing the new modules
as teaching assistants in the core courses. Modules emphasize self-paced
instruction, collaborative learning, group learning, and student-initiated
projects. There are plans to assess the pedagogical effect of the integrated
strategy. The revised curriculum represents a significantly improved education
practice for undergraduate environmental studies students, other science majors
and non-science majors. Study of fundamental scientific concepts are integrated
with study of management, decision making, and ethics in a technically
sophisticated framework. The project demonstrates how GIS can enhance problem
solving, critical thinking and communication skills. Nationally, this project
will serve as a model for environmental science. It will produce sets of
interactive courseware and manuals that other programs can adapt to their own
curricula. These will be disseminated electronically and through publications
and workshops. Because the course materials will conform to a national consensus
curriculum, other institutions should be able to incorporate them with minimal
modifications.