* 9455422
* Engineering, Technology and Culture: with an Emphasis on    Race, Gender and the Individual
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1996
* Lynn Johnson, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chalmers F. Sechrist
* 01/31/1996
* USD 64,210.00

The aim of this project is to make the social sciences and humanities more
meaningful to engineering students, including women and underrepresented
minorities. It is an effort to reform undergraduate engineering education by
offering a unique interdisciplinary and multi-cultural diversity engineering
course as part of the general education curriculum. The course, entitled
"Technology and Culture", places specific engineering designs within the social
and political context of race, gender and individuals. The course is designed to
give technical students a better understanding of the cultural, historical and
political context of their disciplines. At the same time it gives humanities and
social science students a better understanding of the methods and capabilities
of science and engineering. The project promotes new interdisciplinary teaching
methods and encourages faculty to experiment with different ways of
incorporating multi-cultural diversity and gender issues into their courses. It
enlists the cooperation of faculty, departments and committees across the
colleges of engineering and the liberal arts and sciences. It reinforces this
cooperation through a series of faculty development workshops emphasizing
cultural sensitivity training and interdisciplinary teaching methods. The
project also serves as a catalyst for reform for the teaching of other courses
that integrate engineering and science with disciplines in the humanities and
the social sciences.