* 9455748
* An Innovative Course on Elements of Manufacturing Systems   for Non-Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Mohamed Dessouky, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 12/31/1998
* USD 124,286.00

This project will involve the design, development, and implementation of an
introductory course on manufacturing systems for non-engineering students.
Innovative teaching and learning styles suitable for teaching manufacturing
concepts will be identified and incorporated in the course to motivate students
to learn, understand, and appreciate the role of manufacturing in today's
society, its impact on the economy, and its career potential. This course will
build on the background and skills of first- and second-year university
students, to give them a better understanding of the value of basic courses in
mathematics, physics, and chemistry, in learning engineering concepts. It will
also introduce non-engineering students, especially women and underrepresented
minorities, to manufacturing in a non-intimidating manner. It is hoped that such
an exposure will strengthen their confidence, dispel their fear of technology,
and motivate them to choose an engineering career. A preliminary study conducted
through a pilot section of the course offered during spring 1994 to assess the
need for this course and its potential benefits has resulted in positive
outcomes and has given the impetus for developing this course fully. The project
methodology will involve the identification of manufacturing life cycle concepts
suitable for this course and its target audience, and the design and development
of course activities, lesson plans, laboratory experiments, and instructional
aids that will accommodate different teaching and learning styles so that the
course material can be conveyed effectively to a non-engineering student
population. The progress of the project and its outcomes will be evaluated by a
team consisting of members from academia and the manufacturing industry. Course
material that will be developed for this project, the teaching and learning
techniques that will be used in conveying the material to students, and the
results of this study will be of great potential bene fit to educators
everywhere interested in offering similar courses to non-engineering students.