* 9455119
* Integrating Object-Orientation into Undergraduate Computer  Science Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Billy Lim, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Lillian N. Cassel
* 02/28/1998
* USD 124,835.00

In the past few years, object-oriented technology has become one of the dominant
technologies in the computing industry. In a recent survey, it was reported that
over 75% of the Fortune 100 companies have adopted object technology to some
degree for their computing needs. This is in response to the increasing software
maintenance cost and backlog that is so prevalent in the software industry.
Because object-orientation is becoming one of the primary means for problem
solving, the need to teach object orientation in undergraduate curriculum is
growing. This project provides two 2-week summer workshops for faculty who do
not have any formal training in the area of object-orientation. The objectives
are to introduce object-oriented concepts and to demonstrate how to deliver
effective courses and units on object-orientation. The major topics addressed in
this workshop include (1) object-oriented analysis and design, (2) object-
oriented programming, (3) object-oriented databases, (4) integrating object-
orientation into computer science/information system curriculum, and (5)
teaching object-orientation to undergraduates. The workshop includes lectures
and laboratory sessions in which participants have hands-on exercises in each of
the above main topics. Participants also plan a course or course unit utilizing
object-oriented technology at their institutions during the subsequent academic
year. The tools used in the workshops include inexpensive or free software that
are easily obtainable by most universities and colleges.