* 9455416
* Transforming Traditional Quantitative Analysis into a Coursein Modern Analytical Science
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Joseph Pesek, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 05/31/1999
* USD 135,214.00

Transforming Traditional Quantitative Analysis into a Course in Modern
Analytical Science. This curriculum development project transforms traditional
sophomore quantitative analysis into a course on modern analytical science.
Building on work supported by the NSF, we are developing a course that emulates
the working environment of a modern commercial analytical laboratory. The new
lab work reflects a commitment to addressing organic, biological, and
environmental studies, in place of much of the traditional emphasis on simple
inorganic systems. The types of investigations include: separations science
(mixture analysis); multi-element and trace analysis; and combined physical &
chemical characterization. Pervading all of this is a laboratory structure based
on Federal Good Laboratory Practice guidelines, where students are responsible
for calibration, certification, and documentation. The objectives of Phase 2 of
this project, proposed here, are (1) to conduct a realistic experiment in
transportability of the re-structured sophomore quant course; and (2) to produce
a Laboratory Manual which is flexible enough to be useful even at institutions
with limited resources. We have enlisted the cooperation of a small but diverse
group of interested academic institutions to test transportability at their
respective campuses. These schools will also provide feedback regarding
laboratory revisions to help accommodate the wide diversity of academic
resources. We will initiate Phase 2 with a summer workshop in 1995 at SJSU for
all participating faculty. This event will be repeated through 1997, with a
viable Laboratory Manual as the ultimate product.