* 9455329
* Planetary Exploration in the Classroom
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Richard Binzel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 06/30/1998
* USD 109,270.00

Planetary exploration captures the imagination and interest o students having
both science and non-science backgrounds and aspirations. Current textbooks that
simply present a few pictures from planetary missions fail to capitalize on the
potential for utilizing the excitement of planetary exploration as a theme for
learning about physical processes and the methods of science. The project is
developing a curriculum that will build upon the appeal of space exploration to
promote interest in science and to teach modern methods of scientific
investigation and discovery. It uses a hands-on approach in exploring processes
which shape planetary worlds using actual spacecraft images and existing
Macintosh computers. Through a set of exercises, students learn that scientific
images are no longer pictures in books. Instead, modern scientific images are
digital objects that can be manipulated and examined in quantitative detail.
Spacecraft images are used to motivate scientific inquiry but the curriculum
also emphasizes that digital imaging is becoming inherent to all areas of beyond
science. The new curriculum involving digital imaging will be incorporated into
our introductory level classes which attract a broad cross section of science
and non-science students. These students should carry their scientific and
digital imaging experience with them as new tools in their pursuit of majors and
careers in all areas of science, engineering, medicine, humanities, and
education. Because the curriculum is at the introductory science level and uses
both images and software available in the public domain (for both Macintosh and
PCs), these exercises can be available for wide use in other colleges,
universities, and high schools.