* 9455695
* Development of Collaborative, Computer-Networked            Laboratories in General Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1995,12/31/2000
* Nancy Kerner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 12/31/2000
* USD 135,000.00

This project provides students with accurate experience in the laboratory of the
scientific process and skills for solving real life problems. The project
extends a three year pilot project that uses collaborative computer based
learning to meet the above goals. Student groups explore the same general
problem, but each group uses different reagents. A networked computer system
(CoLABnet) is used to collect, pool, and summarize the largely qualitative class
data. The pooled data allow the students to examine more parameters with better
accuracy than would individual data. The discovery of trends is facilitated by
presenting students with multiple instances of the same phenomenon. Groups use
commercial graphing software and communicate their findings during a post-lab
discussion. Preliminary data from the pilot project indicate that student
learning and responses are improved by the new methods. The project evaluates
the impact on student learning, evaluates and optimizes the design and
implementation of software, develops new software around a commercial database
program, and develops and implements a training and support system for TA's. As
part of the TA training process, newly developed videotapes dealing with
instructional techniques relevant to the collaborative learning classroom are
used.