* 9455665
* Multimedia Computer-Assisted Instruction in the Geosciences for Undergraduate Education
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Robert Morris, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 09/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

9455665 Lawrence This two component proposal will improve geoscience teaching at
the freshman and sophomore levels, particularly for non-science oriented
students. We propose to complete a study of concepts and misconceptions brought
to our course by entering students using surveys and interviews. Our
investigations have discovered some unexpected, "pre-science" misconceptions.
Students with the least prior contact with science are likely not to accept or
effectively use fundamental assumptions held throughout science like the
universality of the most basic laws in time and space. The second component will
use the results of this study to guide the creation of computer-assisted
teaching modules, initially one on coastal processes and one on mountain
building. These modules will be interactive multimedia programs which promote
participant learning. We plan to construct "virtual" field trips, animated
simulations of processes, and interactive mathematical effects. We will address
recognized conceptual problems directly, particularly through repetitive
interactivity. Branching lines of study will be triggered to fill in remedial
background for those who need it. Authorware Professional is the intended
programming tool for the highest level multimedia interactions. Our efforts will
be evaluated by repeating the survey approach. If possible, we will include this
in the modules. The teaching modules will form the basis for publishable CD
multimedia programs.