* 9455725
* A New Model for Introductory Biology at Two-Year and        Community Colleges
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1998
* Rodger Bybee, BSCS Science Learning
* Continuing Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 03/31/1998
* USD 1,320,000.00

In recognition of the importance of introductory biology courses at two-year and
community colleges to the development of scientific literacy among college-
educated individuals, BSCS is conceptualizing, writing, testing, and evaluating
a set of innovative curriculum materials for biology students at the college
level. Collaborating in the 36-month project are fifteen partners, including
biology faculty at eight community colleges (including several that offer
programs in biotechnology and environmental technology), the American
Association of Community and Junior Colleges (AACJC), the two-year college
section of National Association of Biology Teachers (NABT), the Society for
College Science Teaching (SCST), the American Mathematical Association of Two-
Year Colleges (AMATYC), the American Institute of Biological Sciences (AIBS),
Ward's Natural Science Establishment, Inc., and Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company
(college division). The completed program will offer an integrated and coherent
approach to helping students achieve three major goals of biological literacy:
1) to understand the basic unifying principles of biology; 2) to develop the
fundamental skills of critical thinking and scientific reasoning; and 3) to
recognize the applications of science, especially relationships among science,
technology, and society. The materials that are being developed are of use to
future teachers or science at the elementary and secondary levels because
strategies are incorporated that encourage students to reflect on the overall
deign of the program, the strategies that help them learn, various teaching
techniques, and assessment strategies. The products of the project will include
student materials (readings, activities, and laboratory exercises) that will
support both semester- and year-long introductory biology courses and that
emphasize hands-on, open-ended inquiry, collaborative learning, and the
relationships among science, technology, and society; an instructor's gui de
that will provide faculty with extensive background reading and specific
implementation support; and a model for a faculty development workshop that will
be designed and tested by the partner faculty and will be supported after the
end of the project by revenues realized from sales of the program.