* 9455113
* Integration of Workshop Approaches into the Teaching of     Mathematics to a Diverse Student Population: A SUNY Faculty Coalition
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1998
* Jack Narayan, SUNY College at Oswego
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 04/30/1998
* USD 93,915.00

The problems addressed by the proposal are: the lack of participation of
students from under-represented groups in mathematics; an unsatisfactory rate of
attrition among all students in precalculus and calculus; lack of student
understanding and retention of fundamental precalculus/calculus concepts;
reluctance of faculty to develop and initiate alternatives to the lecture format
of teaching; and lack of effective communication between two and four-year
institutions, especially among the faculty on the various campuses. A coalition
of thirteen SUNY schools, composed of two and four year colleges, has identified
three broad objectives to address these problems: 1) to develop methods for
attracting and retaining students from under-represented groups in mathematics;
2) to integrate workshop approaches into the teaching of precalculus and
calculus to a diverse student population and, 3) to put in place a structure for
continued faculty and curriculum development across the SUNY system. The
coalition, with the help of consultants, will work cooperatively in a faculty
enhancement workshop to develop methods, strategies, and materials that will be
implemented in Fall 1995 to begin addressing the above stated problems.
Specifically Treisman type student workshops, based on academic excellence
rather than remediation, will be planned to engage students in problem solving
and problem posing experiences in a cooperative learning environment that makes
significant use of technology. The basic themes of the highly successful
Treisman workshops will be tailored to meet SUNY's unique needs. The student
workshops will provide peer interaction and a sense of community that is
invitational, one that welcomes our students, especially those from under-
represented groups, to mathematics and its challenges. The first year coalition
members and their campuses are committed to pilot programs in the Fall of 1995.
The second year program is aimed at getting pilot programs at fourteen more
campuses. Eventually the coalition, with the help of the SUNY Central
Administration, will effect systemic change in the way precalculus and calculus
is taught.