* 9455074
* ATLAST 1995/96
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Steven Leon, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/1998
* USD 150,000.00

ATLAST 1995/96 is a follow-up to the NSF sponsored ATLAST Project to Augment the
Teaching of Linear Algebra through the use of Software Tools. The purpose of
ATLAST is to encourage and facilitate the use of software in the teaching of
Linear Algebra. The project seeks to bring about systemic change in the way
Linear Algebra is taught. The goal of ATLAST is to make the use of software an
integral part of all Linear Algebra courses. ATLAST 1995/96 is offering two
basic workshops on the use of software in teaching Linear Algebra in 1995, one
basic workshop in 1996, and one advanced workshop in 1996. Workshop participants
are learning to use existing Linear Algebra software packages and how to
incorporate those packages into their courses. Participants are expected to
design their own computing exercises and projects at a level suitable for an
undergraduate Linear Algebra class. These exercises are being class tested
during the school year following the workshop and then submitted for inclusion
in the ATLAST database. The best of the ATLAST 1995/96 exercises are being
included in a second ATLAST Exercise Book which is being published by the
Mathematical Association of America. Selected ATLAST materials are included in
the Mathematics Archives at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville. These
materials can be accessed by the greater mathematics community through the
Internet. ATLAST 1995/96 is also offering one advanced workshop for those who
are already experts at developing computer exercises for Linear Algebra. The
purpose of this workshop is to develop exercises for the second ATLAST book.
Participation in the advanced workshop is by invitation only.