* 9455632
* Developing Active Learning Modules on the Human Dimensions  of Global Change
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Susan Hanson, Association of American Geographers
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 02/28/1999
* USD 311,906.00

9455632 Hanson The project 1) actively involves faculty, global change scholars,
and people with expertise in pedagogy in the development of introductory-level,
activity-based course modules on the human dimensions of global environmental
change, and 2) establishes a process within the Association of American
Geographers (AAG) for the development, evaluation, and dissemination of these
and other active-learning modules of introductory courses. The first goal
addresses the needs to a) infuse recent global change scholarship into the
introductory undergraduate curriculum and b) actively involve students in the
learning process. The second goal seeks to address the current absence of any
formal mechanism within the discipline of geography for the sharing of teaching
and learning resources among undergraduate instructors. The principal expected
outcomes are modules that speak to the three broad components of global
environmental change: 1) the human and physical causes or driving forces of
change; 2) the environmental consequences produced by these forces; and 3) the
human responses to these environmental consequences. Central to these modules
are the concepts of a) how human causes, environmental impacts, and human
response vary by location (geographic area), and b) how the relationships among
components are affected by the spatial and temporal scales of analysis (local,
regional, global; decadal, centennial, millennial respectively). The project
also establishes a clearinghouse within the AAG to disseminate the modules for
use in introductory courses nationwide. The modules will be available to all
instructors of some 500,000 students who are enrolled in introductory geography
courses annually. Once this project is completed, the AAG clearinghouse will
continue to develop and disseminate activity-based undergraduate learning
materials.