* 9455928
* Establishing New Traditions:  Revitalizing the Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/1995,08/31/2002
* John Moore, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 08/31/2002
* USD 3,899,577.00

This project's goal establishes new traditions in the chemistry curriculum that
optimize opportunities for all students to learn chemical facts and concepts,
develop and pursue interests in chemistry and chemistry-related disciplines, and
appreciate how an understanding of chemistry is important to life and living. We
are changing fundamentally the ways students, faculty, and administrators view
their roles, creating a student-centered, active-learning emphasis. We have a
broad range of reforms, each of which is developed, tested, modified, thoroughly
evaluated, and widely disseminated. We address five main areas that apply to all
levels of the curriculum: student-focused active learning; inquiry- based/open-
ended laboratories; interdisciplinary course clusters to create learning
communities; a topic-oriented curriculum; and information technology/computer
tools. Each development in each area is carefully evaluated, and only the best
survive. Evaluation provides important information about the process of transfer
of innovations among institutions of different types. To insure that our reforms
are useful for all students, our consortium includes industry, public and
private four-year institutions, minority institutions, and two-year colleges.
The project gives special emphasis to students who choose teaching as a career
option by main-streaming these students in courses which benefit them in both
content and pedagogy. Students, including those in Science Education, are fully
integrated in the development and implementation of the project, working on both
research topics and evaluation. The project also gives special emphasis to
community college students in Advanced Technological Education programs to
ensure that they are given the newly developed curriculum. The students in the
ATE program will clearly benefit by being provided the five main areas of thrust
that this coalition is developing. All the Students emerge with greater
comprehension and better re tention of chemical knowledge, improved ability to
apply chemical concepts to new problems, enhanced appreciation of the relation
between chemistry and other disciplines, and skills that enable them to work
effectively in multidisciplinary teams.