* 9455442
* Physics Resources Packets as a Pathway to Tomorrow's        Education
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1999
* Michael Moloney, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 02/28/1999
* USD 237,317.00

Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology (RHIT) and its fellow institutions in the
NSF sponsored 'Foundation Coalition' (FC) are at the forefront of innovations in
engineering and science education. RHIT has, for example, developed a pioneering
'integrated' freshman year curriculum utilizing symbolic algebra and other
powerful software. This curriculum now regularly employs active learning through
cooperative group work. Little has been done, however, to carry innovations from
programs like the 'integrated' curriculum into the sophomore and succeeding
years. Technology is advancing ever more rapidly (in the fall of 1995 laptop
computers will be required of all entering RHIT freshman), making it imperative
that education be abreast of coming changes. RHIT/FC physics faculty members
will develop 'resource packets' for basic and advanced physics courses which
will galvanize the uptake of freshman year innovations. Consortium for Upper-
Level Physics Software (CUPS) simulations and text will be available in 1995;
they will be a major and timely enhancement resource for the packets. Physics
instructors will have exercises and examples in the new methodologies and
technologies at their fingertips. Sophomores will find their physics courses
regularly featuring assignments which require a continuation of the skills they
learned as freshmen. The packets will impact over 600 students per year at RHIT
alone. Assessment and revision will occur continuously throughout the project.
Vigorous dissemination efforts will include use of conferences, professional
journals, workshops, and electronic mail.