* 9455638
* State University of New York (SUNY) Pre-Precalculus Program:Empowering Underprepared Two and Four Year College          Mathematics Students
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Alfred Patrick, SUNY College at Oswego
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/1998
* USD 184,393.00

The SUNY "Pre-Precalculus Project" is aimed at a large and growing number of
mathematically underprepared and/or unmotivated students at both two- and four-
year colleges. To address the many special needs of students who fail to achieve
in courses such as introductory or intermediate algebra at the college level,
this project is developing a new approach to pre-precalculus featuring a
revamped curriculum involving contextual problem-solving, an integrated use of
technology, an improved pedagogy emphasizing active, collaborative efforts by
students and faculty, and authentic assessment tied more closely to the course
and real world skills. A series of curriculum development workshops over a two-
year period is addressing these issues. The goal of the project is the design of
a sequence of two 4-hour pre-precalculus courses and the creation of the
instructional materials to support them. These two courses are replacing all
developmental college mathematics courses prior to precalculus. As a result of
the diversity and expertise of this coalition of twelve SUNY two-and four-year
colleges, the project plans to empower students with the mathematics they need
in order to survive and flourish in an increasingly technological and
sophisticated 21st Century. The model and materials developed by the project are
appropriate for many such underprepared students throughout the country.