* 9455145
* Improving Biology Education for Non-Majors:  Dissemination  of the Workshop Biology Project
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1999
* Daniel Udovic, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 01/31/1999
* USD 184,657.00

We ape conducting a three-year dissemination of our NSF/FIPSE project, "Workshop
Biology for Non-Majors." Workshop Biology is a successful non-majors' biology
course, taught in the context of a major research university, that addresses the
serious problem of scientific literacy in a world with growing biological
concerns. The course aims to develop students' understanding of biological
concepts, scientific processes, and critical thinking skills to help them make
decisions about important scientific issues. The project has generated a great
deal of enthusiasm among science faculty at many other institutions, who have
clearly articulated to us their need for extended collaboration, using effective
models, in improving their approach to instructional problems. The project's
primary goal is to improve student learning in general education science courses
at other institutions, by helping instructors clarify their educational goals
and implement and assess learning experiences designed to achieve these goals.
The Workshop Biology project provides models for goals, teaching strategies, and
assessment methods, as well as processes for developing new ones. Our project
offers intensive collaboration, experimentation, and reflection by all
participants, to develop effective educational practices for their own
situations. In the first and second years we are focusing on regional
institutions, whom we have already identified, and who represent diverse
contexts: both two- and four-year institutions with different missions
(including a state teacher's college) and different student populations than
that served by the University of Oregon. These institutions will help us create
development materials that we will disseminate, in workshops and conferences the
third year, to other institutions around the country. We will assess the extent
and duration of change at other institutions, the reactions of participants to
the process of dissemination, and the effectiveness of their new programs.