* 9455478
* Computer-based Laboratories for Introductory Computing      Courses for Science and Engineering Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1997
* Joseph Zachary, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 01/31/1997
* USD 87,125.00

In traditional science and engineering degree programs, computation is commonly
treated as a problem-solving tool best studied and applied in isolation from
"real" science and engi neering. Students are typically required to take a
programming class to learn how to program, and perhaps a numerical analysis
class to learn how to apply their programming skills. This traditional approach
ignores the fact that computation has evolved into an essential way of
illuminating scientific and engineering principles. Researchers now choose among
the theo retical, experimental, and computational approaches to studying
scientific phenomena. It has become increasingly clear that computation should
be exploited in science and engineering education for its descriptive and
analytical powers. In the past the barriers to using computational techniques
were high. The emergence of application programs such as Maple and Mathematica
has greatly lowered these barriers. The computational power made available per
unit of student effort is orders of magnitude higher for these packages than it
is for traditional programming languages. We are developing a suite of computer-
based laboratories suitable to support a two-semester freshman/sophomore-level
computing course for science and engineering majors. Each laboratory illustrates
the computational solution of a typical problem from a field of science or
engineering, builds upon freshman-level concepts from mathematics and physics,
and leads the student through the process of learning the computing technology
(including mathematics packages and conventional languages) required to solve
the problem. We will conduct annual workshops to train undergraduate faculty in
the use of our course ware.