* 9455566
* Course and Curriculum Development:  Integrating             Pre-Engineering Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/1995,02/28/1999
* Earl Hamilton, North Seattle Community College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 02/28/1999
* USD 75,000.00

9455566 Hamilton North Seattle Community College proposes a course and
curriculum development project that focuses on developing a year long, team-
taught pre-engineering program titled "Math and Physics: Tools for Careers in
Engineering." The program emphasizes students' working collaboratively to apply
concepts taught in physics and mathematics to the kinds of problems encountered
in the engineering profession. The proposal entails the planning and integration
of an interactive physics and calculus laboratory into the curriculum. By
scheduling a daily three-hour block, the three faculty members in physics,
calculus and engineering will integrate their course work in a two-quarter
sequence which will provide students with 10 credits in calculus, 5 in
engineering physics and 9 in engineering problems, statics and circuits. The
program will be structured to accommodate students who need remediation in
particular skills with learning assistance. It also will be designed to create a
classroom climate that promotes the pursuit of careers in science and
engineering among women and people of color. To bring such significant change to
the curriculum, the three faculty investigators will devote time to curriculum
research during the first of the two-year project. They will consult with two
faculty experienced in developing an interdisciplinary program in science at The
Evergreen State College, Olympia, WA; confer with Professor Denny Davis at
Washington State University who developed a large- scale engineering curriculum
project with DUE support, and visit model interdisciplinary programs in science
and engineering being developed at other institutions. In developing
collaborative, small group approaches to instruction, they will be guided by the
expertise of the Washington Center for Improving the Quality of Undergraduate
Education, a consortium of 42 colleges and universities that focus on learning
communities as a means of reforming the undergraduate curriculum.