* 9455095
* Incorporating Student Projects and Activities into Calculus
* EHR,DUE
* 11/01/1994,04/30/1997
* Stephen Hilbert, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 04/30/1997
* USD 40,388.00

Ithaca College is offering a five-day workshop in June 1995 to provide 30
participants with both an overview of the calculus reform movement and a
tutorial on the use of classroom activities and projects in the teaching of
calculus. The workshop is focusing both on the calculus project and activity
materials developed at Ithaca College, and on approaches and materials developed
at other institutions. The goal is to bring the ideas developed at Ithaca
College and elsewhere to a broader based set of teachers of calculus.
Instructors from two year colleges, and selected pre-college calculus teachers,
as well as teachers at four year colleges and universities are being involved.
In this workshop participants are being given the opportunity to work with new
materials, and to collaborate with others about ways to fit new approaches into
their own curricula. This is helping to encourage wider use of new ideas about
the teaching of calculus. The workshop is technology independent, allowing a
wide range of participants to become involved in the new pedagogical approaches.
However, the workshop includes an introduction to ways that technology can be
used to enhance the teaching and learning of calculus concepts, including the
use of graphing calculators and a variety of computer software.