* 9455635
* A Second Course in Computing for Non-Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Jerry Waxman, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Jane Prey
* 05/31/1998
* USD 85,835.00

Information will be the coin of the realm in the 21st century, and learning to
locate, evaluate, utilize, and disseminate it will be at the very center of the
University's mandate. In the past, only some science and engineering students
needed extensive high level computing skills. However now, and increasingly in
the future, fluency with computational environments will be a decisive factor in
both academic and commercial success. As a sequel to our highly successful first
course for non-computer majors, whose development was sponsored jointly by NSF
and the Department of Education, we propose to develop a second course which
focuses on the acquisition and presentation of data and information. For data
acquisition, the course gives the students high level mastery of the internet.
For the presentation of information students will master a multimedia authoring
system. The Internet segment of the course focusses on the following topics: .
What is the Internet and what is it not . Resources available on the Internet
for teaching and research in various fields. Where to locate additional
information. . Navigating the Internet via Gopher, Archie, Veronica . WAIS and
WWW. . email, FTP, Telnet and List servers . Using USENET, setting up news
groups and IRC on an Internet node set up and maintained at the College. The
multimedia segment of the course uses the Toolbook environment from Asymetrix
Corp. and focusses on: . how to construct simple "books" with hot keys and
buttons . how to create multi-page branching books . how to create motion and
animation . how to design and create hypertext systems . how to design and
create interactive multi-media . how to program sophisticated multimedia
applications within Toolbook.