* 9455561
* Activity Based Physics:  Curricula, Computer Tools, and     Apparatus for Introductory Physics Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Patrick Cooney, Dickinson College
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/1999
* USD 1,780,000.00

Three related activity-based introductory physics curricula have been developed
with major support from the US Department of Education and the National Science
Foundation. These are Workshop Physics, Tools for Scientific Thinking, and
RealTime Physics. All three curricula use the findings of physics education
research, are activity-based, and have involved the design of computer hardware
and software for investigation, data analysis, and dynamic modeling. This three-
year collaboration between principal investigatops at Dickinson College,
University of Maryland, University of Oregon, Tufts University, and Millersville
State University will extend, enhance, evaluate and disseminate activity-based
curricular materials, apparatus, and computer tools for teaching introductory
physics based on this previous work. The ultimate goals of this program are to
continue full scale efforts to improve the scientific literacy of introductory
physics students through the mastery of physics concepts, investigative skills,
and mathematical modeling techniques and to motivate students to learn more
science. Throughout the three year period a comprehensive dissemination program
will be conducted to reach introductory physics instructors at high school and
college levels through workshops, public talks, on-site visits to institutions,
and journal publications. These dissemination efforts will be supported by the
commercial distribution of products through J.C. Wiley & Sons, PASCO Scientific,
Vernier Software, and Physics Academic Software. Particular attention will be
given to developing physics activities suitable for courses designed for future
technicians at two year colleges and preteachers.