* 9455382
* Development and Evaluation of Internet-Based Hypermedia     Chemistry Tutorials
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1997
* Mark Anderson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 01/31/1997
* USD 80,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop and evaluate internet-based hypermedia
tutorials for undergraduate chemistry courses. The specific objectives are (1)
to develop hypermedia resources that increase the effectiveness and efficiency
of student learning and retention, (2) to evaluate and refine hypermedia designs
for maximum student use and efficacy, and (3) to evaluate the accessibility of
hypermedia educational materials via the internet for students and educators
inside and outside the university. The main advantage of hypermedia educational
materials is the ability to link a topic to related and/or remedial material.
Having immediate, in-context remedial help will improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of a student's study time, and will also reinforce the understanding
of basic concepts. The links themselves illustrate the interrelatedness of
different topics and the importance of basic principles. Funding of this project
will allow expansion of our current hypermedia tutorial for instrumental
analysis to sophomore-level analytical chemistry and freshman-level general
chemistry classes. The chemistry tutorials are viewed with NCSA Mosaic, which is
an internet-based hypermedia browser. It is a multimedia viewing tool with
versions for Unix, Windows, and Macintosh operating systems. Since this project
is accessible world-wide via the internet, it will provide an educational
resource for undergraduate chemistry students; K12, vocational, and college-
level educators; and for the public at large. The hypermedia design and internet
access concepts that are learned by evaluating and refining this project will
facilitate the creation and distribution of effective hypermedia resources for
science education in chemistry and other disciplines.