* 9455822
* Chem PRIME: A Curriculum of Chemical Principles through     Integrated Multiple Exemplars
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1996
* Kamil Klier, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 01/31/1996
* USD 50,000.00

9455822 Schray A consortium of nine institutions of higher education headed by
Lehigh University is making fundamental revisions of the chemistry curriculum at
all levels for majors in chemistry, for future professionals, scientists and
engineers, for responsible citizens, and for continuing education students. The
proposed ChemPRIME curriculum will utilize current, high-visibility, multiple
exemplars to structure the chemistry. Options in exemplars, depth and rigor of
treatment, learning style format, review, self- testing, and evaluation create a
flexibility made possible by CD- ROM technology. Students will create self-
customized courses. Ultimately a single publication will integrate all courses
in the curriculum. The planning process involves faculty in: (1) selection of
exemplars for introductory and analytical chemistry courses, (2) definition of
basic chemistry content covered in these exemplars, and (3) combination of
exemplars into tracks through the courses in the traditional curriculum. The
interdisciplinary nature of many exemplars will promote the integration of
chemistry and related disciplines, while traditional core concepts will allow
reliance on the experience and training of faculty. The ChemPRIME curriculum
will create courses of unprecedented flexibility because: (1) different
exemplars treating the same basic chemistry will be interchangeable; (2) depth
and rigor may be selected by an instructor; (3) courses may be incrementally
updated; (4) students will select the presentation optimized for their learning
style; (5) laboratory experiences will be closely linked to exemplars; and (6)
customized courses for new constituencies may be more easily designed and
tested, broadening the impact of chemistry through the traditional college
curriculum. Evaluation of individual components and the overall ChemPRIME
project will be readily conducted. Student access to the developing program
through a network will allow determination of component use and learning success
via embedded self-testing and traditional methods.