* 9455489
* An Assertion-Based Programming Methodology for Introductory Programming Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1995,01/31/1997
* Jerud Mead, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 01/31/1997
* USD 58,283.00

9455489 Mead A perusal of current introductory programming texts shows that
while the syntax of structured statements is described in formal terms the
semantics of structured statement is described in informal verbal terms. The
results is that students leave introductory programming courses with a good
understanding of the syntactical aspects of structured programming and a poor
understanding of the semantical aspects. These programmers will have difficulty
assessing either formally of informally the correctness of software which may
control critical computer systems. The goal of this project is to develop and
assess a programming methodology for the introductory programming sequence,
based on a blend of operational and axiomatic semantics, which integrates
semantic content (in terms of assertions) into the programming process. A
textbook will be written and assessed which presents the methodology. The text
will be language-independent and useful either stand-alone or as a supplement to
an existing introductory programming text. The impact of this project is on four
groups. Instructors of introductory programming courses are able to integrate
the semantic-based methodology into their existing courses without changing the
primary text: the supplementary text provides them formal support for
integrating the methodology. Students learning the methodology via the
supplementary text gain more thorough understanding of the program semantics
because the semantics are presented formally in terms of assertions. They are
better equipped to convince themselves and others that their programs are
correct because their programs carry the evidence. Students, instructors, and
computing professionals who have not had the advantage of a semantic-based
programming methodology will be able to use the text to familiarize themselves
with the more formal semantic side of programming. Finally, the public will be
long-term beneficiaries of the project. Developers of computer systems whi ch
the public depend on will be more confident of the correctness of the systems
when they are programmed by students with a sound semantic background, which
should result when the methodology is learned.