* 9455736
* Pattern-Based Programming Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1996
* Walter Beck, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 12/31/1996
* USD 69,812.00

We are developing curriculum materials for a pattern-based approach in
introductory computer programming courses. Typical programming instruction tends
to focus on the language and has students develop original and often poor
solutions to problems. Little time for quality feedback from instructional staff
is available. Additionally, current instruction shows little connection between
educational theory and practice. A pattern-based curriculum for introductory
computer science is being developed and tested. Problem and code patterns are
identified and selected for inclusion in the course. Print-based instructional
materials is produced via a cycle of development, evaluation, and revision. A
prototype of an automated environment that supports pattern-based instruction
and provides supervision for the higher level of student practice necessary for
truly successful instruction will be produced. Underlying principles and theory
for the approach are proposed and presented. The proposed instructional material
and system will provide a solid test bed for further research and explication of
standard problems and programs in computing. The pattern-based approach
significantly improves the quality of programs produced by students after a
first course. While this project does not focus on any special audience, the
proposed approach to programming instruction should ultimately enhance both
attraction and retention of students. In addition to internal evaluation, two
external reviewers will assess the material twice during the project. Student
performance under the new approach will be tested and compared with that of
students under traditional instruction. Student and instructor perceptions will
be assessed. Descriptive papers will be produced and submitted to appropriate
(CS-Ed &amp; AI) conferences and Journals.