* 9455346
* Aerospace Concepts for Elementary Education Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1998
* Bruce Carroll, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Norman Fortenberry
* 01/31/1998
* USD 120,000.00

There is a critical need to improve the quality of science instruction in
elementary school classrooms. We address this need by having College of
Engineering faculty offer a course for elementary education majors that focuses
on current engineering topics and, more importantly, to present material in such
a way that future teachers will be able to use the material in their classrooms.
This is accomplished by first introducing the scientific principles of an
engineering topic, then providing instruction in an appropriate teaching method,
and finally completing the topic with a laboratory session that involves
projects that can be used in an elementary classroom. The course is being
developed by engineering and education faculty in collaboration with elementary
school teachers. We will offer each topic as a module to facilitate portability
to the elementary classroom and to allow offering the course for either one,
two, or three credit hours. We are targeting pre-service elementary majors
although the course is suitable for in-service teachers and could be easily
tailored to accommodate middle-school participants. We are collaborating with
College of Education faculty to overlap this course with their existing science
teaching methods course. We expect that participants will be more confident with
science topics and, using our material, will be able to teach science more
effectively. Dissemination of the developed materials will occur via
presentation at professional meetings within the state and nationally. In
addition, we are creating a textbook to accompany the course. We will evaluate
the effectiveness of the course by interviewing participants and College of
Education faculty.