* 9455719
* Modeling Applications in Environmental Management:          Preparation of Text and Teaching Guide
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Charles Hadlock, Bentley University
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 07/31/1998
* USD 138,245.00

9455719 Hadlock Through the sponsorship of the Mathematical Sciences Department,
Bentley College has recently developed a new interdisciplinary course entitled
"Modeling Applications in Environmental Management." This course serves a wide
range of students and has a dual objective: to teach them about the complex
range of everyday environmental issues that are faced by business and
governmental organizations, and to give the students first hand experience in
the key role that mathematical modeling plays in dealing with these issues. The
course has a significant field component that includes visits to operating
companies and government installations. The purpose of this grant application is
to develop textbook materials and teaching guidance that would enable a wide
range of teachers primarily at the college level, but also at the high school
level, to incorporate some or all of the same material in offerings at their own
institutions. The course developer has spent many years in industry applying
mathematical models to environmental problems and is in a unique position to
develop and organize such materials for use in the classroom. In fact, this
course has already attracted considerable attention outside the College, and
many invitations have been received to speak about the course itself and to
provide further material that might make it possible for others to teach this
subject matter. Thus the purpose of this proposal is to provide support for the
development of high quality materials to support the inclusion of this material
in courses at various levels and at various kinds of institutions, to train a
pilot group of teachers in its use, and to initiate and promote the further
dissemination process through the academic community.