* 9455371
* Redesign of an Earth Science Course for Prospective Teachersto Incorporate Constructivist Theory and Cooperative        Learning
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Ann Bykerk-Kauffman, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 06/30/1998
* USD 134,544.00

9455371 Bykerk-Kauffman A college-level Earth Science course, that enrolls both
prospective elementary school teachers and prospective secondary school science
teachers, is being redesigned. Project goals are: (1) to increase student
understanding and appreciation of science in general and the earth sciences in
particular; and, (2) to teach a course that serves as a model of good science
teaching aligned with the state and federal science education standards. This
redesigned course emphasizes constructivist hands-on activities, conducted in
small cooperative groups, placing students--not instructors--at the center of
attention. It demands depth of understanding of a few important topics, not
superficial memorization of many terms and facts. The redesigned course
integrates the various sub disciplines within the earth sciences and emphasizes
the underlying themes that unite all sciences. The course connects science with
students' everyday lives and incorporates the history of science, revealing
science as a human, not alien, endeavor. Finally, assessment is as "authentic"
as possible, testing what is truly valued, not just what is easy to test.
Evaluation of the course before, during and after the implementation of the
innovations will test the success of course innovations. Results will be
presented at conferences, as published articles, as a published activity manual,
and in faculty workshops.