* 9455450
* Educating the Next Generation of Information Specialists, in Collaboration with Industry
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Della Bonnette, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Zia
* 12/31/1997
* USD 466,995.00

9455450 Mulder This work produces a greatly needed and major revision (or
complete revamping) of Computer Information Science (CIS) oriented curricula.
Specifically it provides detailed curriculum guidelines, supporting laboratory
material, original learning/teaching paradigms, and a methodology for dealing
with complex information systems. This major component of the Computing Sciences
has been overlooked by practitioners, educators, and the professional societies
for at least fifteen years. During this same period the need for complex, large
grain information systems to support all aspects of business, industry, and
government has exploded; similarly, the technologies supporting the generation
and usage of information have changed dramatically. This has led to our current
dilemma: the availability of exciting new information technologies to be
applied, BUT few (new hires or practitioners), if any, properly prepared to
effectively apply these advances. This academe/industry collaborative proposal
addresses this dilemma, and will produce solutions. This work builds on what is
available today in CIS, adding to it substantial new course and laboratory
material, a methodology for dealing with large grain information system
complexity, development of teamwork and communications skills in students, and
will embed problem solving and design skills within the recommended curriculum.
To support this curriculum, appropriate materials are developed and tested at
selected university/industry test sites. A new learning/teaching paradigm (ie.,
Just in Time Learning) is developed and tested, in which qualified students
(guided by a faculty member) is electronically linked with an ongoing industry
large grained information systems project. There are participating project team
members, receiving both project experiences and just in time
classroom/laboratory experiences. The Boeing Company and Motorola are committed
to supporting this original learning/teaching paradigm. In add ition to the 2
1/2 months per year that the PI and Co-PI devote to this project, a team of ten
(10) carefully selected professionals (5 from industry and 5 from academe) are
heavily involved in the project. Three eminent CIS specialists will form the
National Visiting Committee to critique and guide the project, and 50+
additional external specialists will review the results of the project. ln this
manner, the quality and applicability of project results are assured. Widespread
and timely dissemination to the Computing profession will be conducted.