* 9455159
* Project Kaleidoscope Workshops:  Programs That Work for     Faculty Enrichment
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Jeanne Narum, Independent Colleges Office
* Continuing grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 02/28/1998
* USD 546,984.00

Project Kaleidoscope (PKAL) will operate a coordinated series of workshops for
undergraduate faculty in the sciences and mathematics during each year 1995 and
1996. These workshops on Program that Work, each involving approximately 20
three-person institutional participant teams, will emphasize classroom and
laboratory enhancements in undergraduate science and mathematics. The objectives
for these PKAL Workshops are 1) to disseminate information on current reform
efforts in teaching undergraduate science and mathematics, reforms that have
created systemic change within an institution and as well as improved one
course; 2) to encourage regional and national networks of faculty concerned with
curriculum reform; 3) to foster a national environment which supports
improvements in undergraduate science and mathematics. The Workshops will focus
on eight issues: Revitalizing Introductory Courses in 1) Biology, 2) Chemistry,
3) Mathematics and 4) Physics; 5) Science as a Liberal Art; 6) Interdisciplinary
Programs; 7) The Research-based Curriculum, and 8) Programs for Minority Student
Success. Each issue, to be presented in a series of workshops, will be
coordinated by a Workshop Advisory Board and issues Task Forces, individuals
selected on the basis of their leadership in PKAL, their involvement with a PKAL
Program that Works, and the recognition of their work by the community.