* 9455585
* Interactive, Conceptually Based Multimedia Instruction for  Introductory Mechanics
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Mark Bunge, San Jose City College
* Standard Grant
* Nancy L. Pruitt
* 12/31/1998
* USD 157,690.00

9455585 Bunge This project will develop interactive Multimedia tutorials for
introductory physics . They will be distributed on CD-ROMs that can be used by
students at school or elsewhere on equipment that will be available to most
students upon completion of the project. This project will make use of new
technologies and findings in physics educational research to provide a computer
based learning environment that will facilitate students actively constructing
the conceptual framework of Newtonian mechanics. Students will be introduced to
basic concepts through short video clips of actual events. Many of these will
involve confrontations with common misconceptions. Computer animations and
graphics will help illustrate various interpretations and develop the principles
involved. Students will interact with simulations and physical representations
such as vectors, diagrams, graphs, with appropriate feedback and help, enabling
them to compare predictions made from their conceptual models with those of the
Newtonian model and the real world. After learning the concepts, students will
be introduced to appropriate mathematical models, which can be adapted to the
students background and ability. This will allow the programs to be used in
courses of different mathematical levels. Most of the video clips will be taken
from the extensive collection produced at Valencia Community College in Orlando
FL. Video editing, additional production, and animation will be done at a local
high school which has a nationally recognized electronics arts program that has
received extensive support from Silicon Valley companies. Simulations will be
provided by an Interactive Physics player, licensed from Knowledge Revolution.