* 9455606
* Mathematical Interactive Network Design (MIND):  A Computer Lab for Developmental Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1995,12/31/1998
* John Pool, Amarillo College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/1998
* USD 75,394.00

9455606 Wetzel The Mathematical Interactive Network Design (MIND) project is a
computer laboratory designed for interactive multi-media instruction in
developmental mathematics. Using Visual Basic, multi-media software and object
oriented programs are being developed by supervising instructors. Students are
utilizing a graphical user interface and icon driven software to access and
control various instructional media. The goal is to immerse the student in an
intensely interactive, but easily constructed, simulated learning environment.
This radically new system is meeting each student's unique and specific needs
and providing an individualized tutorial session with appropriate, constructive,
instructive, and timely feedback. Artificial intelligence techniques are being
applied to implement the concept of guides whose behavior and even personality
is being made to depend upon the attributes of the learner. The guide presents a
combination of interactive digitized video and audio integrated with graphics
and text to provide the students with choices of lecture, drill, problem
solving, review and testing as deemed beneficial or necessary through monitoring
of the student's progress and relative success. The software is being used to
supplement and enhance, not replace, coursework.