* 9455621
* Imaging the Universe: A New Curriculum for Undergraduate    Astronomy Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Robert Mutel, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 05/31/1997
* USD 81,660.00

The project extends and enhances the development of an innovative undergraduate
astronomy curriculum based on CCD cameras and robotic telescopes. The emphasis
of the new curriculum is hands-on planning and analysis of the student's own
images rather than traditional methods using observations from professional
astronomers. The primary audience is the non-science major in large introductory
courses. The project has three components. The first is revisions and additions
to the new laboratory curriculum already written. We have developed fourteen
observing laboratories as well as fifteen computer based tutorial exercises
during the current grant period. Based on comments from teaching assistants and
students who have used the draft version of the curriculum, we will revise
existing labs and add about fifteen additional labs. The revisions will attempt
to make the hands-on approach more direct, make the mathematical level more
nearly uniform, and better emphasize the imaginative and creative skills of the
students. The new observing labs will cover astronomical topics not yet
addressed in the current manual,, including orbits of minor solar system
objects, properties of variable stars, variability in active galaxies, and
spectral line observation of nebulae and bright stars. New computer-based
laboratories will include extensive use of the astronomy databases and images
available over the Internet using the Mosaic user interface. The second
component is the development of a software system to schedule and control a
automated telescope system using commercially available hardware. the system
would be completely self-contained and controllable from any site on the
Internet. We have already developed a prototype system for a custom mount and
dome using a low cost PC. The system would allow interested colleges and
universities to set up a complete CCD-based laboratory for large introductory
classes with minimal effort and expense. It could also be used to operate remote
dark-site tel escopes which could be shared among several schools. The third
component is the development of an HTML Internet site at the University of Iowa
for dissemination of on-line information related to the use of CCD cameras and
robotic telescopes in the teaching of astronomy.