* 9455646
* Introduction of Modern Instrumentation in the First Two     Years of Chemistry:  The Iowa Chemistry Curriculum Network  (IACCN)
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/2000
* L. Keith Woo, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 03/31/2000
* USD 260,621.00

9455646 Greenbowe The objectives of this project are to research, develop, and
incorporate three modular instructional resources on modern instrumentation in
the first two years of college chemistry. The modules will contain
instrumentation-oriented components dealing with current real-world topics,
group projects, updated teaching methods, student learning assessments, emphasis
on conceptual thinking interactive multimedia and exploratory laboratory
experiments. Development of interactive, multimedia computer programs that
simulate the operations of the FT-IR, and FT-NMR spectrometers, from sample
handling to data acquisition and work-up will be developed in collaboration with
Engineering Animation, Inc. A UV-VIS multimedia simulation has already been
developed at the University of California at San Diego. A consortium of Iowa's
15 community colleges, three public universities, and four private colleges will
collaborate on all aspects of the project through long-distance video
conferences on Iowa's fiber-optics communication network and at annual summer
workshops. This project will enable students and faculty in the entire state of
Iowa to have facile access to modern instrumentation (UV-VIS, FT-IR and FT- NMR)
via computer simulations. Iowa State university will serve as a clearing house
for running actual chemical samples submitted by students of the participating
institutions. The samples will be run on instruments at Iowa State University,
and the spectra will be made available to the students and faculty from the
community colleges and private colleges over the internet (via anon ftp,the
world wide web, or by e-mail) as digital files or graphic images. This project
will provide new curriculum enhancements and developments to four-year
institutions and all community colleges in the state of Iowa.