* 9455088
* Institute in the History of Mathematics and Its Use in      Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Victor Katz, Mathematical Association of America
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 07/31/1999
* USD 438,661.00

In the mathematics reform effort of the past decade, there has been growing
recognition that the history of mathematics should be an integral part of the
teaching and learning of mathematics at all levels. National standards for the
preparation of teachers of mathematics in K-12 call for inclusion of history of
mathematics in pre-service programs. Mathematicians who teach the history of
mathematics and who use this history to improve their teaching are in need of
more knowledge and resources to prepare to teach their students. The
Mathematical Association of America (MAA), in cooperation with The American
University (TAU), is creating an Institute in the History of Mathematics and its
Use in Teaching (IHMT). The goal is to increase the presence of history in the
undergraduate mathematics curriculum and teacher preparation in mathematics
curriculum. Through intensive three-week programs in two successive summers, 80
mathematics faculty members are being prepared to teach courses in the history
of mathematics and to use history to improve their teaching of standard
undergraduate mathematics courses. Thirteen historians of mathematics, all of
whom are known to be excellent teachers, lead explorations of the history of
mathematics from antiquity through the twentieth-century, stressing applications
and links between different areas of mathematics. Specific techniques for
incorporating history into undergraduate mathematics courses are a central
theme. Through presentations at national and regional mathematics meetings,
publications, and electronic communications, the information and techniques of
IHMT are being disseminated nationally. The home institutions, the students at
those institutions for generations and the collegiate mathematics community will
benefit from this broader understanding of mathematics and its teaching. Through
the inclusion of history in the undergraduate mathematics curriculum, a new
generation of teachers, as a resulty of their undergr aduate experience, will be
able to enrich the courses they teach and benefit all students, at all grade
levels, with interesting and relevant courses in mathematics.