* 9455682
* The Unity of Science:  A Year-Long, Exploration-Oriented    Interdisciplinary Science Course
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2000
* Tom Dennis, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Iraj Nejad
* 06/30/2000
* USD 150,000.00

The goal of this course is to develop an interdisciplinary introductory science
course for first-year college students that will emphasize the methods and
relevance of scientific inquiry. Target students are primarily those students
that do not intend to major in a science. The course content is intended to
include interdisciplinary topics of broad interest in logical sequences. We
start, for example, with color vision (physiology, perception, optics,
spectroscopy), autumn foliage (isolation of chlorophyll, photosynthesis, light
as energy), and the origin of oxygen-rich atmosphere (respiration, flow of
energy through biosphere, ecosystems). This theme (light, energy, and matter)
then leads us through topics in astronomy, physics, chemistry, geology, and
biology, all in context and without traditional discipline boundaries.
Laboratory demonstrations and exercises will be exploration-driven with students
actively participating in defining the questions that are asked and how we look
for answers. In the last half of the year, small groups of students will carry
out self-directed research projects and present their results to the class.
Three faculty from different disciplines will teach the course through lectures
to the entire class (approximately 1/3 of the meetings) and in smaller
discussion groups (2/3 of the meetings). Course content is able to evolve and
change depending on the faculty involved in a given year. A lab director will
facilitate weekly lab exercises, and senior students from all disciplines will
serve as teaching assistants and role models. Students will be graded by the
quality of exploration reports, projects, and personal journals (no timed
exams). An Advisory Committee of outside persons will provide input on course
content and evaluation.