* 9455105
* Integrating Computer Software into Lower Division           Engineering and Engineering Technology Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1995,09/30/1996
* William Lauffer, Prince George's Community College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 09/30/1996
* USD 39,269.00

Prince George's Community College, Largo, MD (PGCC) will hold a five-day
workshop in summer 1995, Integrating Computer Software into Lower Division
Engineering and Engineering Technology Courses. The workshop will be for 20
faculty from engineering, engineering technology, and science, who teach lower
division courses in community colleges and senior institutions in the middle
Atlantic states. The workshop will include lecture/demonstration, visualization
activities, and computer work with Math CAD, MicroCAP, LogicWorks, and PADS.
Each participant will bring three problems from three different courses to the
workshop. These will be solved during the workshop and developed into a "book"
of practice problems and solutions which will be given each participant.
Applications will be shown to Statics, Dynamics, Strength of Materials,
Thermodynamics, Electronics, and Physics Courses. Workshop participants will
also be introduced to Internet and its uses and to the work of the NSF
Engineering Coalition, Engineering Coalition of Schools for Excellence in
Education and Leadership (ECSEL). Follow-up activities include the development
by PGCC of a computer bulletin board to allow workshop faculty and other faculty
in their home institutions to communicate and assist one another, presentations
by workshop participants in their home institutions, and presentations and
papers for professional meetings.