* 9455163
* South Central Calculus Coalition:  Disseminating Calculus   Reform for Two-Year Colleges and Comprehensive Universities
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Gregory Foley, Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 02/28/1999
* USD 192,922.00

9455163 This three-year project will extend an existing calculus coalition to
create a network of two year colleges and comprehensive universities that will
reform their calculus curricula. The existing coalition in southeastern Texas
will expand in three stages to include institutions throughout the South Central
states. The extended coalition will grow from intensive nine-day institutes and
will be fostered by mentoring, electronic mail, follow-through workshops, and a
newsletter. The coalition will use the materials and methods of the Calculus for
Comprehensive Universities and Two-Year Colleges (CUTYC) Project, in which two-
person faculty teams at Sam Houston State University and North Harris, San
Jacinto Central, and Tomball Colleges have written student activities and
customized instructional methods from other calculus reform efforts. CUTYC
integrates cooperative learning, graphing technology, and writing in a
progression of problems and projects that challenge students while improving
their confidence and study skills. The CUTYC faculty teams will serve as the
senior personnel for SC3. At each institute they will lead eight new teams who
will experience the CUTYC approach and plan for the ensuing year. The CUTYC
teams will mentor the new teams as they craft a curriculum suited to the needs
of their students and home institutions. The new teams will conduct workshops
for their colleagues to spread the ideas and methods of the project to other
faculty and other courses. The coalition will directly involve 56 faculty
leaders at 28 collaborating institutions. The project will influence numerous
other faculty through on-site workshops, conference presentations, and
publications. An advisory board will guide the project's progress, and the
project will employ an instructional consultant and an evaluator. Evaluation
will be used to refine the instructional approach, to customize it to local site
conditions, and to measure the success of the project.