* 9455428
* Integrating the Electronic Desktop into the Natural Science Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Gary Novak, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Janet C. Rutledge
* 07/31/1998
* USD 218,845.00

This project's strategy is to use the power of advanced workstation technology
to improve the way science is taught and learned in a multicultural university.
Project activities will have four faculty persons from biology, chemistry and
the earth sciences collaborating to develop three new interdisciplinary courses,
write 29 interactive science visualization courseware applications, revise
instructional delivery, prepare a variety of instructional materials that can be
used at other institutions, integrate Internet resources into the classroom, and
create a new class of instructional applications that can be executed remotely
over the Internet using the World-Wide-Web protocol. This project will annually
involve about 200 students who are science majors and 500 general education
students. The goals are to increase retention of majors and the scientific
literacy of non-majors. Courses will be offered in a highly visual, user-
friendly, computer-based learning environment that is interactive, powerful and
intuitive. Language barriers are less of a problem in an interactive environment
utilizing pictures, animations, sounds, graphs, words and numbers where science
can be seen, heard and explored. More fully engaging students in thinking and
problem solving will allow them to learn better. Also, techniques, concepts and
demonstrations which are too expensive, dangerous or do not lend themselves to
traditional modes of instruction can be taught despite pedagogical obstacles.
Project results will be disseminated through publication, professional
presentations, and be made available nationally over the Internet.