* 9455587
* Project on the Language-Art Interface:  Vision and Voice -  Rethinking Human Communication
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1995,06/30/1997
* William Beeman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 06/30/1997
* USD 151,180.00

Bakewell DUE 9455587 Brown University FY1995 $ 123,680 Providence, RI 02912
Course and Curriculum Psychology Title: Project on the Language-Art Interface
The Project on the Language-Art Interface (PROLARTI) focuses on the development
of a prototype of a CD ROM, with the title: The Origins of Communication, the
first part of a three-part series titled: Vision and Voice: Rethinking Human
Communication. Designed for use by undergraduates in introductory level courses
(in both traditional and long-distance classroom and home settings), Vision and
Voice aims to encourage the exploration of language within an interactive,
multimedia, interdisciplinary and cross-cultural environment. It links together
the methods, theories and data of anthropology, biology, cognitive science,
linguistics, literature, neurology and the visual and performing arts. In both
its prototype and future CD-ROM formats, The Origins of Communication focuses on
three broad areas of language: (1) Evolution (2) Human Development, Language
Acquisition, and Animal Communication; and (3) the Brain. All three areas of
investigation include multidisciplinary material (theories, data, controversies)
on visual and verbal aspects of communication. It is PROLARTI's first
undertaking, which promises to provide a model for truly interdisciplinary
research and teaching on language and to bridge the widening gap between the
sciences and humanities. It plans to do so by redesigning scientific
investigations of human communication to include the study of art alongside the
study of language. When art is defined as "visual representation," its presence
in all aspects of human communication (e.g., gesture) becomes apparent. Rather
than simply emphasize similarities between language and art, PROLARTI's
prototype for Origins of Communication will focus on their differences as well.
Language, being primarily a symbolic system of signs, stands in contrast to
iconically-based systems, such as art. The shift in emphasis as exemplified by
PROLARTI's prototype of The Origins of Communication aims to not only broaden
the study of language to include all communicative processes--nonverbal forms
(glossed here as "art") as well as verbal--but to expand the teaching of
undergraduate courses on linguistics by incorporating multimedia and interactive
material from the life and social sciences as well as the humanities.