* 9455379
* The Quantitative and Experimental Study of Human Nature
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Eugene Galanter, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 07/31/1997
* USD 175,650.00

9455379 Galanter Undergraduate science education has two jobs. First it must
prepare young scientists to continue their studies in one of the disciplines.
But even more important, science education has a responsibility to the nation
and its citizens to ensure scientific literacy among the electorate. If we
regard all introductory students as recruits for advanced work as a major, we
may fail to provide subject matter appropriate to the non-scientist.
Alternatively, if the non major is a central obligation, we may not attend to
the needs of the advanced instruction. We propose an alternative-a
constructivist introductory program that lets students study quantitative and
experimental aspects of human nature from the biological to the social at
varying depths and breath. The program provides the infrastructure for a core
curriculum in science. This new educational design consists of transportable but
interdependent modules that require careful reading and analysis, occasionally
of primary sources. There are also many opportunities for a variety of
complementary projects, field trips, computerized experiments and simulations,
and summer studies in research laboratories, that will let students extend their
science skills. Student participation in the collection and analysis of data and
concepts are central to this proposal, thus departing significantly from audio-
visual and electronic augmentation of classical lecture methods. These
separable, but cross-integrated units can be adapted to a variety of teaching
contexts. We will demonstrate this portability by using them at neighboring
institutions during or immediately following this grant.