* 9455599
* Discovery - Based CAI Fundamentals of Science Course focusedon Relationship Thinking, History of Science, and Math      Applications
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1997
* Paula Ray, Central Texas College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 04/30/1997
* USD 132,905.00

The project being developed will meet a demonstrated need to provide an
interesting, challenging entry level science course in community colleges to
improve the success rates of educationally disadvantaged students. Many students
are under prepared for mastering concepts in college-level biological and
physical sciences because they do not understand principles which use
relationship thinking. The objective is to develop an interdisciplinary,
experiment-based FUNdamentals of Science course with a history-of-science theme
and discovery methods to investigate measurement, density, gas laws, electric
circuits, and light, including lasers. Relationship thinking and skills to use
math as a tool will be developed by having students use a computer program to
create graphs of relationships from data. The program will target the many new
and returning students who function at approximately the intermediate algebra
level. This group includes especially women, African-Americans, and Hispanics
who need a successful experience in their introduction to the sciences. Three
four-year college professionals in undergraduate science education have agreed
to serve as advisors for this project. Student progress will be tracked and
analyzed. Detailed explanations for integrating experiments and computers into
the entry level course will be developed and disseminated. A workshop
(Innovations in Science Teaching) to present the methodology and materials
developed will be scheduled for science teachers, including teachers from area
secondary schools.