* 9455075
* A Novel Mechanism for Introducing Human Genome Research in  Freshman Biology Classes
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Mark Bloom, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 09/30/1998
* USD 218,504.00

This experiment uses the powerful new technique of polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) to demonstrate the variable nature of human DNA. Although the DNA from one
person to another is more alike than different, certain areas of our genome
exhibit a great deal of diversity. Such variable sequences are termed
polymorphic (meaning many forms) and provide the basis for paternity and
forensic testing of DNA. Many DNA polymorhisms are found within the estimated
90% of the genome that does not code for protein. A special class of these
polymorphisms is called an Alu insertion. Alu elements are short DNA sequences
that have amplified to about 500,00 copies, distributed throughout primate
genomes. A few of these Alu insertions have occurred within the last million
years and are not fixed in the human genome. Students obtain samples of their
own DNA using a simple mouthwash procedure (bloodless and noninvasive). PCR is
used to amplify across an intron of the tissue plasminogen activator gene that
may contain an Alu insertion. If the Alu sequence is present, then a 400-bp PCR
product will result, while a 100-bp product is produced when the Alu sequence is
absent. Following amplification, student samples are loaded into an agarose gel,
electrophoresed, stained, and photographed. Each student will see one or two
bands in their gel lane, indicating whether they are homozygous for the Alu
insertion, homozygous for the absence of the insertion, or heterozygous for the
insertion.