* 9455688
* A New Approach to Earth and Environmental Science           Undergraduate Instruction
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1998
* James Hays, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 03/31/1998
* USD 150,000.00

Columbia's Department of Geological Sciences and Barnard's Department of
Environmental Science are in the process of developing a new curriculum in Earth
and Environmental Science that builds on the intellectual and information
resources of Columbia, Barnard, Teachers College, Lamont-Doherty Earth
Observatory and the NASA/Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS). This two-
year project involves design of a multidisciplinary introductory core
curriculum, for both geology and environmental science majors. This three
semester core, serving both Barnard and Columbia, focuses on three interacting
global systems: the lithosphere, the climate system, and the biosphere. Women
form a key target audience of this enhanced curriculum, through merging of the
Barnard introductory sequence with that of Columbia The core incorporates new
technologies for accessing, analyzing and transmitting information, thus
shortening the information path between research scientist and undergraduate. An
electronic library containing data, text, models, graphics and analytical tools
is being developed. Through this electronic library students can explore
features of the three systems and processes that operate within and among them.
The design team, brought together from within the Columbia community to develop
and implement the curricular revisions, engages a wide variety of scientists and
educators in the process.