* 9455079
* Providing and Integrating Educational Resources for Faculty Teaching Artificial Intelligence
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Giorgio Ingargiola, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Lillian N. Cassel
* 12/31/1997
* USD 178,297.00

This proposal builds upon a workshop by the same title being run in 1994. It
proposes three faculty enhancement workshops for instructors in two and four
year colleges. Each workshop runs for six days in June followed by a one day
"reflection" workshop in November. The goal of each proposed workshop is to
provide instructors in two and four year colleges an exposure to resources
available to teach the undergraduate introductory course in Artificial
Intelligence and some approaches for their effective utilization. Major topics
to be addressed include how to (1) obtain available resources, (2) integrate
classroom lectures, with laboratory sessions and assignments using repository
materials and network facilities, (3) adapt and extend the available pedagogic
material, (4) improve learning and cooperation between instructors and their
students, and between students, (5) establish and maintain cooperative
arrangements between instructors at different institutions, (6) assess the
effectiveness of various pedagogic methods for using the resources. Each
workshop builds upon the Teaching Portfolio produced in the preceding workshop.
The Teaching Portfolio, accessible using Mosaic, includes a variety of pedagogic
materials (e.g. syllabi, class-plans, exercises, projects, discussion topics)
and references to tools, programs, and other materials available on the
internet.