* 9456040
* Mathematics and Undergraduate Education:  A New Framework   for Mutual Invigoration
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1994,09/30/1996
* Daniel Maki, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Lightbourne
* 09/30/1996
* USD 50,000.00

9456040 Maki This proposal seeks funding for a planning proposal to implement a
restructuring of undergraduate mathematics education. The planning involves
curriculum restructuring, creation of a general academic infrastructure for
undergraduates, and creation of a new institutional infrastructure. The
curriculum restructuring will engage mathematicians and their colleagues from
other disciplines in the development of three types of new interdisciplinary
courses, all aimed at underscoring the way mathematics is used in other academic
disciplines and in the non- academic world: (1.) Courses based on real problems
in a different area where mathematics is used in the solution. Students will
work in teams using technology to implement mathematical tools developed in
class for the projects. (2.) Courses designed to give a mathematics major a
basic understanding of a subject which is a current or potential area of
application for mathematics. (3 .) Courses developed in collaboration with the
professional schools to introduce mathematics majors to the possibility of using
their education in one of these areas. General academic infrastructure for
students. The second component of the implementation of the general philosophy
involves the manner in which the students relate to their academic programs.
Institutional Infrastructure. The implementation of our general philosophy of
undergraduate mathematics instruction requires a degree of collaboration and
coordination across departments and disciplines that far exceeds what is
commonly found on any campus. As the means of accomplishing this, we propose
that the preparation and the design of classes and activities will take place in
an Institute for Undergraduate Education.