* 9457336
* NSF Young Investigator:  Investigation of Multi-Class       Queuing Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1994,08/31/2001
* Jiangang Dai, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Janet M. Twomey
* 08/31/2001
* USD 312,500.00

9457336 Dai The focus of this research is the investigation of several aspects
of multi-class queuing networks that arise from complex manufacturing systems.
The scope of the research will range from the development of fundamental
mathematical models of such networks to the computer implementation of the
models for some real world applications. Specific research topics to be
investigated include the scheduling of wafer fabrication lines, stability of
multi-class queuing networks, Brownian models under non-FIFO (non-first in-first
out) policies, heavy traffic convergence, and computation of stationary
distribution for a reflected Brownian motion (RBM). A queuing network is said to
be stable if the corresponding deterministic fluid limit eventually reaches zero
and remains there. Research on wafer line fabrication will investigate whether
the current operating policies of such lines are stable. If a system operates
under an unstable policy, it could be mistaken to have insufficient resources.
Study of stability of queuing networks will investigate the conjecture that if
all customer classes visiting a station have the same mean service time, and the
nominal load at each station is less than one, then any work-conserving policy
is stable. Fluid models of two stable policies will also be investigated.
Brownian models have been proved to be effective for the approximate analysis of
queuing networks. It has also been proved that FIFO which most Brownian models
to date employ may be unstable in some networks. Although a heavy traffic limit
is used to justify the use of Brownian models, no such limit theorem exist for a
general multi-class network with feedback under any policies. A proof for the
heavy traffic limit theorem under the FIFO policy will be established for the
case in which customers that visit the same station also have the same mean
service rate. To improve and extend the existing algorithm for computing the
stationary distribution of an RBM in an arbitrary polyhedral domain, fin ite
element method will be used. This will enable the computation of stationary
distribution of RBMs arising from closed queuing networks and finite buffer
queuing networks. Brownian models play important roles in both performance
analysis and optimal or near optimal scheduling of queuing networks. The
Brownian approximation will be used to analyze most queuing network models that
are interesting in practice. The computer implementation of the Brownian
approximation scheme will predict the performances of a variety of queuing
networks, including those that arise in manufacturing and telecommunication
systems.