* 9457809
* NSF Young Investigator: Concurrent Object-Oriented          Programming Support for Irregular Parallel Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1994,10/30/1998
* Andrew Chien, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 10/30/1998
* USD 275,000.00

For parallel computing to become the vehicle of choice for a broad variety of
computing problems, not just regular numeric ones, the expression and
exploitation of irregular parallelism must be efficient. This research addresses
the major challenge, programmability, by 1) supporting the expression of
irregular parallelism with concurrent object-oriented programming languages and
2) supporting the exploitation of irregular parallelism with high performance
routing networks and network interfaces. Concurrent object-oriented languages
enable programmers to hide concurrency and distribution, allowing incremental
parallelization and also confining the complexity arising from irregular
parallelism to a small part of the program. However, efficient implementation
requires aggressive locality and grain size optimizations in the underlying
compiler and runtime system. This project is exploring aggressive type inference
and dynamic data structure analysis techniques to enable such program
optimizations. Type inference is used to discover program control flow, and
dynamic data structure analysis approximates the program storage map. Runtime
techniques are also being explored. These techniques are embodied in the
publicly available Illinois Concert System. This system is being used to develop
a number of parallel application programs.