* 9457458
* NSF Young Investigator:  Binarity in Young Stars
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/2000
* Andrea Ghez, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Terry D. Oswalt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 170,664.00

9457458 Ghez The study of star formation is often motivated by the desire to
explain the formation and evolution of the solar system. Thus, the current
paradigm for star formation is centered on the production of a single star that,
at a young age, is surrounded by a disk of gas and dust, roughly a few hundred
astronomical units (AUs) in size, from which planets may form. However, recent
surveys, carried out by Dr. Ghez and others, of the star forming regions of
Taurus and Ophiuchus in our Galaxy have led to the conclusion that most, if not
all, young low mass stars have companion stars. Furthermore, the majority of
these binary stars are separated by distances that are smaller than the size
typically assumed for a circumstellar disk. At the distance to Taurus and
Ophiuchus, the nearest sites of star formation in our Galaxy (Distance = 150
parsec), the angular extent of a circumstellar disk is expected to be roughly
1-2 seconds of arc. Unfortunately, due to turbulence in the atmosphere, the
angular resolution of traditional imaging techniques is limited to 1 second of
arc, a factor of 10-30 times worse than the theoretical resolution of a 4-m
telescope. Thus, to study these perplexing and yet prevalent close binary stars,
the high resolution imaging technique of speckle imaging will be used. The
current research effort is focussed on studying the effect of these close binary
stars on the formation and evolution of circumstellar disks. The presence of a
circumstellar disk and its properties are primarily inferred from the measured
spectral energy distribution (SED) of T Tauri stars. In particular, it is the
excesses of radiation at ultra-violet and infrared wavelengths that have been
attributed to disk processes. More recently, increased efforts in modeling the
effects have resulted in the interpretation of dips in the SED as evidence for
planetary formation. However, the SED's for close binary stars have so far been
the result of observing the co mbined light from both components. In one
approach to answering questions regarding the consequence of close companion
stars for circumstellar disks, Dr. Ghez is measuring the SED, from optical to
infrared wavelengths, of each individual component within these close binary
star systems using high spatial resolution imaging techniques. This will allow a
determination of (1), how much of the previously observed excess can be
attributed to the presence of a secondary source as opposed to a circumstellar
disk (2), if the excess remains, whether both components or only one shows
evidence for a circumstellar disk and (3), whether or not the dips in the SED
are created by the presence of two stars with different apparent temperatures.
In a second approach, Dr. Ghez will also compare the binary star frequency of
the classical T Tauri stars (CTTS), which are thought to have an inner accretion
disk, with that of the weak-lined T Tauri stars (WTTS), which are thought to
lack an inner accretion disk. In their initial work, Dr. Ghez and her
collaborators observed a distinction at the 3 sigma level; at separations less
than 35 AU binary stars are more frequent among the WTTS than the CTTS. These
observations suggest that close companions significantly interfere with the disk
accretion process associated with many T Tauri stars. This result is an exciting
possibility but requires follow up observations of more T Tauri stars to gain
statistical significance. This will be accomplished by (1), expanding the sample
of observed T Tauri stars to additional star forming regions and to fainter
systems with the use of a more sensitive camera and (2), eventually using larger
telescopes (Diameter > 5-m, such as the Keck telescope) to probe this
relationship further. If Dr. Ghez' hypothesis is correct, then the difference
between the CTTS and WTTS binary star populations should increase at smaller
separations. This award is to recognize an outstanding young faculty member in s
cience and engineering. The award will enhance the career of the faculty member
by providing flexible support for research and educational activities.
Cooperation with industry and institutions that support research and education
is encouraged.