* 9457509
* NSF Young Investigator - Bandlimited and Multiple Access    Communications
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1994,07/31/2000
* Mitchell Trott, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 07/31/2000
* USD 206,306.00

ABSTRACT: 9457509, PI-Mitchell D. Trott: The award will support two projects.
The first project integrates and extends results from algebra, system theory,
symbolic dynamics, and coding theory to develop a structural framework for the
analysis and synthesis of nonlinear trellis codes. Trellis codes, introduced by
Ungerboeck in 1982, are used in essentially all modern voice-band modems; the
recent V.34 ITU modem standard specifies three types of trellis codes that
achieve communication rates exceeding 28800 bits per second over ordinary
telephone lines. Despite the continued interest in their construction, no
comprehensive theory of trellis codes has emerged. The trellis codes specified
in current and proposed standards, for example, were designed largely via ad hoc
pencil-and-paper heuristics and computer search. These methods have reached
their complexity limit, and future codes, with 256 states or more, must be found
by other means. The aim of this project is to use systems over groups to
describe the symmetries inherent in good codes, thereby facilitating the
analysis of existing codes and the construction of new ones. The second research
project will develop results in multiple access communication. There has been a
recent explosion of interest in wireless voice, video, and data communication
over newly allocated radio bands. The multiple access communication environment
in these bands is characterized by fading, multipath, and non-Gaussian noise.
Intuit ion and rules of thumb for point-to-point communication over Gaussian
channels is often misleading when applied to this new environment. The goal of
the project is to develop a new intuition appropriate to radio. This will
require both a deeper theoretical understanding of the fundamental performance
limits of the channel and also an understanding of how information-theoretic
results can be translated into practical implementations. Specific subproblems
include optimal detection, adaptive antenna algorithms, and multiple access
coding techniques, especially as applied to communication at rates 1 Mb/sec or
more.