* 9457709
* NSF Young Investigator:  Surface Induced Dissociation of    Molecular Ions at Self-Assembled Monolayers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1994,03/31/2000
* Michael Trenary, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 03/31/2000
* USD 312,500.00

This National Science Foundation Young Investigator project is in the general
area of analytical chemistry, with a specific focus on surface chemistry. During
the five-year tenure of this award, Professor Hanley and his students will
examine the reactions that occur when a high flux molecular ion beam impinges on
a self-assembled monolayer. The fragments from this collision, when analyzed by
mass spectrometry, yield valuable information about the structure of the parent
ion. The state of the surface before and after the ion-surface collision will be
probed using techniques such as x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, infrared
reflection absorption, and thermal desorption, and these experiments will allow
the mechanisms of the surface induced dissociation process to be investigated.
The use of these molecular ion beams for surface lithography of nanostructures
and for plasma polymerization chemistry will also be explored during the course
of this research project. This project should provide important insights into
the mechanisms of molecular fragmentation occuring when molecular ions collide
with a well-characterized surface. This approach, when used in conjunction with
mass spectrometric detection, allows structurally similar molecules to be
distinguished. Additionally, this award will enable Professor Hanley to further
his overall professional development as a researcher and educator at the
University of Illinois at Chicago.