* 9457700
* NSF Young Investigator:  Solvation and Chemical Dynamics at Immiscible Liquid Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1994,07/31/2000
* Nancy Levinger, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Bragin
* 07/31/2000
* USD 369,618.00

Nancy E. Levinger is supported by an NSF Young Investigator Grant from the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to perform experimental studies
of polar solvation and chemical reactions at the interface between immiscible
liquids. She will use surface second harmonic generation (SSHG) to perform
initial studies on coumarin 153, a classic probe of solvation dynamics, at the
liquid/liquid interface. SSHG is an ideal technique for studying interfacial
chemistry because the signals arise solely from the interface without
interference from the bulk medium. Information regarding molecular rotational
reorientation and electron transfer reactions at interfaces can be examined by
this method. A variety of liquid/liquid interfaces will be probed including the
octanol/water interface which is an important model system for drug modeling of
membrane solubility. Electron transfer and isomerization reactions will be
studied at the liquid/liquid interface in a variety of immiscible liquid solvent
systems including real membrane bound biologically important proteins. A wide
range of chemistry occurs at interfacial boundaries. Examples range from
biological and medicinal interfacial problems, such as chemistry of anesthesia,
to industrial scale separations of metal ores across interfaces, to the
relatively new investigations into self assembled monolayers and Langmuir-
Blodgett films for nanoelectronics and nonlinear optical materials. These
problems are based not only on structure and composition of the interface but
also on kinetic processes that occur at interfaces. As such, there is
considerable interest in chemical dynamics at interfaces. Levinger has developed
a tool to directly probe the chemical dynamics occurring at such interfaces, and
will apply this technique to a variety of important and technologically relevant
problems.