* 9457473
* NYI:  Visual Programming Languages (Scaling Up)
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2000
* Margaret Burnett, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 08/31/2000
* USD 306,125.00

Visual programming is intuitively very appealing, because it allows the
programmer to express relationships among, or transformations to, data simply by
sketching them, pointing at them, or demonstrating them -- not by translating
them into sequences of commands, pointers, and abstract symbols. This removal of
many of the concepts traditionally required to program computers, combined with
continuous visual feedback, offers the promise of making programming easier and
more reliable. Yet, there is a problem that has caused the potential of visual
programming to remain largely untapped. Most visual programming languages (VPLs)
to date are not easily extended beyond small demonstration programs to
adequately handle realistic programming without re-introducing the very concepts
they have tried to remove. This problem is called the scaling-up problem. The
objective of this research is to improve the scalability of VPLs. The focus is
in three directions: (1) developing ways to increase expressive power and code
reuse that also maintain the qualities of simplicity and concreteness; (2)
developing a concrete approach to implicit polymorphic types suitable for VPLs;
and (3) extending the applicability of VPLs. Research results from investigating
these three directions are prototyped in the research system Forms/3, a lazy
declarative visual language.