* 9457445
* NSF Young Investigator
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1999
* Christopher Walker, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Van Citters
* 06/30/1999
* USD 312,500.00

9457445 Walker One of the major goals of both ground and space based
observational astronomy is the identification and study of protostellar objects.
A study of protostars will provide insight into the initial conditions required
for star formation, protostellar evolution, and the formation of solar systems
like our own. Over the next five years the following research, which will
involve the participation of students, will be carried out: 1) conduct a
vigorous observational search for protostellar objects using telescopes
operating at submillimeter wavelengths, 2) write the radiative transfer computer
codes needed to interpret the complex spectroscopic line profiles obtained by
observing candidate objects, and 3) construct the low-noise submillimeter
wavelength heterodyne receivers needed to successfully detect infall and other
motions associated with material around protostars. Two graduate students will
be working on thesis projects related to these goals. The research program at
the University of Arizona has an established laboratory for the development of
state-of-the-art submillimeter wavelength receiver systems. Receivers for the
Arizona/Max-Planck-Institute fur Radioastronomie (MPifR) submillimeter telescope
operating in the 1300, 870, 610, 450, and 350 micron wavelength atmospheric
windows will be constructed. A dual-channel (610/370 micron wavelength), low-
noise receiver will be constructed for use on a 1.7m submillimeter wavelength
telescope at the South Pole. The receiver will be used to observe the
distribution of atomic carbon in the Milky Way and other galaxies visible from
the South Pole. There will be participation in the analysis and interpretation
of the huge astronomical data base that will be generated by making the
observations. New technology will be used to construct a high performance,
heterodyne array instrument which will consist of a 5 by 5 array of receivers.
This instrument will increase the scientific throughput of the telescope by at
least a factor of 25. Projects which were previously unthinkable due to limited
telescope time will become tractable. %%% This award is to recognize an
outstanding young faculty member in science and engineering. This award will
enhance his career by providing flexible support for research and educational
activities. Cooperation with industry and institutions that support research and
education is encouraged.