* 9457782
* NSF Young Investigator:  Logic and Complexity Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1994,08/31/1997
* Toniann Pitassi, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Dana May Latch
* 08/31/1997
* USD 75,000.00

The study of the complexity of proof systems is fundamental to logic and has a
broad range of applications in computer science as well. First, the efficiency
of any deduction system is tied to the speed of logical reasoning (e.g., Prolog,
Datalog, and many inferencing systems in artificial intelligence). Secondly, the
complexity of propositional proof systems is intimately connected to the central
question in complexity theory of whether NP equal coNP. Finally, there are links
between particular propositional proof systems, systems of arithmetic, and
complexity classes. Exploiting these connections, one can apply a whole new
range of tools from logic to attack difficult complexity questions (such as P =
NP). The basic question in propositional logic to be considered is: How long
does a proof of a propositional tautology have to be, as a function of the size
of the tautology? The best upper bound for all known proof systems is
exponential in the size of the tautology and it is conjectured that a similar
lower bound holds. This question is equivalent to whether or not NP = coNP, and
while it has been studied extensively for the last 25 years, it is still far
from solved. Propositional proof systems can be divided into classes that
correspond directly to complexity classes. An approach toward proving NP = coNP
is to establish superpolynomial lower bounds for specific proof systems of
greater and greater proof strength. Much of this research is aimed at attacking
this difficult problem. Another line of research concerns feasible arithmetic
(also known as bounded arithmetic) and its connections to propositional proofs
and complexity theory. The concept of a feasible proof has been the subject of
much research in the last ten years.