* 9457618
* NSF Young Investigator
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/2000
* Pietro Perona, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jing Xiao
* 08/31/2000
* USD 312,500.00

Humans use their body to communicate with each other. Much of this communication
is mediated by vision, however vision is not currently used in human-to-machine
interfaces. If we could imitate nature and obtain good human-to-machine visual
communication we could build convenient, portable and powerful interfaces. This
technology would contribute immensely to industries such as entertainment,
telecommunications, portable computing and security. Dr. Perona will study
techniques for tracking and recognition aimed at building visual interfaces
between humans and computers. His research will concentrate on three systems:
the face, the hands, and the limbs, including head and body posture. In order to
access the information conveyed by the limbs and the hand it is first necessary
to locate them in potentially cluttered images and then to reconstruct their
configuration in space and time. The face has to be detected, its 3D orientation
computed, its features located and its deformation measured. Dr. Perona's
research will accordingly concentrate on scene segmentation from motion flow and
3D motion, recursive estimation of the 3D motion of kinematic chains with
partially known kinematics from monocular and stereoscopic sequences of
perspective images, detection of complex objects (hands, face) in cluttered
scenes, representation and estimation of nonrigid motions.