* 9457156
* NSF Young Investigator: Nondestructive Evaluation of        Polymer Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1994,12/31/2000
* Susan Mantell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* KAMLAKAR P RAJURKAR
* 12/31/2000
* USD 312,500.00

9457156 Mantell The goal of this research is to develop and implement a
noncontact, nondestructive method for evaluating interlaminar bonding during in-
situ consolidation of composites. An airborne acousto-ultrasonic technique will
be implemented in closed loop control of tape laying. In the early phases of
this research, the focus will be on developing a better understanding of
airborne ultrasonic waves for detecting defects in composites. A theoretical
model relating airborne acousto-ultrasonic operating parameters to the resulting
stress wave will be developed and experimentally validated. The second phase of
the research will entail sensing and evaluating bond quality off line using the
proposed air contact NDE method. Specimens of varying thickness with an poorly
bonded top most layer will be manufactured and tested. Nondestructive evaluation
of bond strength will be compared with mechanical tests of the bond strength. In
the final phase, the proposed air contact NDE method will be integrated into an
existing tape laying apparatus. Following statistical design of experiment
techniques, an empirical process model will be developed and a closed loop
control algorithm implemented. This research is significant on several fronts.
In processing of advanced materials via in-situ consolidation, adequate
interlaminar bonding is critical to part structural integrity. Because cost of
these materials is high, it is desirable to monitor part quality during
processing. Defects identified during processing can be reworked immediately as
part of the process control scheme; thereby improving yields and reducing scrap
and costs. A noncontact method also offers portability to remote sites and on
line (during manufacture) sensing capabilities. Moreover, similar methodologies
could be applied to other in-situ consolidation and bonding processes.