* 9457703
* NSF Young Investigator:  Studies on Oxidosqualene Cyclase   and Catalytic Antibiotics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1994,06/30/1999
* T. Daniel Stack, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/1999
* USD 312,500.00

9457703 Griffin Stanford University Two major projects will be pursued under
this NSF Young Investigator Award: (1) The detailed analysis of oxidosqualene
cyclase (OSC) enzymes and (2) The elaboration of antibacterial agents which
exhibit catalytic activity towards their cellular targets (i.e., catalytic
antibiotics). A long-term goal in the first project will be to gain a detailed
mechanistic and structural understanding of OSC enzymes, which catalyze the
transformation of oxidosqualene to sterols and related triterpenoids. Inhibitors
of OSCs will be prepared that will include inhibitors with promising anti-fungal
activity. In the second project, the hypothesis that antibacterial agents which
act catalytically against their targets will be more potent than those which act
stoichiometrically will be tested. In this study, bacitracin, which sequesters
intermediates in cell wall biosynthesis containing bactoprenyl pyrophosphate
will be investigated. This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the
research of Professor John H. Griffin at Stanford University. The mechanism by
which an enzyme affects the cyclization of a molecule into steroids will be
pursued and related to the structure of enzyme. From a knowledge of the
structure of the enzyme, inhibitors of this enzyme will be prepared that include
those with anti-fungal activity. In another project, the mechanism of
antibacterial action will be investigated from a molecular perspective. A
hypothesis will be tested to determine if antibacterial agents that operate in a
catalytic manner are more potent than those that do not.