* 9457549
* NSF Young Investigator
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1999
* J. David Frost, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 08/31/1999
* USD 312,498.00

9457549 Frost This is an NSF Young Investigator Award. It involves the study of
computer-based systems and methods for the acquisition, management and
visualization of geotechnical engineering information. The research seeks to
further integrate the use of imaging and information technologies in the
analysis of geotechnical information, by taking advantage of the fact that the
analyzed data is in digital form, and thus can be readily used in computer
visualization of geomechanics processes. The focus is on the development of
analytical techniques. Specific aspects of the research involve digital imaging
processing and analysis techniques for acquiring information, geographic
information system hazard analysis, and the visual analysis of geotechnical
processes. The development of imaging and information system algorithms and
procedures for these specific tasks is fundamental to the longer term goal of
creating an integrated visual analysis framework. There are strong links between
the research and the teaching plan, which comprises an educational research
component involving visualization. It involves the development of a
"Geotechnical Test Simulator" which will be evaluated and compared with
conventional teaching methods. The combined teaching and research plans seek to
integrate the results of interdisciplinary research and teaching developments
into education and practice. ***