* 9457806
* NYI: Surface Splines Over Irregular Meshes
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/1994,09/30/2000
* jorg peters, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 09/30/2000
* USD 327,500.00

Models of die casts in manufacturing, level sets of functions, deposition
fronts in simulation, pleasing shapes in animation, fast prototyping, and
visualization of interactions in a virtual world have one thing in common: the
need for efficient representations of smooth surfaces. At present, some of our
understanding and use of scientific results is handicapped by the fact that the
standard representation used for the task, tensor-product B-splines, can only
model a small subset of these surfaces naturally and efficiently, namely
surfaces that allow for a regular, checker-board arrangement of its pieces.
Free-form surface splines extend the spline paradigm and techniques to cover
also irregular arrangements. In extending, they preserve the intuitive
generation of the surface from the control mesh by a process of cutting with
hyperplanes, also known as corner cutting or subdivision. So far only first-
order, tangent continuous surface splines exist. Extension to higher-order
continuity is both of fundamental and practical interest. The fundamental aspect
consists of a new theory that arises when surfaces from pieces using massive
computing power in contrast to analyzing surfaces as in classical Gaussian
differential geometry. The goal of this research is to develop a general
framework for surface splines and to use the representation to optimize the
shape of surfaces with respect to various cost functions. The immediate goal is
the derivation of surface splines and to find tools to adjust the variation of
curvature, an important quality criterion for surfaces. Since the challenge is
considerably greater than the definition of first-order surface splines over
irregular meshes, progress requires heavy use of symbolic computation and
graphics for quality assessment.