* 9457189
* NSF Young Investigator:  Analysis and Simulation of         Multi-Stage Inventory Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1994,08/31/2000
* Paul Glasserman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 08/31/2000
* USD 285,356.00

9457189 Glasserman This research is focused on the analysis and simulation of
multi-stage inventory systems with limited production capacity. The emphasis and
common theme is on the use of new techniques for bounding and approximating the
performance of such systems. The methodologies involve draw upon techniques for
analyzing probabilities of rare events, which, in a properly designed system,
correspond to inventory stockouts, last sales, long response times, etc. The
different subclasses of problems to be studied include capacitated multi-stage
systems, capacity allocation among multiple products, stocking levels in the
presence of component commonality, cyclic schedules for multiple products, and
efficient simulation of rare events. In capacitated multi-stage systems, the
research emphasis is on the study of features of the assembly and supply chains
of many industries with the objective of developing design and control tools to
coordinate the various stages to meet service levels for external demands and to
limit inventory costs. Research in capacity allocation problems will seek to
extend the solution to capacity allocation problems that involve multiple
products in make-to-order stock environment. Research in stocking levels is
aimed at developing solution to the problem of setting stock levels for
components that are required by multiple products. The study of cyclic schedules
in which products are made in a fixed schedule and each visit to a product
restores its inventory to a preset target level that depends on intervening
demand will also be considered in this research. The rarity of events such as
stockouts, lost sales, etc. in complex inventory systems make the use of
simulation as an evaluation tool of such systems very difficult. This research
will also focus on the development of variance reduction techniques, based on
importance sampling, to increase the efficiency of simulation analysis. Expected
outcomes of this research inclu de the characterization of asymptotically
optimal base-stock levels for control of capacitated inventory systems,
identification of asymptotically optimal capacity allocation among products, and
better analysis, understanding, and design of cyclic schedules for multiple
products. Furthermore, tools to better analyze inventory systems through
simulation will be developed. This will make it easier, more attractive, and
computationally more efficient to analyze complex inventory systems through
simulation technique.