* 9458210
* NSF Young Investigator
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1994,07/31/2000
* Detlef Weigel, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/2000
* USD 312,500.00

9458210 Weigel The switch from vegetative to reproductive development is a
critical transition in the life cycle of a flowering plant. Despite its
importance, the molecular mechanisms underlying this developmental switch are
poorly understood. Dr. Weigel has previously isolated a gene, LEAFY, that is the
earliest known gene to be active in flowers of the small crucifer Arabidopsis,
and whose activity is required for floral identity. He proposes to use genetic
and molecular approaches to decipher the genetic hierarchy that leads form
floral induction to pattern formation within the flower, initially using the
LEAFY gene as a main tool. Specific questions that he will address include the
following: (1) How does floral induction lead to the activation of genes that
determine floral identity? (2) Which genes, in addition to LEAFY, control floral
identity? How is the pattern or organ emergence in shoots and flowers regulated?
(4) Are the mechanisms uncovered in Arabidopsis conserved in other species of
flowering plants? %%% This work seeks to investigate and identify molecular
mechanisms underlying the switch from vegetative to reproductive development in
the life cycle of a flowering plant. Specific questions will be asked in
Arabidopsis thaliana and, ultimately, in other flowering plants. The answers to
be obtained to those questions will lead to a mechanistic understanding of
floral determination which will permit directed manipulation of flowering not
only in Arabidopsis but also in other, economically important plants. ***