* 9458004
* NSF Young Investigator
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,07/31/1998
* David Pappas, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 249,042.00

Technical abstract: A study of the magnetic properties of ultra-thin rare-earth
films and sandwiches will be conducted. The issues which will be addressed will
be the surface magnetic reconstructions and the indirect exchange coupling
across non-magnetic spacer layers such as ytterbium. The films will be grown in
an ultra high vacuum chamber and characterized in-situ with low energy electron
diffraction, Auger electron diffraction, angle resolved photoemission, spatially
resolved spin polarized secondary electron spectroscopy, and magneto-optic Kerr
effect. Ex-situ characterization of the samples will include extended x-ray
absorption fine structure, vibrating sample magnetometry, x-ray diffraction, and
magneto-resistance measurements. The change of structural, magnetic, and
transport properties for various thicknesses, preparation temperatures,
substrates, and cap layers will be investigated. A more complete understanding
of the surface and interfacial magnetic properties of the rare-earths is sought
in order to find applications for their unique properties in non-volatile
magnetic storage applications and magnetic sensor technology. Non-technical
abstract: Magnetic films are presently the mainstay of modern data storage
devices such as hard disk drives and tape back up system. The films are used
both as the active storage media as well as in the heads which read the data.
Two main examples are read-write rnagneto-optic disk dnves, which use an alloy
of transition metals (iron and cobalt) together with a rare earth (ytterbium) to
form a film with magnetic domains which represent the data) pointing
perpendicular to the surface and layered pickup-heads made of magnetic
transition metals which have a large resistance change when they pass over the
various magnetic patterns on a storage tape. In the present study, the magnetic
domain properties of very thin rare-earth materials and lay ered structures will
be investigated to determine the suitability of these materials for future
generations of magnetic storage media.