* 9458046
* NSF Young Investigator
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1994,06/30/2000
* Steven Ringel, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2000
* USD 280,000.00

9458046 Ringel Research will be directed toward an improved understanding of the
electronic properties of dislocations in lattice mismatched semiconductor
heterostructures, their relationship with dislocation microstructure, and an
exploration of methods to electrically passivate the deleterious nature of
dislocations. The effects of impurities and extrinsic processes such as those
encountered for specific device applications, will be considered in detail. The
focus is on three technologically important semiconductor systems,
III-V/Silicon, Germanium-Silicon/Silicon and nitride based wide bandgap III-V
materials. The proposed research incorporates a unique array of complementary
electronic, microstructural, and atomic resolution measurement techniques, in
addition to epitaxial growth and processing facilities to perform the proposed
studies. This research will make fundamental contributions to the materials
science of dislocations in semiconductor heterostructures from an electronic
perspective which, coupled with an improved understanding of dislocation
control, will have significant impact on integration of lattice mismatched
electronic materials for advanced device applications. %%%%%% This research is
expected to provide improved fundamental understanding of the electronic
properties of defects resulting from the monolithic integration of dissimilar
semiconducting materials, and to investigate methods to control the undesirable
properties of these defects. The results will be of importance to the
development of multi-functional devices and integrated optoelectronics that
consist of different classes of materials integrated onto a common substrate. An
important feature of this research project is the training of graduate and
undergraduate students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area
of materials and processing research. ***