* 9458100
* NSF Young Investigator
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/2000
* David Bredt, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 08/31/2000
* USD 317,500.00

9458100 Bredt Nitric oxide (NO) is a noxious free radical gas which, remarkably,
functions as an endogenous biological messenger molecule. Initially identified
in mammalian macrophages and endothelial cells, NO appears to have prominent
influences in diverse tissues throughout the animal kingdom. NO represents a
major divergence from previously characterized cellular signals. While other
transmitters reversibly interact with high affinity receptors in a "lock-and-
key" manner, NO achieves signaling specificity not by its three dimensional
shape but rather by its radical chemical reactivity. Under ambient conditions NO
is a lipophilic gas; these properties allow it to rapidly diffuse into cells
without being restrained by cellular barriers. The discovery of NO as a
messenger has prompted a search for other small reactive biological mediators
and already several have been found in organisms ranging from bacteria to
primates. This laboratory is using molecular and genetic approaches to define
the roles of NO in the functioning and development of the nervous system. Owing
to its reactive free-radical structure, experimentally adding NO to a biological
system may cause non-specific effects which are physiologically unimportant.
Also, NO is technically difficult to deliver in a manner which resembles
endogenous synthesis. To avoid these problems these studies will make use of
transgenic NOS "knockout" mice generated by targeted disruption of the
endogenous gene. These animals are viable and furtile and should serve as an
excellent model to study the neuronal functions for NO. The PI will also develop
a "dominant negative" genetic approach to delete NOS from specific cell types
and during selected stages of development. These and other future studies of NO
may help serve as a model for understanding signaling by other members of this
new class of biological messengers.