* 9458319
* NSF Young Investigator
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1994,08/31/1997
* Sabine Iatridou, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 08/31/1997
* USD 97,800.00

9458319June 26, 1994 Iatridou This award provides support to Dr. Sabine Iatridou
under the National Science Foundation's Young Investigator Awards program. The
objective of this program is to recognize outstanding young faculty in science
and engineering, to enhance the academic career of recent PhD recipients by
providing flexible support for research and educational activities, and to
foster contact and cooperation between academia, industry, and institutions that
support research and education. Dr. Iatridou has already made significant
research contributions to the field of linguistics, and she has the potential to
become a leader in academic research and education. This award will allow the
investigator to build on her existing research on the convergence of linguistic
inquiry, philosophy, and cognition. Her main area of interest is in the relation
between meaning and form in natural language. During the next few years she will
undertake a cross-linguistic study of counterfactual conditionals. This is a
topic at the interface of syntax, semantics, and pragmatics, relating linguistic
structure to cognition and language use. The research is of great importance to
linguistic theory because it promises to overcome a major longstanding problem
in the field: current syntactic analyses are too superficial to support a
realistic representation of the semantics of human utterances, while current
semantic analyses are so abstract that they give little indication of how to
constrain linguistic representations. The work promises to be the touchstone for
future work in this area.