* 9458329
* NSF Young Investigator
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/2001
* William Rogers Brubaker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 08/31/2001
* USD 312,500.00

9458329 Brubaker This award provides support to Dr. Rogers Brubaker under the
National Science Foundation's Young Investigator Awards program. The objective
of this program is to recognize outstanding young faculty in science and
engineering, to enhance the academic career of recent PhD recipients by
providing flexible support for research and educational activities, and to
foster contact and cooperation between academia, industry, and institutions that
support research and education. Dr. Brubaker has already made significant
research contributions to the field of sociology, and she has the potential to
become a leader in academic research and education. This award will allow the
investigator to build on his existing research on comparative historical
sociology and political and cultural analyses of nation states. His research
interests are in the areas of international migration, citizenship, nationhood,
and nationality. During the next few years he will extend his initial work in
this area which focussed on Western Europe to resurgent nationalisms in Eastern
Europe and the former Soviet Union. He will focus on the dynamic, and
potentially explosive, triangular interplay between national minorities, the
nationalizing states in which they live, and the external national "homelands"
to which the minorities belong by ethnic nationality though not by legal
citizenship. The project will be a sustained effort to try to understand the
dynamics of nationalism before the Soviet Revolution relate to those that have
emerged in the wake of the collapse of the USSR. This will include the long-
standing histories and geopolitical patterns of conflict, and the impact of
Soviet nationalities policy and other intervening events and variables. This
research promises enlightenment about both politicized ethnicity and fundamental
social theory. Through sustained comparative analysis of the closely
interlocking political fields of national minorities, nationalizing state s and
external national homelands, it seeks to grasp the interactive processes through
which nationalist claims and counterclaims arise, intensify, and subside.