* 9458339
* NSF Young Investigator
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1994,08/31/2001
* Dare Baldwin, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 08/31/2001
* USD 312,500.00

9458339 Baldwin This award provides support to Dr. Dare Baldwin under the
National Science Foundation's Young Investigator Awards program. The objective
of this program is to recognize outstanding young faculty in science and
engineering, to enhance the academic career of recent PhD recipients by
providing flexible support for research and educational activities, and to
foster contact and cooperation between academia, industry, and institutions that
support research and education. Dr. Baldwin has already made significant
research contributions to the field of cognitive psychology, and she has the
potential to become a leader in academic research and education. This award will
allow the investigator to build on her existing research on the interpretive and
information-gathering abilities children possess that support the rapid
expansion of world knowledge. During the next few years she will study the
language learning and information-gathering abilities of infants and young
children. Through analysis of what enables children to resolve the inductive
difficulties intrinsic to word learning and language comprehension, she will try
to ascertain if the mechanisms of interpersonal inference that we have found to
figure so importantly in language acquisition likewise expedite knowledge
acquisition in other domains. Through analysis of children's abilities to seek
new information through direct investigation, she hopes to determine if it may
be possible to point to the involvement of a relatively open and versatile
inductive capacity which promotes knowledge acquisition from a very early age.
From analysis of children's abilities to elicit new information through
indirect, social channels, her goal is to discover whether the human ability to
appreciate others as repositories of information plays a critical role in the
efficient transmission of knowledge between individuals. The findings from this
research program have the potential to provide major new insight s into complex
interrelations between neurological change, social cognition, and knowledge
acquisition in human development.