* 9460919
* Fast Laser Driven Plasma Switch
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Leonid Polonskiy, PXL Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 03/31/1996
* USD 74,946.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a novel
switch technology which will secure instantaneous electrical connection based on
the novel mechanism of the electrical discharge initiation - laser breakdown in
Besselian (B) laser beam. Laser breakdown in the B-beam will result in a novel
type of optical discharge - Continuous Extensive Laser Spark (CELS) which is
ideally suitable for shorting electrodes due to absence of breaks in the plasma
channel, high electrical conductivity of the channel, and generation of the
channel with hyperlight speed. The most efficient transformation of the Gaussian
(G) beam into the B-beam can be achieved by focusing light beam into an axial
line with a conical lens (axicon). According to preliminary estimates, the
triggering will require modest energy of the laser pulse ( 100 mJ) which can be
provided with a compact and inexpensive laser. The new switching technology will
open new opportunities for all pulsed systems: operation with high precision and
reliability in the extremely broad voltage range (from zero to self-breakdown
level), current range (kiloamperes to megamperes) and long gaps (1 - 100 cm),
low jitter and fast switching (nanoseconds or better) will allow for highly
precise synchronization of multiple switches as well as for multichannel
switching in one device. In Phase I, feasibility of the technology will be
established through the development and testing of a single-channel coaxial
switch. The alternative switch configurations will be analyzed from the points
of view of cost and efficiency of operation. Phase II will demonstrate practical
realization of the full potential of the switch technology several different
purpose switch prototypes will be developed.