* 9460551
* Yttrium Barium Copper Oxide Single Crystals for             Flux-Trapping Applications
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Douglas Miller, Seattle Specialty Ceramics
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 03/31/1996
* USD 74,350.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project involves research in the
area of synthesis and processing of advanced superconducting ceramic materials.
The principal objective of the proposed work is to optimize the stoichiometry,
phase composition, morphology, and other characteristics of high-temperature
superconducting ceramic (HTSC) powders used to produce high-quality single
crystals having high critical current densities necessary for flux-trapping
applications. An important additional objective is to contribute to the
development of an improved understanding of certain crystal growth process
parameters thought to be of prime importance in controlling growth rates and
single crystal properties. The work will be concentrated on YBa2Cu3O7 (123)
materials known to have useful superconducting properties and which have already
been successfully fabricated as single crystals, both in the United States and
in Japan. The powders will be produced using a proven combustion spray pyrolysis
(CSP) method capable of providing high-purity, ultra-fine, stoichiometric
powders with consistent reproducibility. Y2BaCuO5 (211) powders used in the
growth of 123 single crystals, as well as 123/211 composite compositions, will
also be produced. The recognized role of small additions of platinum to the
crystal growth process will be explored by examining appropriate means for
introducing the metal into the precursor powders. Required modifications to the
CSP process required to produce preferable precursor powders will be
established. Selected powders will be used in subsequent single crystal growth
experiments (modified Czochralski growth method) to be conducted at Princeton
University. Single crystal growth technology will be transferred from Princeton
University to SSC, Inc. for continuing development and eventual
commercialization as progress warrants.