* 9460624
* A New Nanoprobe Instrument for Imaging Trace Elements in    Electronic and Optoelectronic Devices
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/1995,09/30/1996
* Heinrich Arlinghaus, ATOM SCIENCES INC
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1996
* USD 64,994.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop,
demonstrate, and characterize a high-resolution, highly efficient instrument for
imaging elemental distributions. Atom Sciences, Inc. has designated this device
as a sputter-initiated resonance ionization nanoprobe (SIRINP) instrument. The
unique features of SIRINP are necessary to meet the needs of the electronics and
optoelectronics fields as higher performance, higher speed devices continue to
evolve. Advances in these fields to date have been expedited by improvements in
the performance of analytical instrumentation used to characterize the
composition and structure of devices under development. These successes
encourage the expectation that still higher performance devices will become
available, but the concomitant reduction in semiconductor device dimension and
increases in materials purity and compositional fidelity are straining available
characterization techniques. Successful completion of the proposed new
instrument will make it possible to quantify the spatial distribution of atomic
species in electronic and optoelectronic devices, optical fibers, biological
specimens, environmental and other samples, to sub-parts-per-million
concentration levels with high sensitivity, efficiency, analysis speed, and
lateral resolution approaching 50 nm using a Ga ion probe. In Phase I, they will
(a) determine the SIRINP imaging capabilities on electronic materials relevant
to the semiconductor research community: (b) determine lateral resolution,
sensitivity, efficiency, analysis time, and depth resolution possible with
SIRINP, and (c) define instrumental modifications required to optimize the
SIRINP technique for routine high-resolution imaging analysis. In Phase II they
will optimize efficiency, analysis time, and spatial and mass resolution for
analytical research. Phase II will result in a full prototype SIRINP instrument.
In Phase III, SIRINP analyses and instrument will be made available for the
analytical community.