* 9460082
* Isolation of DNA Promotors Induced by Environmental Stimuli and Their Use In The Construction of Improved Biocatalysts  for Environmental Remediation
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Robert Steffan, Envirogen, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 03/31/1996
* USD 74,989.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project involves the development
of chlorinated solvent-degrading biocatalysts that express degradative genes in
response to environmental stimuli. Chlorinated solvent-degrading genes will be
cloned under the control of promoters that are induced (turned on) in the
presence of target chemicals, under low pH, and/or under low temperature. The
biocatalysts will be applicable to both reactorbase( and in situ biotreatment
processes for destroying recalcitrant chlorinated solvents. Chlorinated solvents
are the most widespread and abundant contaminants of the Nation's groundwater
and soils, and many are directly carcinogenic even in small amounts. Current
technologies for remediating soils and/or groundwater contaminated with
chlorinated solvents are limited by their high costs or the fact that they often
do not destroy the contaminating chemicals. Biological oxidation of chlorinated
solvents, however, results in the complete destruction of the contaminant, and
degradative microorganisms can be used to destroy contaminants spread over large
areas or contaminants trapped in aquifers. Although many bacteria are capable of
destroying chlorinated solvents, the process is co-metabolic; i.e. the compounds
do not act as growth substrates or gene inducers for the degradative organisms.
Degradation is often limited by repression of enzyme synthesis in the absence of
toxic inducing substrates such as toluene or phenol. Envirogen, Inc. proposes to
use molecular biological techniques to develop biocatalysts that no longer
require the presence of toxic inducing substrates for destroying chlorinated
solvents, but rather have degradative genes under control of DNA promoters that
are induced by environmental conditions (low temperature or low pH) or the
presence of the target compounds themselves. Cloned toluene monooxygenase genes
will be fused to existing environmentally induced promoters, and to promoters
isolated during the proposed project. The resulting biocatalysts will be capable
of destroying chlorinated solvents under controlled conditions in bioreactors,
and also under specific in situ conditions in aquifers and/or soils.