* 9460511
* Giant Impedance Transition in Lanthanum Hexaboride (LaB6)   Thin Films
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,11/30/1995
* Qin Jang, ULTRAMET, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 11/30/1995
* USD 64,996.00

This SBIR Phase I project will investigate a new phenomenon discovered recently
at Ultramet while fabricating thermionic emission devices using thin films of
lanthanum hexaboride (LaB6), a low work function thermionic emitter. This
phenomenon, designated giant impedance transition (GIT), is represented by a
large and very fast change in impedance (or resistance in DC) in response to
external electromagnetic and electrostatic radiation. It should be noted that
all observations of the GIT phenomenon have been extremely preliminary, obtained
merely as a byproduct of the thermionic emission work being performed, with no
focus having been given to the phenomenon itself. As such, much additional work
is required to understand the physics of the GIT phenomenon and quantify it
before proceeding to the device design stage. In this program, Ultramet will
investigate the GIT phenomenon to achieve an understanding of its physics,
perform quantitative analysis, and relate the behavior of the impedance change
in the LaB6 deposit to its microstructure and thus, the processing technique.
Ultramet will team with the Electrical Engineering Department of the University
of Utah for characterization of the electrical and optical properties of LaB6
thin films produced at Ultramet. The successful completion of this effort will
result in an understanding and quantification of the GIT phenomenon, as well as
a direction for device design and fabrication to be pursued in follow-on work.