* 9460852
* Sensorless Active Magnetic Bearings Using Neural Networks
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Eugene Parker, BARRON ASSOCIATES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 03/31/1996
* USD 74,989.00

Active magnetic bearings (AMBs) employ electromagnets to levitate the rotor in
rotating machinery so that it spins without contacting the stator.
Conventionally, magnetic forces are controlled using feedback from sensors that
measure shaft position. Although rotor position sensors work well in most
applications, their cost can be prohibitive. Additionally, it is often necessary
to operate sensors in extreme environments, which increases sensor cost. Sensors
also cannot be placed at the same location as the bearings (colocation), which
can be a source of control problems and even control instability. A further
disadvantage in utilizing sensors in AMB applications is that they increase the
number of points of potential failure. The sensorless AMB exploits the fact that
the magnetic actuators themselves can act as sensors. That is, the relationship
between magnetic coil driving current and voltage is affected by the electrical
inductance, which (ideally) is inversely proportional to the clearance between
the stator and the rotor. Neural networks can learn this nonlinear mapping
between the driving current and voltage and rotor position. By training the
neural network on data from an operating machine, the mapping will necessarily
also account for the effects of flux leakage, magnetization curve nonlinearity,
eddy currents, and hysteresis.