* 9460533
* Real-Time Magneto-Optic Nondestructive Inspection of Tagged Composite Materials
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Gerald Fitzpatrick, Physical Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 03/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate a new,
advanced, rapid nondestructive inspection technique for use on composite
materials during manufacturing and in-service inspection. Composite materials
are rapidly becoming strong, lightweight substitutes for a great variety of
traditional metallic structural components. However, composites are often
difficult to inspect for discontinuities or impact damage due to their high
electrical resistivity and/or high ultrasonic attenuation. It is proposed that
composites be tagged during manufacturing with trace quantities of magnetic
powders in the binding matrix and/or with ferromagnetic or electrically
conducting wire screens among the fiber layers - such screens are already
commonly employed in existing aerospace composites for deicing heaters and
lightning protection. It is further proposed that an electrically noncontacting
magneto-optic/eddy current imaging system, the MOI, then be used to form rapidly
scanned, real-time images of voids and impact damage deliberately introduced
into these materials. With an appropriate choice of tagging materials, composite
samples and controlled experiments involving the MOI and SQUID magnetometers,
Physical Research, Inc., will demonstrate the feasibility of rapidly imaging and
detecting otherwise hidden discontinuities and impact damage.