* 9460602
* Coulombic Pairing of Dopants as a Novel Approach to         Produce High Conductivity p-Type GaN
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1995,04/30/1996
* James Yee, Avyd Devices
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 04/30/1996
* USD 74,867.00

Avyd Devices proposes to develop a technology to prepare high conductivity
p-type GaN crystals with an extremely novel and innovative approach. The
approach entails the creation of shallow acceptor levels via coulombic pairing
of a double acceptor A-- with a single donor D+ with the resulting pair (A--
D+)- acting as a single acceptor with an energy level shallower than that of
either A- or A-- in their unpaired state. Specifically, GaN crystals will be
simultaneously doped with an element from Group I and an element from Group VI
and then the crystals will be annealed under well controlled thermodynamic
conditions which would promote the coulombic association of the Group I element
occupying gallium lattice sites, acting as a double acceptor, AGa--, with the
Group VI element occupying nitrogen lattice sites, acting as a single donor,
DN+. The resulting pair, (AGa-- DN+)- would act as a single acceptor with an
expected energy level much closer to the valence band edge than that of either
AGa- or AGa-- in their unpaired state. Phase I research will focus on
demonstrating the feasibility of coulombic pairing as an approach to produce
high conductivity p-type GaN. At the end of Phase II of the program, Avyd
Devices expects to reproducibly produce high conductivity p-type GaN and high
power blue LEDs for commercial applications. The technology can also be extended
to Ga1-x Alx N alloys to produce solar blind detectors.