* 9460480
* Heavy Metals Removal from Industrial and Environmental      Wastes Using Exopolysaccharide Adsorbants Produced by       Marine Microorganisms
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Alan Chmurny, NOVASCREEN BIOSCIENCES CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 02/29/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is designed to establish
the technical feasibility for use of a novel marine exopolysaccharide in the
removal of heavy metals from industrial effluents and environmental media. These
metal pollutants are among the most prevalent and problematic waste treatment
and environmental remediation targets. Current technologies provide only
partially effective treatment and are costly to implement and use. It is
proposed that a complex exopolysaccharide (EPS), which is produced by a recently
discovered marine microorganism and which is known to possess strong ion
exchange properties, be evaluated for its ability to selectively adsorb heavy
metals from complex waste streams containing non-hazardous metals under
anticipated field conditions. It is further proposed to evaluate approaches for
incorporation of this material into a fixed or supported polymer matrix system.
The objectives of this Phase I project are: ) To assess the capacity of this EPS
for binding regulated and non regulated metal singly and in combination, and 2)
to evaluate various crosslinking and other polymer stabilization procedures to
produce an EPS adsorbent that is usable under a variety of process conditions
and which can be easily regenerated. It is anticipated that this work will
identify methodology for the use of EPS adsorbents for the selective removal of
regulated metals from complex, dilute or otherwise difficult to treat metal-
containing waste streams.