* 9460589
* Solvent Free Liquid Photoresist
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Steven Johnson, International Polymer Systems
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/29/1996
* USD 73,239.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes a novel liquid
photoresist chemistry to produce printed circuit boards (PCBs). This chemistry
permits 100% solids application, eliminating objectionable solvents used in the
application of currently available photoresists. The innovative chemistry uses a
hardener blocked with a reactive component. This hardener is combined with
suitable monomers, oligomers containing acid (COOH) functionality, polymeric
binders, photoinitiators and photosensitizers. Following coating the material is
heated to dissociate the blocked hardener, resulting in a partial cross linking
of the reactive component, forming a tack-free (B-Stage) surface. The coating is
patternable with U.V. light which through a free radical photoreaction results
in selective polymerization of the coating. The unexposed material is developed
with a 18 sodium or potassium carbonate water solution. The patterned
photoresist is then used to define the negative image for subsequent etching,
plating and electroplating. The photoresist is subsequently removed by stripping
in a 108 sodium or potassium carbonate water solution. This program will
demonstrate the feasibility of this approach by demonstrating this material on
real circuit board substrate at a commercial printed circuit board vendor.