* 9460696
* Interactive Multimedia Educational Software Addressing the  Technological Literacy Needs of Residents of Economically   Disadvantaged Communities
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Timothy Cottrell, Princeton Teaching Associates Software Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 03/31/1996
* USD 60,048.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
feasibility of constructing interactive multimedia educational software to
educate residents of economically disadvantaged communities in the skills
necessary to take advantage of opportunities in emerging computer and
information systems industries. A well-publicized revolution in information
technology is taking place both nationally and globally. As the information
decade unfolds, residents of economically disadvantaged communities face the
prospect of further alienation from the American ideals of upward social and
economic mobility (`Data Highway Ignoring Poor, Study Charges,` The New York
Times, p. 1 May 25,1994). Just as real highways bypass economically depressed
areas, it appears that the information superhighway--its technologies and its
benefits--will bypass the residents of poor communities. Education, however, can
give the residents of these communities the power to forge entrances into and
become active participants in the information revolution. Instead of viewing
emerging information technologies as further hindrances to the social mobility
of historically disadvantaged groups, this project will construct the tools by
which these technologies may be translated into new employment and educational
opportunities. The technologies associated with the information revolution--
interactive multimedia and computer networking--require a new set of job skills.
Phase I research will prove that interactive multimedia training materials can
effectively teach these skills, at both an introductory and an advanced level.
Use of the proposed software will make students desirable members of the
information technologies workforces by giving them skills, experience and
training in emerging technologies. In addition, young adults who use the
software will be introduced to subjects and technologies that will motivate them
to pursue higher education in related fields.