* 9460825
* Radio-Optic Method for Measuring Relative Motion
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1995,02/29/1996
* William Dunn, Quantum Research Services, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 02/29/1996
* USD 65,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate a novel
means of measuring the relative motion (displacement and velocity) between a
structure and the medium in which it is embedded when the system is subjected to
shock loads, such as those from earthquakes. The complexity of the behavior at
the structure-medium interface poses a large source of uncertainty in design and
analysis of man-made structures that are partially or totally embedded in a
medium. The proposed method involves the use of an encapsulated and collimated
radioisotope source located in the medium near the structure-medium interface
and an array of plastic scintillating fibers embedded in the structure. As the
source and fibers move relative to each other, the collimated source beam
penetrates the intervening material and sweeps across the fiber array, exposing
different fibers at different times. The displacement and velocity of the source
(medium) relative to the fibers (structure) can be determined from the fiber
count-rate time histories. Key features of the proposed approach include: the
instrument minimizes interference with the motion at the interface; the fibers
can be fabricated into ribbons, which maintain inter-fiber registration but are
flexible and rugged; and the system can achieve high spatial resolution and high
data collection rates. Phase I will involve design, modeling, and experimental
testing of a laboratory system, in order to demonstrate proof-of-principle.
Instruments for field evaluation would be developed and extensively tested in
Phase II.