* 9460372
* An Adaptive Hybrid (Cartesian-Prism) Grid and Flow Solver   for Navier-Stokes Equations
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1995,05/31/1996
* Z.J. Wang, CFD RESEARCH CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 05/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to use
overlapped Cartesian grid and Body-Fitted (BF) prism grids for solving viscous
flow problems. Given a geometry definition in the form of triangularized
surfaces, a BF prism mesh will be generated using the advancing layers
technology with grid clustering near body surfaces. This prism mesh is then
overlapped with a coarse uniform Cartesian background grid. Initially the
Cartesian grid will be refined to have similar resolution near the prism grid. A
high-order flow solver based on linear reconstruction and Roe's flux-difference
splitting will be developed. Grid adaptation according to the physical nature of
the flow field will be carried out to place control volumes where required the
most, achieving maximum accuracy with minimum resources. An explicit multi-grid
procedure will be employed to speed up the simulation process. The interface
between the Cartesian and prism grid will be treated by conserving mass,
momentum and energy flux on the outer boundary of the prism grid. The overall
algorithm integrates grid generation and flow solver into one complete system to
obtain maximum solution accuracy, efficiency and user friendliness. In Phase I,
the above methodology will be implemented and demonstrated for 2-D viscous flow
problems. Extension to 3-D and moving body problems and implementation in a
commercial code will be made in Phase II.