* 9460097
* Catalytic Oxidation of Chlorofluorocarbons and Related      Compounds for Pollution Abatement Applications
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Joseph Rossin, GUILD ASSOCIATES INC
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 03/31/1996
* USD 71,282.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project investigates the
feasibility of using a novel catalyst to control the release of CFCs
(chlorofluorocarbons) and related compounds into the environment. The release of
CFCs and related compounds is believed to play a significant role in the decline
in the earth's ozone layer. Although the production of CFCs is currently being
phased out, large quantities already exist and must be dealt with. Compounds
intended to replace CFCs, which include HFC (hydrofluorocarbons) and HCFCs
(hydrochlorofluorocarbons), also possess ozone-depleting properties. As a
result, the release of these compounds must also be controlled. Catalytic
oxidation is a technology well suited for controlling vapor phase emissions.
However, catalysts capable of oxidizing CFCs have deactivated rapidly, due
primarily to materials degradation in the harsh acid gas environment. A novel
catalyst was recently identified which was capable of oxidizing fluorine
containing organic molecules without loss of catalytic activity. The objective
of this Phase I proposal is to evaluate this novel catalyst for its ability to
oxidatively destroy CFCs and related compounds in streams of air. To meet this
objective, the catalyst will be evaluated for reactivity and performance
stability against selected CFCs, HFCs, and HCFCs. Tests will be conducted over a
wide range of process conditions so that the performance envelope of the
catalyst may be established. Based on performance data obtained to date, it is
anticipated that the catalyst will oxidize the above compounds without loss of
catalytic activity.