* 9460043
* The Magnetic Turbine; An Energy Recovery Approach to        Extend Electric Vehicle Range
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Donald Breck, ENEX Laboratories
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 02/29/1996
* USD 65,000.00

*** 9460043 Breck A homopolar hybrid magnetic turbine energy recovery dynamo may
significantly reduce armature reaction in generating devices. Its design would
increase voltage for interface with higher voltage systems. This has not been
accomplished commercially in any homopolar energy conversion technique.
Homopolar electrical generating technology is very efficient, but it is
characterized by high amperage at low voltage. Therefore, it is deficient as a
conventional generator due the inability to raise voltage. The heart of the
magnetic turbine system is a low-inertia slave armature of a special design. In
the proposed concept it cannot reciprocate as a motor without changing the
armature design, maximizes voltage stepping with amperage. The turbine design
slaves it the electric car motor. Due to the turbine armature's very low
inertia, the burden to the vehicle motor is very small. As the vehicle motor
rotates, the low-inertia turbine armature spins to high speed from mechanical
advantage, without armature reaction or motor drag, to convert armature
mechanical inertia into electric current that feeds the battery bank
facilitating extended operation. This produces constant real-time generation
when the motor is running in contrast to awkward gyro-effect, inertial flywheels
or to switched reluctance motors on all four wheels of a vehicle that is only
part-time and more costly due to control electronics. Keeping it simple and
reliable is advantageous, especially in the present and future retrofit market.
Phase I will facilitate a working model for evaluation. Phase II would produce a
production prototype for further testing.