* 9460396
* A Fast Hybrid Fourier Real Space Algorithm for Coulomb      Energies
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,05/31/1996
* Benny Johnson, Q-Chem, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 05/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate an
innovative alternate approach to the evaluation of the Coulomb interactions in
large molecules. Recently there has been a rapidly growing interest in Density
Functional Theory (DFT) as a general procedure for predicting physical
properties of molecules, which is relatively inexpensive compared to traditional
correlated methods. For the largest molecular systems whose study is feasible by
the current DFT programs (several hundred atoms), the treatment of the Coulomb
interactions, with its quadratic cost is system size, is computationally
dominant. In order to be able to perform calculations on truly large molecules,
a breakthrough in the scaling of the Coulomb contribution is required. There is
a significant opportunity for considerable advancement beyond current technology
in this area. Recent research in finite-population sampling theory has yielded a
breakthrough method, the QCKR algorithm, which yields the solution to certain
combinatorial problems extremely efficiently relative to standard techniques,
often affording several orders of magnitude improvement. Interestingly, it is
possible to express the Coulomb problem in a form which is closely related to
these combinatorial problems. During the Phase I effort, the QCKR method will be
extended to solve the Coulomb problem, and the potential of the method for
facilitating DFT calculations on very large molecular systems will be assessed.