* 9460668
* In Vitro Culture Technology for the Production of the       Anti-Cancer Algal Natural Product Halomon
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,11/30/1995
* Alexander Leonard, CalBioMarine Technologies Inc Lab
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 11/30/1995
* USD 65,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase-l project seeks to establish a
program to demonstrate the feasibility of in vitro seaweed cell/tissue culture
technology as a viable and effective means of producing research and development
quantities of the high-value anticancer natural product halomon. Halomon is a
powerful cytotoxic natural product compound exhibiting a unique specificity for,
and high activity against certain highly chemoresistant human tumor cell lines.
The compound is not amenable to artificial synthesis in adequate quantities to
support drug development. Furthermore, the only known source is a limited
population of the marine alga Portieria hornemannii from a remote island in the
Philippines. Preclinical development of the compound is currently hampered by
lack of raw material. This proposal details a program for developing an
alternative to wild collections by bringing the alga into cell/tissue culture.
The methods to be used are based on techniques and technologies for in vitro
culture of marine macrophytes and terrestrial plants, as well as plant
biotechnology. Phase l will develop the basic culture protocols for in vitro
maintenance of P. hornemannii, as well as test physiological induction
mechanisms for stimulating secondary metabolite production. In addition, we seek
to perform preliminary experiments on two-phase culture which will significantly
guide the planning of an optimized bioreactor production system to be designed
and built in Phase ll.