* 9460612
* Novel Metal Carbide Substitutes for Platinum Group Metals
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1995,09/30/1995
* Robert Haufler, TDA Research, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1995
* USD 65,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on preparation
of substitutes for scarce, strategically important metals. Platinum group metals
are scarce, expensive, and have a number of desirable properties, resistance to
chemical attack, excellent thermal stability, and excellent electrical
conductivity. Perhaps the most useful property is the ability to catalyze a wide
range of chemical reactions. The members of this group include platinum
($400/oz), ruthenium (($450/oz), rhodium ($1,200/oz), palladium ($400/oz),
osmium ($500/oz), and iridium ($250/oz). The natural sources of these metals are
found almost exclusively in South Africa, Russia, and Canada. Certainly, an
inexpensive material with platinum-like properties that could be made from non-
scarce materials would be of great value. As substitutes for platinum group
metals, TDA proposes to produce and evaluate novel molecular metal carbide
cluster materials. The molecular metal carbides are (MoC4)n and (WC4)m,, where n
= 1 to 4 and m = 1 to 8. While the structures of these species have yet to be
proven, reasonable structures have been proposed for which the Mo and W metal
sites possess d8 electronic configuration (the same as the Platinum Group
metals). In Phase I, TDA will produce test quantities of these materials, and
characterize their ability to act as platinum-like catalysts for a variety of
commercially important reactions.