* 9460114
* Numerical Approach to Computing Nonlinear H-Infinite Control Laws
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Ching-Fang Lin, American GNC Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1996
* USD 74,987.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop an
efficient algorithm for approximately computing nonlinear H( control laws. The
design of a nonlinear H( control law is reduced to solving two Hamilton-Jacobi-
lsaacs (HJI) equations, an extension of the algebraic Ricatti equation. Due to
their nonlinear nature, it is almost impossible to obtain the closed-form
solution of the HJI equations. An innovative algorithm and data structure is
proposed to find a numerical solution of the HJI equations. Assuming the
solution of the HJI equation in the Taylor series form, this algorithm will
obtain the coefficients of the Taylor series by iteratively solving an algebraic
Ricatti equation and a sequence of linear algebraic equations. American GNC
Corporation's approach is the first-ever effort for providing a systematic
procedure to approximately solve the HJI equations. This procedure can be easily
implemented in routine computer languages and software packages. Their approach
may be the only feasible method for making the nonlinear H( control a practical
design tool and can find a wide range of applications for controlling highly
uncertain nonlinear systems such as high performance missile and/or aircraft
systems, high accuracy robot manipulators, and large maneuvering spacecraft. The
effectiveness of the proposed approach will be illustrated by a high performance
missile autopilot design experiment in a real-time control/simulation
environment.