* 9460263
* Optimal Shape Design by the Boundary Contour Method
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1995,06/30/1996
* Yu Mukherjee, DeHan Engineering Numerics
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is concerned with the
development of a next generation Computer Aided Design (CAD) software package
for three-dimensional (3-D) stress analysis and optimal shape design of solid
structural components. Use of CAD software is commonplace throughout the
industrial sector in the US and in other advanced countries. Typically, the main
components of a CAD system are (a) geometric modeler and pre-processor, (b)
computational engine for stress and sensitivity analysis, (c) optimizer, and (d)
post-processor. The finite element method (FEM) is usually the computational
engine. A serious shortcoming of such a system is the need to discretize (mesh)
the entire domain of a 3-D body into (volume) finite elements. This task, which
cannot be efficiently automated for bodies of complex shape, becomes
particularly onerous during optimal shape design when the shape of a body
changes during successive iterations. Also, volume discretization is not
naturally compatible either with solid modeling or with shape design algorithms.
This project proposes the development and use of an entirely new computational
engine - the boundary contour method (BCM). This breakthrough approach only
requires the modeling of the 1-D bounding contours of 2-D surface elements on a
3-D body, thus preserving a seamless geometry interface with a solid modeler.
Automatic meshing, initially and between design iterations, now becomes
straightforward. Also, the approach is extremely efficient since only line
integrals (on the bounding contours of surface elements) need to be numerically
evaluated in the BCM for 3-D problems. Development of the BCM, for stress and
sensitivity analysis, is the main research goal for Phase I. Optimization,
adaptive meshing and development of a data parallel version of the software
package for parallel operation on networked workstations, are planned for Phase
II.