* 9460523
* Fuzzy Logic Controller and Cerebellar Model Arithmetic Computer Neural Networks for Active Vibration Suppression
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/1995,02/29/1996
* Zheng (Jason) Geng, Robotronics Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 02/29/1996
* USD 74,848.00

The primary objective of this proposed work is to study a novel artificial
neural network architecture which synergistically combines the preferred
features of the CMAC (cerebellar model arithmetic computer) neural networks and
the Fuzzy Logic Controller (therefore we called it the Fuzzy-CMAC Neural
Network), and attempt to utilize this novel Fuzzy-CMAC neural network in the
implementation of the real-time learning control systems for active vibration
suppression (AVS) applications. In typical AVS systems, the plants to be
controlled are usually poorly-modeled, complex, highly nonlinear, and non-
deterministic mechanical systems. Robotronics, Inc. believes that the advances
in study of neural networks, especially the novel Fuzzy-CMAC neural network
architecture proposed here, may offer an ideal approach to implement self-
learning nonlinear control resulting in a significant performance improvement in
AVS systems. As two separate control schemes, both CMAC neural networks and
fuzzy logic controllers provide valuable designs for intelligent control
systems. However, there has been no research activity reported so far which
bridge the connection between these two approaches and apply it to the AVS. This
proposed work attempts to establish the relationship between these models from
an architectural viewpoint. Various features of both models are compared and a
Fuzzy CMAC model which combines the desirable features of both models will be
developed. An approach to apply the Fuzzy CMAC to active vibration suppression
is discussed. Preliminary simulation results show very good learning and control
performance. During Phase 1 work, theoretic issues of the Fuzzy-CMAC neural
network architecture will be conducted. The proposed Fuzzy-CMAC active vibration
suppression approach will be verified through nonlinear simulations and will be
implemented using real-time multiple DSP control hardware for experiments. The
results of simulations and real-time experiments to be performed will be
evaluated and compared with those of existing controllers.