* 9460150
* High-Level Specification for the Generation of              Simulation Codes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1995,10/31/1995
* Elaine Kant, SciComp Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anthony A. Centodocati
* 10/31/1995
* USD 63,576.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to simplify the
mathematical modeler's job by providing a very high-level specification language
and implementation system for scientific computing. This project will extend a
prototype that was developed for one application area (wave propagation) and one
class of algorithms (finite difference methods). In this prototype, equations
can be specified in a coordinate-free notation (or by key words in the case of
built-in equation classes). The system's output is a target code, optimized for
the specific problem and platform (in the prototype, Fortran, C, or Connection
Machine Fortran). The modeler can optionally specify choices for the algorithm
method and for initialization and output styles. Specifications can be given
either interactively or in text files; many numerical experiments only require
changing a line in the specification. The system can also generate a convergence
rate test to validate the correctness of the generated program. This main
objective of this research is to develop an algorithm specification language
that enables experts in algorithm design to cleanly and abstractly describe
numerical methods. This language will make the program development approach
extensible to a much wider range of applications. Because the program refinement
process is implemented with objects, program transformations, and symbolic
algebra, the algorithm specifications themselves can be very abstract-for
example, independent of coordinate system, dimensionality, or optimizations.
Other phases of the code generation process will incorporate these refinements.