* 9460176
* Artificial Pinning Center Niobium Titatium Superconductors  with Optimal Overall Compositions
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Jeffrey Seuntjens, Supercon Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 03/31/1996
* USD 74,958.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project develops NbTi
superconductors with artificial pinning centers with an optimal composition in
terms of performance and cost. Supercon has developed a patented and proven
process for the manufacture of NbTi superconductors using an artificial pinning
center approach (APC), which assembles alternate layers of Nb and Ti metals to
form a superconducting filament through partial diffusion of the pure metals. It
allows one to have independent control of the filament effective composition as
well as both the non-superconducting phase (pinning center) thickness and
spacing. Conventional NbTi composite manufacturing uses- Nb-47 wt. % Ti for most
applications. In principle, the Supercon APC approach can fabricate composites
with filaments of almost any effective overall composition. The proximity effect
is thought to limit practical NbTi alloy compositions with industrially useful
Tc and Hc2 to within the range of 40 to 65 wt. % Ti. Most APC conductors
reported in the literature have an overall composition on the Nb rich side of
this range. As a result, the Hc2 is reduced, and the cost of the raw materials
is increased over a conventional alloy. This proposed work builds upon existing
APC manufacture experience at Supercon to optimize new composites with different
filament compositions suitable for specific applied magnetic filed ranges, while
minimizing the Nb content and therefore cost in each case. The technical
objective of the Phase I effort is to understand how independently varying both
the composition (relative Nb and Ti layer thickness) and the second phase volume
fraction (thermal processing conditions) effect the microstructural, mechanical,
and electrical properties (Jc and Hc2) of APC NbTi superconducting composites.