* 9460775
* Growth and Characterization of Lead Tetraborate and         Strontium Tetraborate for UV Modulation
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,11/30/1995
* Ratan Adhav, QUANTUM TECHNOLOGY INC.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 11/30/1995
* USD 65,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on the
development of Pockels transverse type UV modulators from E-O materials of the
borate family. The half-wave voltage decreases as the wavelength is decreased
and the length is increased. It is proposed to demonstrate a UV modulator with a
half-wave voltage of less than 1000 volts at 266nm. UV modulators are required
for high density information storage and retrieval with high resolution. Quantum
Technology (QT) proposes in Phase I to investigate new members of the borate
family, namely Lead Tetraborate (PBO) and Strontium Tetraborate (SBO). These
materials were grown for the first time by Prof. Bruce Chai of the University of
Central Florida Center of Research and Education in Optics and Lasers (CREOL).
These materials have the potential as UV modulators because of their basic
properties: (1) UV transmission down to 130nm (SBO) and 280nm (PBO); (2) high
refractive index; (3) not soluble in water; (4) growth characteristics of
congruent melt, which enables them to be grown by Czochralski method; and (5)
low piezo-electric resonance, typical of the borate family. Large crystals, 8 x
40 x 120nm3, were grown in seven days. The current growth process is not fully
optimized. In the Phase I proposal, QT will investigate the electro-optic
coefficients rc1 and rc2 and measure the parameters of PBO/SBO as a transverse
E-O amplitude modulator in the UV.