* 9460507
* Microwave Plasma Generation of Oxidative Radicals for the   Non-Thermal Destruction and Removal of Hazardous Air        Pollutants
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Bill Wofford, Rf Environmental Systems, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 02/29/1996
* USD 74,602.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes the development
of an innovative air pollution control device for the destruction and removal of
hazardous chemical compounds from industrial stack emissions. Currently, air
pollution control technologies are limited either by cost per pound of pollutant
destroyed (thermal oxidation) or by space requirements (catalytic oxidation).
The proposed process will very efficiently oxidize hazardous air pollutants to
such innocuous by-products as CO2, HCl, and H2O and other easily scrubbed
compounds. These hazardous air pollutants will be oxidized by reaction with
oxidative free radicals which are generated by the application of microwave
radiation and formed in the stack. Radical injection techniques are a promising
strategy for air pollution control and abatement. Phase I will entail the
development of a novel concept: gas phase injection of a single oxidative
chemical radical to completely oxidize halohydrocarbons which are present in the
stack of an actual ground water pump and treat system. A full-scale process
model will be constructed to demonstrate the feasibility of the oxidative
process. Experimental data currently available from the literature and chemical
kinetics calculations show that chemical radical oxidation is a very effective
technique for the complete oxidation of most hazardous air pollutants. Finally,
this experiment will provide critical data such as radical lifetimes, reaction
rates, and control efficiencies which can be used to design a variety of control
systems.