* 9460011
* A Model Based Interactive Graphical Scheduler
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1995,09/30/1995
* Donald Miller, Advanced Process Combinatorics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1995
* USD 52,033.00

Advanced Process Combinatorics, Inc., proposes an interactive scheduling system
which integrates model based optimization with an electronic Gantt chart. This
system (SMART++/IGS) will be a new component for the object-oriented model based
optimization scheduling system, SMART++ (Scheduling and Material Resource
Timing). As such, IGS will be integrated with RCSPec, an existing language for
describing scheduling problems, and MILP++, an existing object-oriented mixed
integer program optimizer. The main defining feature of IGS will be the coupling
of the electronic Gantt chart to the underlying model based optimization
algorithms. Users will be able to add a wide variety of constraints to the
schedule using the graphical user interface. By clicking the mouse on a task in
the Gantt chart the user will be able to fix the execution time, or the place of
a task in a sequence. The optimizer will complete the schedule, building an
optimized schedule around the pieces already specified by the user. In addition
to the obvious advantages of user friendliness, this provides the user with
detailed control over the optimization algorithm. The addition of constraints
(partial schedule specification) will make the optimization problem smaller and
thus, easier to solve. Such user guided problem simplification may be exploited
as a method of rendering difficult problems solvable. This and advances in
optimization algorithms and faster computers offer hope that interactive
scheduling which utilizes rigorous model based optimization will be a
deliverable commercial product in the next few years.