* 9460452
* Computer Simulation of Integrated Optics for the            Analysis and Design of Advanced Devices
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Gregory Wojcik, Weidlinger Associates Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 03/31/1996
* USD 64,953.00

Since the advent of lasers in the early 1960s and their integration into
semiconductor substrates Weidlinger Associates, Inc., has seen traditional
electronic technologies augmented by optical devices; the future will see many
of them supplanted. These new optoelectronic devices are made possible by a
variety of innovative concepts, materials, and designs requiring unprecedented
technical sophistication. Monolithic integration has simplified the process
considerably, by including waveguide routing, grating couplers, 3-D resonators,
and diffractive optics on an IC-like substrate. Digital processor technology is
a natural target for optical augmentation. However, as these devices mature,
conventional experiments and analyses are approaching practical limits of
effectiveness. Comprehensive 2-D and 3-D computer modeling using finite
element/finite difference methods is a viable alternative. Such modeling will
confer a competitive advantage to users and act as a catalyst for new classes of
innovative devices. In Phase I Weidlinger Associates, Inc., will develop a
comprehensive finite element/finite difference simulation system to solve
Maxwell's equations in integrated optoelectronic devices. This will be based on
their existing electromagnetic solver, EMFlex. The immediate need in Phase I
appears to be propagation models for routed waveguides, grating couplers,
tapers, mirrors, and diffractive optics, rather than active devices or nonlinear
models. Their objective is to put this code in the hands of designers and
experimentalists immediately.