* 9460347
* Dynamic Load Balancing for Distributed Finite Element       Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1995,01/31/1996
* Manas Deb, Computational Mechanics Company, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 01/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate
techniques for dynamic load balancing in parallel finite element analyses. The
techniques will be particularly suitable for distributed analyses on
heterogeneous networks. In the area of high performance computing, significant
efforts are underway to effectively use the idle computing power of workstation
networks. One of the key issues in designing algorithms for such systems is that
of load balancing. The proposed project offers to devise techniques for dealing
with this problem. The prevalent balancing methods aim to achieve a balanced
state at discrete instants in time by rebalancing the whole system. This project
will explore methods to maintain a continually (near) balanced state by
exploiting balancing opportunities as and when they occur. Imbalances that occur
in distributed analyses due to the dynamically varying capabilities of
participating processors and nonuniform adaptations of meshes (as a result of
using solution adaptive techniques of analysis) will be dealt with. A two-level
approach is suggested to efficiently correct these imbalances with minimal
communication overhead while maintaining the data locality that is so important
for the efficiency of distributed implementations of finite element type
discretizations.