* 9460479
* On-Line Control of Particulate and Volatile Air Toxic       Emmissions from Thermal Treatment Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1995,01/31/1996
* Chad Nelson, Advanced Fuel Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 01/31/1996
* USD 74,905.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop emission
control strategies based on on-line FT-IR diagnostics and improved combustion
modeling. Many technologies are emerging for improved incineration of hazardous
wastes including turbulent spray flames, spouted bed or fluidized bed
combustors, dump combustors or rotary kilns, and more innovative technologies
such as plasma torch, circulating combustion bed, and solar assisted
incineration. For wastes considered hazardous under RCRA, 99.99% DREs are
required for incineration. Destruction of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are
also covered under the TSCA, requiring 99.9999% DREs. The environmental impact
of thermal destruction systems can be compounded by the fact that thermal
treatment of halogenated wastes may result in the production of secondary wastes
more toxic than the primary waste. In order to properly control the destruction
efficiency of thermal treatment systems and prevent potential environmental
contamination, instrumentation is needed to provide real-time control of
particulate and volatile air toxics. Current analysis methods rely on laboratory
procedures which may take up to two months for results, not providing any
feedback for control or environmental protection. The resulting control system
will be capable of ensuring that regulated DREs are met and environmental health
is protected.