* 9460076
* Molecular Engineering of a Biocatalyst for the              Destruction of Chlorinated Solvents
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Robert Steffan, Envirogen, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 03/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project involves the use of
molecular biological techniques to alter the substrate specificity and activity
of a biological catalysts for destroying a wide variety of recalcitrant
chlorinated solvents. The putative active site of cloned toluene monooxygenase
genes of Pseudomonas mendocina KR1 will be altered by using site directed
mutagenesis so that it more closely resemble that of broad-substrate-specificity
methane monooxygenases. The resulting catalysts will be tested for their ability
to degrade a variety of chlorinated solvents heretofore not degraded by the
wild-type organism. The effect of alterations in the putative oxygen binding
region of the enzyme will also be examined. Chlorinated solvents are the most
widespread and abundant contaminants of the Nation's groundwater and soils, and
many are directly carcinogenic even in small amounts. Moreover, they often occur
as mixtures of chlorinated alkenes, alkanes, and sometimes chloroform. Current
technologies for remediating soils and/or groundwater contaminated with
chlorinated solvents are limited by their high costs or the fact that they often
do not destroy the contaminating chemicals. Biological oxidation of chlorinated
solvents, however, results in the complete destruction of the contaminant, and
degradative microorganisms can be used to destroy contaminants spread over large
areas or trapped in aquifers. Currently available biological catalysts for
destroying chlorinated solvents are somewhat limited by their narrow substrate
ranges, the instability of the degradative enzymes, or inherent properties such
as slow growth or sensitivities to co-contaminants which make their application
commercially impractical. During this project Envirogen, Inc. proposes to use
modern molecular biological techniques to develop biocatalysts which have
improved enzyme substrate specificity's and stability while processing
characteristics such as rapid growth and robustness which make their application
commercially feasible.