* 9460087
* Novel Facilitated Transport Membranes for Olefin            Separation Based on Water-Free Rubbery Polymer              Electrolytes
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,11/30/1995
* Ingo Pinnau, MEMBRANE TECHNOLOGY & RESEARCH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 11/30/1995
* USD 65,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on the
separation of olefins from saturated hydrocarbons. Olefins, including ethylene
and propylene, are produced in larger quantities than any other organic chemical
in the United States. The separation of olefins from saturated hydrocarbons is
currently carried out by distillation, which is an extremely energy-intensive
process due to the very low relative volatilities of the components. Although
polymeric membranes have been applied successfully to a number of gas
separations, including nitrogen production from air and hydrogen removal from
refinery streams, the selectivities and gas fluxes of such membranes are
inadequate for olefin separation from saturated hydrocarbons. Facilitated
transport membranes have higher selectivities and gas fluxes than polymeric
membranes for olefin/paraffin separation. However, three problems have limited
the application of facilitated transport membranes to industrial olefin
separation applications: membrane instability, low gas fluxes, and the
requirement of a water-saturated feed. Membrane Technology and Research, Inc.
(MTR) proposes to develop a new type of solid facilitated transport membrane
with high gas fluxes and high selectivities for the separation of olefins from
saturated hydrocarbons. The membranes will consist of rubbery, polyether-based
polymers that can be doped with a wide range of ionic salts as gas complexing
agents. To provide high gas fluxes, the resulting solid polymer electrolyte will
be formed into a thin-film composite membrane. Preliminary studies at MTR
indicate that polymer electrolyte membranes can show dramatically improved
performance over conventional facilitated transport membranes for
olefin/paraffin separation and can be used with a dry feed.