* 9460802
* An Innovative Concept for a Universal Drill Point Grinder   Based on a Hexapod Mechanism
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Zheng (Jason) Geng, Robotronics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 02/29/1996
* USD 74,850.00

Drilling machines represent about 60% of the total number of cutting tools
throughout the world. The drilling operation generates about three quarters of
all chips made in metal cutting. More than two million holes need to be drilled
in a Boeing 737 aircraft structure. A typical automotive engine plant drills
300,000 holes daily. These simple facts indicate the crucial role that drilling
operation plays in manufacturing. Global competition has increased demands on
U.S. manufacturing sectors to produce high quality products at lower costs.
Therefore, enhancement of drilling efficiency and quality is becoming
increasingly important for U.S. manufacturers to remain competitive.
Robotronics, Inc., proposes to study the feasibility and build a prototype of a
six degree-of-freedom (DOF) universal drill point grinding machine based on the
Hexapod mechanism (also called a Stewart Platform after its original inventor).
The grinding or sharpening of drill points requires a dexterous and high
precision machine tool with great stiffness. While the work envelope required by
the grinding operation is relatively small, a universal drill point grinder
needs to be able to generate motion trajectory with six spatial DOF. The Hexapod
Drill Point Grinder (HDPG) promises a leapfrog advancement in grinding tools
which can significantly improve the quality, efficiency, and precision of
drilling operations. The efficient truss type design of the Hexapod provides the
stiffest mechanical system for a given mass. The hexapod-based machine tool is
fundamentally six DOF, hence it can machine virtually any surface. Stiffness is
increased over its conventional serial counterparts because the loads are
divided among all of the links, and accuracy is increased because leg length
errors tend to average and therefore decrease the final error. The forces
applied to actuators as the result of machining loads are all axial forces
(tension and compression) without any bending moments. A hexapod is mechanically
simpler than an equally capable serial link mechanism. Because of their
mechanical simplicity, Hexapod-based machine tools should be less costly than
conventional machines of the same capability.