* 9460644
* The Mathematician's Sketchpad
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1995,04/30/1996
* William Finzer, Key Curriculum Press
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 04/30/1996
* USD 74,019.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project builds on the success of
The Geometer's Sketchpad(, one of very few pieces of educational software to
have a real effect on the teaching of mathematics in secondary schools. The
proposed research will design and prototype a next generation of this software
--The Mathematician's Sketchpad --an integrated exploratory environment for
algebra and geometry utilizing declarative constraints as a new mathematical
modeling tool. The Geometer's Sketchpad allows users to carry out geometric
constructions using Euclid's compass and straightedge tools augmented by
reflection, rotation, and dilation. At any time, users may drag objects in the
sketch using the computer's mouse, and all of the other objects will dynamically
adjust their position and size to maintain the constructed relationships. This
simple idea has profound implications. The Mathematician's Sketchpad will
incorporate these tools and methods and go beyond them by allowing users to
declare constraints on objects after they have been constructed, and by allowing
algebraic specification of constraints. The revolution in the teaching of
geometry being brought about by The Geometer's Sketchpad, reveals the
opportunity to spread its fundamental ideas of constraint-based modeling and
dynamic dragging to the rest of the secondary mathematics curriculum. The
objectives of this Phase I research project are to design and prototype the
critical elements of The Mathematician's Sketchpad and describe and prototype
the support materials that will ease its introduction into classrooms.