* 9461452
* Dominion:  A Distributed System for Large Scale Decision    Support Applications
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,11/30/1995
* Donald Miller, Advanced Process Combinatorics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 11/30/1995
* USD 60,055.00

Economic pressures and global competition are forcing US manufacturers and
government to make decisions as quickly and cost effectively as possible. Such
decision problems include locating facilities, transporting manpower and
materials , battle strategy analysis, globally coordinating manufacturing, and
molecular design. Advanced Process Combinatorics proposes commercialization of
the distributed decision support system DOMINION, which will make decisions
using rigorous optimization principles rather than rule-based or other heuristic
approaches currently in practice, allowing for the most cost effective decisions
possible. Furthermore, although large decision problems currently require
expensive supercomputers to exploit rigorous optimization technology, DOMINION
will be developed for much lower cost platforms (desktop workstations) in large
number. This will allow organizations without larger scale computers to utilize
their currently installed workstations and networks instead. It further removes
the single point of failure fault from large, time critical computations.
DOMINION will operate by distributing a parallelizable optimization problem
across a heterogeneous, globally distributed network of workstations. Each
computational agent in the distribution is fully capable of solving portions of
the overall problem and dispatching portions of its work to and receiving from
other networked agents. This model, in contrast to the currently popular master-
slave models, is easily scalable to very large networks, and is significantly
more robust to partial network failure. Sales of decision support software
easily range in the hundreds of millions of dollars per year. DOMINION will
augment the current commerical offerings with new capabilities, and allow
optimization of larger decision problems at a much lower cost.