* 9461343
* Polyhenylene Bone Replacements and Supports
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1995,10/31/1995
* Virgil Lee, MAXDEM INC
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 10/31/1995
* USD 64,865.00

Plastics have become commonplace in biomaterial applications. In diverse uses
ranging from intraocular lenses to vascular prostheses, polymers are often the
materials of choice because their unique combination of properties provide
excellent mimics of natural systems. However, plastics have been of limited use
in load-bearing applications (such as bone replacements or supports) because of
their poor mechanical properties. Unfortunately, the metals that are used as
bone substitutes are also not ideal because they are much stronger and stiffer
than natural bone and promote the resorption of surrounding tissue. A family of
substituted poly (para-phenylene) thermoplastics, Poly-Xá, has recently been
developed at Maxdem which offers promise in load-bearing biomaterial
applications. The mechanical properties of these unreinforced polymers are
fortuitously very similar to natural bone materials. In addition, these polymers
feature exceptional scratch resistances that could translate into outstanding
wear properties. Coupling these properties with the facile processing
requirements and potentially low cost of Poly-Xá materials, make these polymers
an exciting alternative for the next generation of load-bearing orthopedic
devices. This proposal addresses preliminary wear and toxicity measurements on
these truly remarkable materials.