* 9461046
* Permeability and Complex Resistivity Measurements for       Determination of Pore Structure in Low Permeability Rocks
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Greg Boitnott, NEW ENGLAND RESEARCH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 02/29/1996
* USD 74,946.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will adapt a new method
for permeability measurement to allow for simultaneous measurements of
electrical resistivity and deformation. Many fundamental bulk properties of rock
such as permeability, electrical resistivity, and elastic constants are highly
dependent on details of the pore structure. Attempts to infer properties such as
permeability from measurements of electrical resistivity and acoustic velocities
(common in borehole geophysics) require a thorough understanding of the inter-
relationships between these and other bulk properties and the underlying pore
structure which controls them. While a number of models have been developed
which predict the inter-relationships between fundamental bulk properties and
pore structure, validation and routine use of these models requires a means of
making a large number of diverse measurements on core in a routine fashion.
Permeability and electrical resistivity are two of the most important properties
for understanding pore structure. While laboratory measurement techniques for
these properties are well developed, simultaneous measurements of permeability
and electrical resistivity have been difficult to perform, inhibiting routine
and integrated measurement. The proposal work will adapt a new method for
permeability measurement in order to construct an apparatus for routine and
automated measurement of permeability, specific storage, electrical resistivity,
and deformation. The apparatus and technique to be developed will be well suited
for routine measurements as well as experimental studies of pore structure and
its relationship to the fundamental bulk properties of rock.