* 9461878
* Application of Induction Accelerators for Electron Beam     Radiolysis of Contaminated Water
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,03/31/1996
* James Moran, Science Research Laboratory Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 03/31/1996
* USD 74,908.00

There is currently an active interest in the development of improved methods to
decontaminate and disinfect waste water. Direct electron beam irradiation is
attractive since radical formation and attack on contaminants is energy
efficient and relatively nonselective. Effective decontamination has been
demonstrated with an energy investment well below 1.0 MRads. Although various
electron accelerators have been applied, large scale implementation has been
impeded by excessive size, initial cost, reliability, or scaleability. Induction
accelerator technology as developed at Science Research Laboratory (SRL) offers
the promise to surmount these limitations. The objective of this effort is to
develop a new, low cost and reliable process for decontamination of process and
wastewater using linear induction accelerator technology. Electron beams are
produced with the SRL accelerator in a compact configuration which employs the
reliability of all-solid-state switching to provide high average power through
high pulse rate. Preliminary tests at SRL at 1.2 MeV electron energy have shown
effective and efficient destruction of organic contaminants in water. The
proposed Phase I work will expand these data to a wider range (1-1000 ppm) in
initial concentrations, and a wider range (0.05-6.0 MRads) in dosage to provide
a basis for system conceptual design, optimization and costing. In addition,
since peak dose rate for induction accelerators is higher (100-1000 times) than
rates delivered by electrostatic accelerators, this parameter will be varied to
seek potential further improvement in system efficiency. The existing SNOMAD-IV
induction accelerator at SRL with recent upgrade to 1.5 MeV will be used in this
effort. This system has been coupled to a flowing contaminated water system to
provide a unique facility for the proposed research.