* 9461708
* Yttrium Barium Copper Oxide Thin Film for Microwave         Communications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1995,09/30/1995
* Albert Cardona, SUPERCONDUCTOR TECHNOLOGIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1995
* USD 64,942.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project outlines a program to
determine the physical origins of the degradation in performance of thin-film
high-temperature superconductor (HTS) rnicrowave devices with increasing power.
The most promising application for thin-film HTS is high-frequency signal
processing. Passive microwave devices such as resonators, filters, and delay
lines fabricated from YBa2Cu3O7-x (YBCO) thin films and operated at 77K have
shown dramatically improved performance over conventional materials. However,
signal power levels transmitted through these devices are on the order of only
10 milliwatts. Most commercial applications, in particular cellular
communications, require signal processing with power levels exceeding 10 watts.
The performance of even the very highest quality thin-film superconductors
degrades dramatically at only 5 watts of input power! High quality, epitaxial
YBCO films will be grown by laser ablation with deliberately altered
microstructural characteristics, such as improved epitaxy, chemical dopants and
enhanced grain boundaries; then the resulting films will be characterized by
patterning into microstrip resonators to evaluate their microwave performance at
77K. These results will allow the Phase II effort to focus on the most promising
methods for scale-up and circuit fabrication.