* 9461685
* Channel Hopping for Increased Capacity on Combined Cellular Voice and Packet Radio Networks
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Jay Jacobsmeyer, Pericle Communications Company
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 03/31/1996
* USD 74,653.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project investigates the
performance and feasibility of a channel-hopping packet radio-base station. In
the United States, a consortium of cellular service providers is building a
nationwide mobile data network called Cellular Digital Packet Data (CDPD). By
using existing 30 kHz radio frequency channels, CDPD provides a mobile data
overlay on the existing cellular voice system. To exploit unused capacity, CDPD
hops between idle voice channels. Base stations currently under development scan
the available frequencies and select the idle channel that is expected to remain
idle for the maximum length of time. This approach is far from optimal because
it does not address co-channel interference effects. To improve throughput of
hopping data channels, the base station should select the idle channel with the
least co-channel interference. By doing so, a packet radio system can
theoretically increase throughput by a factor of five. This project presents
many technical challenges, including the need for a 12.5 MHz-wide digital
receiver capable of acquiring and processing channel data in less than 10
milliseconds. The research objectives of this project are to demonstrate a
factor of four improvement in throughput in Rayleigh fading, determine
estimation accuracy, determine the impact of implementation losses, determine
the performance of multiple hopping channels, and investigate efficient spectral
estimation techniques.