* 9461465
* Evidence of Reductive Dechlorination and Mineralization of  Lower Chlorinated Biphenyls by Anaerobic Microbial Consortia
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1995,09/30/1995
* Murugiah Natarajan, Grand River Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1995
* USD 64,913.00

Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are widespread priority toxic pollutants, which
are persistent in the environment and tend to bioaccumulate. Phase I of this
project will undertake studies to investigate the reductive dechlorination and
mineralization of lower chlorinated PCB-defined congeners by anaerobic microbial
consortia developed in Grand River Technologies, Inc. laboratory. In the past,
reductive dechlorination processes have resulted in the accumulation of ortho-
chlorinated congeners. Their current investigations have indicated that the MBI
anaerobic granules are capable of dechlorinating all substitutions of chlorines
from PCB mixtures and congeners. Higher chlorinated congeners were dechlorinated
extensively, but accumulation of corresponding lightly chlorinated products was
not seen in these studies. Accumulation of biphenyl as an intermediate or end
product was inconsistent and thus, it is difficult to calculate a material
balance. These results are intriguing since it is widely accepted that lower
chlorinated biphenyls and biphenyl do not undergo further dechlorination and
mineralization anaerobically. Since their results strongly indicate that process
exists, they intend to obtain evidence to prove it. Further if that is happening
then they want to understand the primary mechanism for it. Under Phase I of this
proposal, the fate of 2-Chlorobiphenyl, 2,6-Dichloribiphenyl and Biphenyl, and
their 14C-labeled isotopes will be examined with their anaerobic microbial
consortia under different conditions. Enzymatic evidence will also be sought to
determine the mechanism of ring cleavage under anaerobic condition. The ultimate
strategy will be to utilize these anaerobic consortia to develop an in situ
bioremediation process to treat PCB-contaminated lake or river sediments. This
project will be the first demonstration of complete dechlorination and
mineralization of PCBs by anaerobic microbial consortia.