* 9461370
* Nonlinear Wavelet Tools for Noisy and Indirect Data
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,11/30/1995
* Andrew Bruce, Insightful Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 11/30/1995
* USD 64,645.00

The wavelet transform is an important new tool which has made a huge impact on a
variety of important problems. For example, wavelets have been successfully
applied to data compression problems. What makes wavelets good for data
compression is also what makes wavelets good for statistical estimation.
Wavelets and associated ideas have the potential to make a huge contribution to
problems in involving noisy and indirect observations. StatSci Division,
MathSoft, Inc. proposes to develop a collection of statistical techniques based
on the principle of wavelet shrinkage. Wavelet shrinkage refers to estimations
obtained by taking the wavelet transformation, followed by shrinking the
empirical wavelet coefficients towards zero, followed by inverse transformation.
These techniques will be bundled in an object-oriented software toolkit. The
research plan is divided into four components: (1) a wavelet shrinkage advisor
to help sift through the myriad of techniques, (2) a suite of diagnostics and
remedies to diagnose and fix common problems, (3) new wavelet shrinkage
algorithms, (4) new statistical theory behind wavelet shrinkage. The tools
developed in their research will apply to a wide variety of statistical and
scientific problems, including signal extraction, nonparametric regression,
density estimation, inverse problems, image reconstruction and enhancement,
change-point analysis, and analysis of massive datasets.