* 9461103
* Fuel Cell Proton Exchange Membrane
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Shyam Argade, Technochem Company
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 02/29/1996
* USD 65,000.00

9461103 Argade Proton exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) power sources
utilizing hydrogen and oxygel can be used for many applications. So far, most of
the fuel-cell power plants are based on alkaline or phosphoric acid fuel cells.
Conventional polymeric proton exchange membrane fuel cells offer a number of
advantages, but require water management to maintain good performance. If proton
exchange membranes are available which can operate near 200 degrees Celsius, it
will lead to a significant technological breakthrough in terms of reliability,
improved energy efficiency, and lower cost. Reduced platinum catalyst loading or
use of non-precious metal catalysts, and most importantly alleviation of water
management problems, will lead to a compact, lower weight fuel cell system using
high-temperature PEMs. Thermal management of the system will also be easier due
to the higher operating temperature, an important consideration for many
applications. The proposed Phase I program will focus on novel inorganic proton
exchange materials with stable crystal structures to very high temperatures and
demonstration of the feasibility of a water/oxygen fuel cell based on a membrane
made from these materials. The Phase II program is projected to concentrate on
scale up of the processes of membrane preparation, methanol/air fuel cell
development, system considerations and long term performance evaluation.
Successful development of this technology will be most useful for improvement of
energy recovery from coal via the methanol route.