* 9461528
* Enhanced Fuel Cell Power with Oxygen Enriching Membranes
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Stuart Nemser, COMPACT MEMBRANE SYSTEMS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 03/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project provides a valuable
solution to power limitations of electric vehicles. Electric vehicles (EV)
powered by fuel cells (FC) have appeal related to their high efficiency, low
pollution levels and minimum number of moving parts. A major limitation of FC is
their limited power. Historically oxygen based FC have increased power by
increasing system pressure and oxygen partial pressure. This pressure process
consumes significant energy and causes weight and design problems. The major
limitation in using oxygen enriched air (OEA) from membranes for increasing
oxygen partial pressure is that no compact OEA systems exists. Our high oxygen
permeable perfluoropolymer membranes dramatically improve oxygen flux
capability. They will supply compact OEA (30-35% oxygen) membrane systems for
enhanced FC power. Engineering studies indicate our perfluoromembrane systems
are 30 times more productive than existing membranes and can boost power 50%
with significantly less weight than lead-acid batteries. Phase I focuses on
proof of concept by developing the needed thin film composite hollow fiber
structure to demonstrate high flux and doing engineering evaluations on the
overall system. Phase II will focus on developing expanded area prototype
membrane modules and running actual FC tests.