* 9461125
* Sensor Fusion for Advanced Copper Metallization Cluster     Tool
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Yong Lee, CVC Products Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 02/29/1996
* USD 64,958.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project involves the development
of sensor fusion strategy and algorithm for an advanced copper metallization
cluster tool for high performance on-chip interconnect. A growing number of low
cost in-situ sensors are available to measure the various process parameters in
a single wafer rapid thermal processor. In order to meet the increasingly
stringent process control requirements for sub-half micron semiconductor
technologies, development of the physical sensors as well as the ability to
manage and interpret the increasingly larger number of sensor data are needed.
The proposed SBIR Phase I project addresses the issue of intelligent integration
and interpretation of sensor data. The sensor fusion algorithm will be applied
to CVC Products' advanced copper metallization cluster tool which consists of 4
cluster modules (ICP, collimated PVD, MOCVD, RTP/.RTCVD). Sensor fusion
technology is a key enabler of the copper metallization technology which is
expected to play a strategic role in 0.25um semiconductor technologies and
beyond. The sensor fusion algorithm will be developed based on a set of real
time and pre/post process sensors that have been developed and verified during
the Texas Instruments/ARPA/Air Force MMST program. Additionally, CVC's
proprietary sensors as well as commercially available sensors will be used as
inputs to the sensor fusion algorithm.