* 9461490
* Insect Larvae as Natural Factories for Production of        Recombinant Proteins
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Marjorie Wier, Biotechnology Transfer Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 03/31/1996
* USD 74,983.00

Genetic engineering techniques have been used to produce proteins with modified
functions and to isolate proteins that are difficult to purify from natural
sources. The most commonly used technology, based on expression in prokaryotic
cells, is not satisfactory in all cases because the proteins are not
appropriately modified and are often produced in relatively insoluble forms. The
baculovirus expression system has been used as an alternative because insect
cells infected with baculovirus vectors produce proteins that are post-
translationally modified and that are expressed in high levels in the
appropriate cell compartment. In addition, large DNA fragments have been
successfully incorporated into baculovirus vectors. The complexity of the
culture conditions for insect cells and the requirements for specialized
equipment for scale-up have limited the application of this technology. An
inexpensive and relatively simple alternative is to produce the recombinant
protein in insect larvae. While this method has been used in research
laboratories to generate recombinant proteins, the potential for use in large-
scale manufacturing has not been demonstrated. Biotechnology Transfer, Inc.
proposes to examine the technical, operational, and economic feasibility of
using the insect larval system for expression of a lymphokine using a
baculovirus expression system. The gene for IL-2 will be cloned into baculovirus
and the recombinant virus fed to larvae. The protein will be purified using ion
exchange and immunoaffinity chromatography, and characterized biochemically and
functionally. Finally, issues of reproducibility and scale-up will be examined.