* 9461730
* Application of Stochastically Distributed Field Emission    Microstructures for High Performance Electron Sources
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,11/30/1995
* Zirao Zheng, SI Diamond Technology, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 11/30/1995
* USD 64,921.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the
feasibility of application of stochastically distributed microstructures for
high performance field emission electron sources. At the present, the state-of-
the-art high-current cathodes employ microfabricated field emitters that feature
submicron tips with a packing density of the order of 10 7 / cm 2 and are
capable of delivering a peak current density on the order of 1000 A/cm 2.
However, the arrays of miniaturized field emitters require rather complicated
and expensive processes to produce, hampering proliferation of electron sources
based on these structures. This proposal describes a novel technique that has
the potential to break through the current maximum output current density while
significantly reducing the fabrication cost. Inexpensive templates that are
commercially available will be used to fabricate stochastically distributed
microstructures in a simple electrochemical process. The technique permits
significantly higher packing density of field emission sites and larger active
field emission area per microstructure, compared with the conventional microtip
array cathode. The simplicity of this technique makes it a very promising
approach for the fabrication of commercially viable high performance and broad-
area cathodes.