* 9461758
* High-Efficiency Silicon-Based Visible Light Emitting Diodes
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1996
* Nader Kalkhoran, Spire Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 01/31/1996
* USD 64,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project proposes to investigate
the fabrication of high-efficiency Si-based visible light emitting diodes
(LEDs). These LEDs will be built using Spire's recently discovered method for
making efficient contacts to porous silicon by in-situ electropolymerization. In
this method, the contact layer is deposited on the entire sponge-like surface of
porous silicon in the same hydrofluoric (HF) acid solution used to anodize Si-
substrates and form porous layers. By in-situ deposition, the active and fragile
Si nanostructures are never exposed to air and, therefore, are not oxidized
before contact formation. This clean, simple, and low-cost process for
conductive contact formation can effectively eliminate the most serious problem
currently preventing the fabrication of an efficient solid-state
electroluminescent device based on porous silicon. In Phase I, we will
investigate fabrication of two different types of junction LEDs based on in-situ
electropolymerized coating of porous silicon. In one device, a heterojunction
LED will be formed between an electropolymerized p-type layer and n-type porous
silicon film. The second device will consist of a homojunction PN silicon
structure with an electropolymerized ohmic contact on top. Phase II will
optimize the parameters for fabrication of these LEDs and demonstrate working
prototypes worthy of commercialization.