* 9461499
* Cone Penetrometer Membrane Inlet
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,11/30/1995
* John Schmidt, Environmental Technologies Group Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 11/30/1995
* USD 63,718.00

This Small Business Innovation Research project will demonstrate a novel
membrane inlet for cone penetrometers instrumented for chemical detection in
soil and groundwater. Cone penetrometers are now used to understand site geology
at remediation sites. Cone penetrometers equipped with chemical sensors will
reduce site remediation costs by allowing the currently required geophysical
stuty to be combined with a chemical survey. This will minimize the number of
expensive wells required. Further, chemical analyses, now routinely done in the
laboratory at significant expense, will be done in the field. Field engineers
will be able to make remediation decisions in real time at minimum cost. Recent
efforts to instrument cone penetrometers have used large sophisticated laser
systems which send light underground through fiber optic cable and return the
signal to the surface for analysis. These systems can cost $250,000. This
research will develop a membrane inlet for cone penetrometers which will make it
possible to instrument a cone penetrometer with inexpensive, in-situ, chemical
vapor sensors with a projected system cost of under $10,000. The phase I
objective is to demonstrate a membrane inlet in the laboratory with typical
chemicals found in remediation sites. The overall program objective is to built
and demonstrate a fully operational cone penetrometer system at two remediation
sites.