* 9461791
* An Antimonide Strained Quantum Well Laser                   Operating at Lambda &amp;gt; Micrometer
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1995,06/30/1996
* Eric Forsythe, NEI CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 06/30/1996
* USD 74,991.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate
feasibility of development of laser diodes by MBE, operating in the mid-infrared
(MIR) range ((&gt;6ªm) using the InGaAsSb/AlGaAsSb strained quantum well (QW)
structure. The development of our MIR laser structures serves a variety of dual-
use applications having immediate use in molecular spectroscopy, remote sensing,
as well as in optical fiber telecommunications and laser radar systems. The
emitting wavelengths are extendible to cover the 6-ªm range. Structured
Materials Industries, Inc.'s laser diode is constructed with three regions. In
the middle is the active region where undoped AlGaAsSb layers confine the
InGaAsSb QWs. The active region is sandwiched by two heavily doped AlGaAsSb
cladding layers which form a pn junction and provides the optical confinement.
In Phase 1, the laser structure will be grown InP substrates with a buffer layer
to which the AlGaAsSb layers are lattice-matched. Using InP substrates with a
buffer layer has demonstrated advantages over GaSb and InAs for the antimonides.
They anticipate a major increase in laser wavelength by the use of strained QW
structures as compared to conventional antimonide based QW or double
heterostructure (DH) lasers. The modification of the density of states in QWs
associated with the quantum effects can result in lower threshold current and
reduced temperature sensitivity. They will study strain and quantum effects as
well as the Auger recombination process, an important nonradiative mechanism in
low bandgap materials, in order to optimize their laser design. In Phase I,
their design will be implemented, characterized and compared to the model. The
Phase I effort will create a firm base for the further development in Phase II.
The strained QW approach chosen will allow them to develop this material to
cover the laser wavelength range from 6 to 10ªm in later Phases. The growth,
processing and packaging capability will be refined and a distributed feedback
mechanism will be implemented to improve the mode selectivity for single mode
operation in Phase II in order to produce lasers suitable for military and
commercial applications. They will also implement the lasers in IR spectroscopic
Trace Gas Concentration Monitoring and Analysis system.