* 9461681
* Efficient Electrical Impedance Tomography Software Based on the Dual Reciprocity Boundary Element Methods
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Ramani Duraiswami, Dynaflow Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 03/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Phase I Research project will develop efficient
computational algorithms that will enable accurate imaging using Electrical
Impedance Tomography (EIT) for both two-dimensional (2-D) and three-dimensional
(3-D) applications in medicine and industry. EIT attempts to determine the
distribution of electrical conductivity inside objects by applying specified
currents at their surface, and measuring the voltage induced there. In
comparison to other imaging methods, if successful, EIT offers significant
advantages in economy, convenience, and safety for a wide variety of clinical
and industrial applications. While much progress in experimental EIT techniques
and in the mathematical modeling of EIT have been made, it remains restricted to
laboratory situations and imaging objects in 2-D. The chief stumbling block to
extending EIT to practical situations appears to be the lack of efficient
algorithms that can perform accurate inversion of data. Conventional inversion
algorithms in EIT are based on either heuristic techniques that are only
applicable to 2-D ring-like geometries, or on full numerical solution using
Finite Elements. In the proposed research the much more computationally
efficient Boundary Element Method (BEM) will be extended to EIT by using new
algorithms that use dual reciprocity techniques. These algorithms will allow
efficient imaging in complicated 2-D and 3-D geometries and will significantly
reduce problem size, avoid cumbersome grid/mesh generation, and offer order of
magnitude speed-up. Phase I research will develop the numerical algorithms and
software for inverting EIT data using Dual Reciprocity BEM. The software
developed will be tested on analytically generated forward problem data. Phase
II will develop algorithms in the develop a prototype EIT system using and
further refining the Phase I algorithm. Phase III will commercialize the
developed system and software.