* 9461950
* A Water Treatment System Based on the Electrochemical       Synthesis of Oxidants
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,11/30/1995
* Oliver Murphy, Lynntech Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 11/30/1995
* USD 65,000.00

This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research proposal concerns the
development of a new process for destroying unwanted byproducts and
environmental pollutants in water using ozone and hydrogen peroxide. There is
continuing and increasing interest in the use of these chemical oxidants in
industrial and environmental practices. The proposed research involves the
paired electrochemical synthesis of both ozone and hydrogen peroxide in a single
electrochemical reactor. The benefits of combining these two reactions are: (1)
lower operating costs, as two oxidizing agents can be obtained for the price of
one; (2) the elimination of the need for transportation and storage of hydrogen
peroxide which can be generated on demand; (3) both oxidants together provide
enhanced oxidation capabilities over the use of either oxidant alone; (4)
aqueous phase ozone concentrations that can be generated electrochemically
significantly exceed those obtainable by conventional methods of ozone
generation; (5) electrochemical ozone generation requires simplified equipment
compared to the conventional method of ozone generation allowing compact modular
design for easier on-site installation and transportation between treatment
sites. Synthesizing ozone and hydrogen peroxide in a single reactor is a
considerable challenge because each requires fundamentally distinct reaction
conditions. The proposed research addresses these difficulties through the
development of a new type of electrochemical cell.