* 9461119
* New Microwave Dielectric  Ceramic Materials
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,11/30/1995
* Scott Swartz, Mission Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 11/30/1995
* USD 64,943.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project will address the
synthesis and processing of ceramic materials for microwave dielectric
resonators used in mobile telephones and other telecommunications applications.
Mission Research Corporation (MRC) proposes to conduct research on a new family
of bismuth-based dielectric materials, with potential for reducing the size of
ceramic resonators while improving resonator performance. These new dielectric
ceramics also can be sintered at low temperature, thus allowing low-cost
multilayer device fabrication and eventual integration into co-fired microwave
integrated circuitry. In previous research, MRC identified a family of bismuth-
based ceramic compositions that offer high permittivity, low microwave
dielectric loss, and temperature-compensation of the resonant frequency. These
properties are desired for the dielectric resonators used in mobile telephones.
The primary objective of this Phase I project is to establish compositions and
processing methods that provide low microwave dielectric loss in high-
permittivity and temperature-stable dielectric ceramics. In this project,
several ceramic compositions will be prepared and evaluated. The effects of
composition and ceramic processing on the crystal chemistry, dielectric
properties, and microwave dielectric loss of these ceramics will be determined.
At the conclusion of this Phase I project, the feasibility of using these new
dielectric ceramics in microwave dielectric resonator devices will be
established. The Phase I research will provide a basis for further compositional
and processing optimization and prototype resonator fabrication in Phase II.