* 9461760
* Understanding Physical Property Variation in Vapor-Grown    Carbon Fibers
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,05/31/1996
* Ronald Jacobsen, APPLIED SCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 05/31/1996
* USD 74,089.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to identify and
eliminate the sources of defect formation in a novel graphitic fiber called
Vapor Grown Carbon Fiber (VGCF). VGCF possesses engineering properties that
equal or greatly exceed other types of carbon fiber, as well as metals.
Additionally, VGCF can be produced in a simple, rapid and inexpensive chemical
vapor deposition (CVD) process, thus holding potential to greatly reduce the
cost of high performance carbon fiber reinforcements. However, the usefulness of
VGCF is currently limited by batch-mode production which yields a large
variation in physical properties both within the batch, as well as between
batches. Consequently, the fibers are not sufficiently predictable to commit to
critical engineering applications. The proposed research effort will seek to
identify the source of variations in fiber quality, and to eliminate the
variations through refinements in the CVD process. Specifically, this effort
will investigate the relationship between variation in fiber properties and the
occurrence of a particular morphological feature of the fibers called
crenulations, and then determine those process variables whose careful control
will best narrow the range of values of the fiber properties. Optimization of
these variables and development of techniques to better control them, especially
during higher volume production, will be the intended focus of the associated
Phase II effort.