* 9461530
* Amorphous Silicon Carbide Thin Film Photovoltaic Cells      by the Sol-Gel Process
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1995,12/31/1995
* Cheng-Jye Chu, CHEMAT TECHNOLOGY INC
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 12/31/1995
* USD 65,000.00

The sol-gel process for thin film has been proved to be a low cost and high
productivity technique, which also provide many advantages like no limitation on
size and shape of the coating substrates, simple process and molecular level
tailoring of composition and properties. Amorphous and microcrystalline SiC thin
films were also prepared from polycarbosilane (PCS) by the sol-gel process.
Preliminary results showed that n-type and p-type SiC can be prepared by using
doped polycarbosilane (PCS) with good electrical and optical properties. Heat-
treatment in hydrogen can drastically decrease the defect concentration of the
sol-gel derived silicon carbide. Therefore, device quality hydrogen-induced
silicon carbide thin film can be apply on PV cells application. Transparent
conductive electrode (ATO, ITO) can also be fabricated by the sol-gel process,
which can further decrease the manufacture cost of the PV cells. In this
proposal, sol-gel derived hydrogen-induced silicon carbide thin films PV cells
has been proposed PV solar cell consist p-i-n layers of hydrogen-induced
amorphous or microcrystalline silicon carbide will be prepared on low cost
(stainless steel) substrate by the sol-gel process. The transparent conductive
electrode will be prepared by their proprietary polymeric oxoalkoxide using the
sol-gel process. The PV cells derived from the sol-gel process can be expected
to have reasonable conversion efficiency with much lower manufacturing cost than
the existing process techniques. Large-scale utilization of solar power can be
achieved. More applications on electroptical device are expected from this
hydrogen-induced amorphous silicon carbide thin film.