* 9461520
* Monte Carlo Simulation - A Design Tool for Fine Grain       Investment Casting
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Carl Jaske, Cortest Columbus Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 03/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

The proposed SBIR Phase I project will develop a software design tool that will
be used in advanced materials processing to predict the grain structure of
materials. This is a very important tool with wide commercial and technical
value. Grain structure is a primary factor in materials properties and must be
carefully considered in almost all materials processing applications. The advent
of easy access to advanced computing power such as engineering workstations has
made it possible to use computer simulation in engineering design. The design of
materials through computer simulation is now at hand. The proposed research will
use a coupled heat flow and Monte Carlo simulation of fine grain, superalloy,
investment casting to demonstrate the feasibility of such an approach to
materials processing design. The simulation program will be developed from work
previously supported by the NSF and reported in the literature.
Commercialization of the research will seek application to a wide range of
materials processes where grain structure is of critical importance. The
successful completion of this project will make US industry more productive and
competitive in the area of advanced materials processing. A representative of
the advanced materials processing industry, Howmet Corporation, is participating
in this project.