* 9461386
* New Resonance Technique for Measuring High Temperature      Superconductor Electronic Structures
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Jon Spijkerman, Ranger Scientific Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 03/31/1996
* USD 72,790.00

Among the isotopes used in Mossbauer spectroscopy (MS), 67Zn has the highest
energy resolution (5 x 10-16 ) and an extreme sensitivity for the measurements
of hyperfine interactions, to determine the electric field gradient (EFG) tensor
and internal magnetic field at the nucleus. The distribution of charges between
lattice sites can then be calculated from the EFG. Since 67Cu is a source for
67Zn MS, the technique has been used to study high Tc superconductors. With the
use of emission MS, the superconductor is doped with 67Cu, and it is known
precisely where the 67Zn daughter is formed in the crystal structure. The
difficulty in obtaining 67Zn spectra, with line widths of 0.31 microns/sec, and
the poor signal/noise, has limited the use of this technique to a few
laboratories. A new type Mossbauer Spectrometer is needed and has been designed
based on an experiment by Grodzins and Phillips. Rather than moving a source or
absorber, as has been done with a conventional Doppler velocity modulation
spectrometer, the optical ((-ray) path is changed as a function of time. This is
achieved by moving a plastic wedge, or a plastic wheel at an angle to the drive
shaft in the (-ray beam. For 67Zn, a shift of one line width corresponds to a
rotation of 100 RPM. In this technique, the source and the absorber can be
rigidly mounted together and virtually eliminate any vibrational noise. The
signal to noise in MS can be greatly improved with the use of a resonant
detector. These detectors have been developed for 57Fe, 119Sn and 151Eu. 67Zn is
an ideal candidate. Resonant detectors make use of the conversion electrons that
compete with the (-ray emission after the resonant absorption. The conversion
electrons are detected by an organic plastic scintillator filled with a 67Zn
enriched inorganic absorber placed in contact with a photomultiplier. The only
significant noise parameter is the photoelectric effect, but for Zn this cross
section is 103 times smaller. Even with a recoil free fraction of only 2%, the
net gain is a factor of 20.