* 9461019
* Crosslinked Enzyme Crystals Deposited on Surfaces as a      Novel Type of Catalyst for Large Scale Chemical Processing
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,11/30/1995
* Alexey Margolin, Altus Biologics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 11/30/1995
* USD 65,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project deals with the
development of a new type of biocatalysts by crystallization of enzymes on solid
supports. Enzyme-catalyzed processes offer significant advantages over
traditional chemical methods in organic syntheses, including superior
efficiency, stereoselectivity and specificity. Yet, despite this enormous
potential of enzymatic catalysis only a tiny portion of enzymes is used in the
synthesis of fine chemicals or pharmaceuticals on an industrial scale. There are
three major problems that preclude wider acceptance of enzymes as practical
catalysts: enzymes are not stable enough, enzymes are fairly expensive, and in
some cases - and this is especially important for the chiral resolutions-
enzymes stereoselectivity is not high enough. Altus Biologics, Inc. believes
that all these problems can be successfully addressed by using Cross-Linked
Enzyme Crystals (CLECs). So far CLECs (microcrystals of 1-100 (m) have
demonstrated excellent performance characteristics in the synthesis of optically
pure compounds on a lab scale. Further scale-up of chemical processes (1-1000
kg) will require larger catalyst particles ( 1mm) which will be mechanically
stable in both stir-tank and column reactors. To solve these problems
researchers propose to design new catalysts by crystallization of enzymes onto
solid supports with the following chemical crosslinking of the crystals. CLECs
deposited onto solid surfaces (CLEC-SS) will offer significant advantages in the
large-scale chemical processing. In this Phase I study, candida rugosa lipase
(CRL) will be crystallized on the surface of glass beads and the properties of
the catalyst will be thoroughly investigated.