* 9461350
* The Selective Removal of Selenium from Contaminated Waters
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Kevin Gleason, TDA Research, Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 03/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the problem of
selenium contaminated waters. Selenium is presently the primary water treatment
challenge for many West Coast petroleum refineries and irrigated farm lands.
Selenium can be found in refinery process streams at levels up to 5 mg/L with
flowrates reaching 1000 gallons per minute. Similarly, in the Westlands Water
District alone, there is a current need for the disposal of 2 million gallons
per day of agricultural drainage water with selenium concentrations reaching 0.5
mg/L. Because of its known toxicity and suspected carcinogenicity, the discharge
limits as set by the Clean Water Act are very low (0.260 mg/L maximum, 0.035
mg/L continuous for selenium). The California discharge standards allow
effluents to contain no more than 0.05 mg/L selenium. Processes developed for
selenium removal from drinking water (anion exchange and activated alumina) are
too expensive for the treatment of industrial wastewaters. In particular, these
processes are appropriate for small volumes of water with low levels of
dissolved and suspended solids. These processes are only feasible when competing
anions such as sulfates or carbonates are absent. Therefore, TDA Research
proposes to develop a new specialty extractant to remove selenium from
contaminated water streams. In Phase I we will synthesize novel metal-chelating
ligands capable of selectively extracting heavy metal anions, like selenium, in
the presence of common but non-hazardous anions such as sulfate, carbonate, and
chloride. We will then conduct experiments to demonstrate their ability to
selectively extract selenium over competing anions like sulfates.