* 9461091
* Novel Aerogel-Filled Diffractive Optical Elements
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Donald Thornton, Advanced Environmental Research Group Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 03/31/1996
* USD 74,753.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project describes how one can
protect the grooves of the microscopic surface relief pattern in optical
diffractive elements by filling them with aerogel, a very fine quartz foam,
which protects the grooves against dust and grease and thereby improves the
usefulness of various types of these optical diffractive elements by saving them
from severely degraded optical performance. In applications of coherent optics,
the use of optical diffractive elements is spreading rapidly and they are even
important in certain non laser devices. This project combines two recent
material technologies and applies them to two important national needs, one of
which is energy savings in buildings through innovative window designs, the
other is to develop novel optical devices to be used in laser devices. The
diffractive structures for windows (when eventually manufactured industrially in
large sheets) would be placed in contact with the upper part of a window.
Sunlight incident from the southeast, south, or southwest on the structure is
diffracted with high efficiency towards the ceiling and from there shines
downwards into dark corners, so called `daylighting.` The role of the aerogel is
to fill the delicate diffractive grooves and thus protect them against damage
from handling and against dust accumulation. The flat aerogel film would further
improve thermal insulation and could also serve as a substrate for deposition of
heat (infrared) reflecting layers. In that case, the structure would combine the
function of daylighting (redirecting of incident light) with keeping out heat
rays (low-E glazing) and be thermally insulating. Aerogel is the optimal
material to combine with the diffractive plastic for various reasons: 1) Its
refractive index is very close to that of air, which is essential in maintaining
large efficiency over a wide range of incident angles as will be elaborated on
later. 2) Aerogel is optically quite transparent, particularly in a thin layer.
3) Aerogel is lightweight and has recently been deposited in micron thick films.
4) The trapped air gives aerogel very excellent thermal insulating properties.