* 9461303
* Processing of Bimetallic Centrifugal Cast Cylinders Using   Aluminum Matrix Silicon Carbide Particulate Composite
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1995,01/31/1996
* Mouli Vaidyanathan, Schevers Laboratories Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 01/31/1996
* USD 49,000.00

The development of new metal matrix composite materials such as the aluminum
matrix silicon carbide particulate composite, has provided substantially
improved materials for corrosion and wear resistant applications. This is
especially true in the food and plastic processing industries, where, wear and
corrosion resistance and thermal conductivity are important. The present
industry standard is chrome plated nickel and nickel/cobalt alloy bimetallic
cylinders. The food and plastics industry are in dire need for better processing
chambers (cylinders) due to the advent of in-line processing and newer highly
abrasive and corrosive fluropolymers. The goal of the research project is to
develop a unique new composite material for use as processing chambers in the
food and plastics industries. Working in close cooperation between Schevers
Laboratories Inc. and Wisconsin Bimetallic Corporation, the processing
parameters necessary to manufacture bimetallic cylindrical chambers having an
aluminum matrix silicon carbide particulate composite inner diameter will be
investigated. Processing variables such as bonding of the aluminum composite to
the backing steel, casting temperatures, centrifugal speed, silicon carbide
wetting, anodizing, machining and honing will be investigated. Besides
processing of the bimetallic cylinders, materials characterization like wear,
corrosion. thermal conductivity, microstructure and particle distribution after
bimetallic centrifugal casting will be studied.