* 9461137
* Ultrafiltration Membranes Prepared by Polymerization of     Lyotropic Liquid Crystals
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,11/30/1995
* Dongbin Zhang, Lyotropics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 11/30/1995
* USD 64,953.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on a new
generation of materials with potential commercial and technological impact on
filtration of proteins, viruses, pharmaceuticals and other sub-microscopic
particles. Although it is intuitively obvious that any filtration material
should have pores of all the same width (so as to achieve precise and reliable
separations based on particle size) and also a high density of pores (for lower
resistance and higher fluxes), there is an important particle size range over
which no materials exist satisfying these fundamental requirements. Nature
provides a certain type of liquid crystal -- a `lyotropic` liquid crystal --
that exhibits a very high degree of order and refinement at this scale size. It
was first shown by a consultant on this project (Prof. David Anderson) that
certain of these lyotropic liquid crystals can be converted to polymers, thus
providing a new material that satisfies these two requirements. The Principal
Investigator (Dr. Dongbin Zhang) has trained under Prof. Anderson and extended
the range of chemistries afforded by these materials to include ultrafiltration
materials with optimal porewall properties for minimizing adsorption. The
purpose of the study is to produce membranes from these new materials using
state-of-the-art ring opening metathesis polymerization catalysts, and to
characterize their performance in ultrafiltration of proteins. The test results
will include curves quantifying the sharp cut-off of protein separations based
on the particle size (or molecular weight) and values of flux rates (or
throughput), both of which are standard tests that will instantly convey the
improved filtration performance of these materials compared with other materials
currently available for similar uses.