* 9461485
* A Control System to Optimize Biological Nutrient Removal
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1995,11/30/1995
* Patrick Conley, Conley Engineering, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 11/30/1995
* USD 65,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the
feasibility of an automated process control system for optimizing biological
nutrient removal wastewater treatment plants. Nitrogen and phosphorus removal is
needed at many municipal wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) to control problems
of algae and plant growth in receiving waters. This is of special concern in
certain coastal areas, around the Great Lakes and in other locations around the
U.S. Chemicals have been used at hundreds of plants for phosphorus removal, but
an alternative is to use biological phosphorus removal designs that promote the
growth of bacteria with high phosphorus storage capacity. Biological phosphorus
removal has many advantages over chemical addition, including cost and less
sludge production. However when biological phosphorus removal is combined with
biological nitrogen removal systems, phosphorus removal efficiencies may be
lower than required and chemicals are still used. This problem discourages other
facilities from changing to biological phosphorus removal designs. The lower
phosphorus removal efficiency may be due to release of phosphorus in the
nitrogen reduction zones of combined nutrient removal systems. This release,
termed secondary phosphorus release, is related to the inflexibilities of
current process designs, and lack of a control system to respond to plant load
variations. The purpose of this proposed Phase I research is to study factors
that affect secondary phosphorus release, so that a control system can be
developed to prevent it. Bench-scale reactors will be set up at the Yakima, WA.
WWTP to study operating conditions and factors that affect the rate and extent
of secondary phosphorus release. Full-scale combined biological nutrient removal
facilities will also be visited to conduct tests on secondary phosphorus
release.