
* 0073865
* Collaborative Research: Stochastic and Multiscale Structure Associated with the Navier Stokes Equations
* DMS,PROBABILITY
* 08/01/2000,08/11/2000
* Rabindra Bhattacharya,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 09/30/2002
* USD 136,010.00

This project will develop the theory of the motion of fluids as embodied by the
Navier-Stokes equations using new probabilistic methods that exploit the power
of stochastic calculus and probabilistic limit theory. Although the Navier-
Stokes equations are essentially deterministic, the approach used in this work
will build on a representation of the equations as a functional of an underlying
branching random walk. This representation, which was recently discovered by
LeJan and Sznitman in France, is clearly intrinsic to the structure of the
Navier-Stokes equations. While this is not the first attempt to use stochastic
methods in connection with the flows associated with the Navier-Stokes
equations, it does represent an entirely new direction which has the potential
to transcend much of existing theory. Specific problems considered in this
proposal seek to provide a better understanding of the role of spatial
dimensions, boundary conditions, multi-scaling exponents and singularities,
viscosity, homogeneity, isotropy and rotational accelerations, stationary flows
and long-time evolution. The Navier-Stokes equations describe the basic physics
governing the motion of fluid in its various forms of air, water, oil, etc. As
such these equations play a fundamental role in science and engineering through
the modeling of all varieties of fluid flow, from atmospheric and oceanic
circulation to the flow of water beneath the earth's surface. Improved
understanding of these equations and their solutions is essential to
applications which range from tracking climate change and dispersion of
contaminants in the Earth's environment, to more stable aerospace and sea vessel
designs. The nonlinearity inherent in these equations makes explicit solutions
possible only for the simplest of flows. Consequently the development of a more
complete understanding of these equations at all physical length scales ranks
among the most important outstanding problems of contemporary mathematical
physics
