
* 0073812
* Collaborative Research: Geometric and Analytic Properties of Discrete Groups--A Focused Research Group on the Novikov Conjecture and the Baum-Connes Conjecture
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2000,08/14/2000
* Shmuel Weinberger,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/2003
* USD 208,000.00

ABSTRACT

The Novikov conjecture is one of the fundamental unsolved problems of manifold
theory. Its history is a fascinating journey through a remarkably varied
mathematical landscape. The conjecture has provoked vigorous exchanges of ideas
between widely separated subjects, and (like other famous unsolved problems) it
has generated lively new mathematics of its own. The Baum Connes conjecture
transports the fundamental aspects of the Novikov conjecture to operator algebra
theory, and makes new contacts with representation theory, spin geometry and
other areas. Very recently, striking progress has been made on the both
conjectures. Methods and ideas involving dimension theory, amenable actions of
groups, Banach space geometry and combinatorics have played essential roles. An
unusually exciting opportunity has arisen to spark interaction among some quite
widely separated fields. Some of the core questions are so basic that one can
even expect important exchanges at the student level. The issues are so broad
that the ordinary mathematical scheme of small, two or three person,
collaborative efforts will not give the most rapid and efficient progress. The
key objectives of the proposed program are as follows: Marshall forces from
topology, analysis and from several less apparent areas for a general attack on
the Novikov and Baum Connes conjectures. Create a rapid and effcient means of
providing the essential tools for continuing research in this broad area.
Broaden the communication and cooperation between US and foreign mathematicians
through a coordinated program of visits. Offer effective training opportunities
for graduate students, giving them exposure to an unusual breadth of
mathematical ideas and expertise.


