
* 0073657
* Collaborative Research: The Geometry of Duality in Mathematics and Physics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2000,08/11/2000
* Sheldon Katz,OK,Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/28/2002
* USD 330,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0073657 Principal Investigator: Sheldon Katz

This research project assembles a team at two campuses to work on string theory
and related geometry. The project is led by two mathematicians and a physicist,
and the award supports postdoctoral research fellows, graduate students, and the
collaborations and communications of a broadly based research network. The
research program supported by this award concentrates on dualities in string
theory and M theory, a topic in which a broad range of geometric and physical
concepts come together. The best known of these dualities is mirror symmetry,
which has had dramatic consequences for algebraic and symplectic geometry, and
this project intends to explore new dualities and constraints along with mirror
symmetry.

String theory is a promising candidate for a unifying theory of the universe at
its most fundamental levels. The basic idea is simple - elementary particles
should be modeled as mathematical loops of string rather than as points - but
working out the details of this theory has involved and inspired some
sophisticated mathematical tools and ideas. Constraints and observations from
physics, sometimes posed as a claim that two distinct geometries must generate
the same physical theory, can have large numbers of consequences for geometry
since quantities of physical interest are often expressed as the average value
of an observable quantity over space, or as a way of counting the number of
times two objects meet. The program in Algebra, Number Theory, and Combinatorics
is cofunding this award.
