
* 0073923
* Collaborative Research on High Bit-Rate Communication: From Mathematical Development to Fiber Design
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2000,08/11/2000
* Christopher Jones,RI,Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2004
* USD 927,779.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0073923 Mathematical Sciences: Collaborative Research
on High Bit-Rate Communication - From Mathematical Development to Fiber Design

Abstract

0073923 Jones

This project will focus on the development of mathematical and computational
techniques for addressing the critical issues of optical fiber communication
technology. The modeling and methods will be aimed at the more efficient use of
fiber bandwidth. It will include both single channel and Wavelength Division
Multiplexing techniques. The group will develop methods for the investigation of
theoretical models of the main fiber optics technologies. This includes the
emerging techniques of dispersion compensation, distributed amplification,
wavelength division multiplexing, and uses of the newly developed dispersion-
profiled fiber. Also to be investigated will be the influence of dispersion
management on four-wave interactions and therefore on the stability of bit-
patterns in multi-channel systems. Each of these methods involves, in some way,
the spatial management of dispersion and other physical effects. In general,
this leads to an inhomogeneous evolutionary partial differential equation with
rapidly varying coefficients. Much of the mathematical and computational theory
will be aimed at a deeper understanding of these equations and their properties
within the specific context of optical transmission. An emphasis will be placed
on the averaging theory, stabilization of pulses and pulse interactions.

Increasing the bit-rate in optical fiber communications is a challenge that is
both scientifically exciting and technologically imperative. An objective of
this project will be to take the involvement of mathematical investigations in
improving the efficacy of optical communications to a new level. We shall
intertwine the development of the underlying mathematics, numerical techniques
and the practical, experimental implementation of new scenarios through a group
effort that involves representatives from academia, government laboratories and
industry. The development of new mathematical and computational techniques is
crucial for the both the formulation of new strategies and their initial
evaluation. This effort will take the methods of modern applied mathematics into
the fiber optics engineering community. It will pave the road for further
interactions between applied mathematicians and electrical engineers and
promises to make the field of optical communications even more vigorous. At the
same time, the work will stimulate new areas of applied mathematics, such as the
study of averaging methods for strongly inhomogeneous partial differential
equations, stability and interaction of pulses, and development of effective
computational methods for rapidly varying systems.


