
* 0101340
* Collaborative Research: FRG: Mathematical and Computational Methods for High-Data-Rate Communications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2001,07/30/2001
* Mark Ablowitz,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Henry A. Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 308,472.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0101340

Mathematical Sciences: FRG: Mathematical and Computational Methods for High-
Data-Rate Optical Fiber Communications

Abstract DMS-0101340 Ablowitz

The goal of this research project is to develop new methods that can be used to
determine the behavior of optical transmission systems under realistic
circumstances. This will be accomplished by a combination of various techniques.
One approach will exploit the mathematical structure of fiber transmission
models in order to eliminate unessential degrees of freedom. The reduced models
that will result will be more tractable mathematically and also much more
computationally efficient. Another approach that will be used is the application
of linearization and importance sampling techniques to enable the simulation of
systems at realistic data error rates. These methods will be combined to study
the main sources of impairment in optical fibers in order to achieve an accurate
evaluation of system performance. All the techniques to be developed will be
carefully validated by comparison to more computationally time-consuming models
and to experiments.

The development of high-data-rate optical fiber communications is one of the
great technological achievements of the late 20th century; in the last decade
alone, data rates have increased by four orders of magnitude. This enormous
increase has made possible the growth of the global Internet that promises to
continue to revolutionize day-to-day communications. Because demand for further
growth continues unabated, however, system capacity is becoming limited by fiber
transmission effects. It has therefore become crucial to accurately model and
calculate the impairments due to non-ideal fiber properties when designing
systems. Due to the tremendous data capacity that will be required of future
transmission systems (terabits per second of aggregate capacity) and the need
for extremely small transmission error rates (less than one error per trillion
bits), realistic attempts to model and predict the effects of these impairments
as they appear in practical systems present a number of difficult mathematical
and computational challenges. The techniques that will be developed in this
collaborative research project are expected to yield large reductions in the
computational time required to model optical communication systems, and at the
same time produce new insights into system behavior. Because these methods will
be capable of providing detailed information about system performance at
realistic data error rates, we believe they will lead to significant changes in
the way in which optical transmission systems are modeled, and, ultimately, in
the way that they are built.
