
* 0101339
* FRG: Collaborative Research-Computational Conformal Mapping and Scientific Visualization
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2001,09/12/2001
* David Rottenberg,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2004
* USD 170,000.00

This Focused Research Group is composed of pure mathematicians, computational
mathematicians, and neuroscientists. They develop implementations of discrete
conformal mapping for multidisciplinary use, both within mathematics itself
where complex analysis is being reinvigorated by new discrete techniques, and in
the larger scientific context with visualization and analysis of scientific
data. The Riemann Mapping Theorem guarantees unique conformal maps between any
pair of conformal 2-discs (or conformal 2-spheres); the conformal geometry
preserved by such maps carries valuable mathematical structure. Such surfaces
arise naturally in many scientific contexts as piecewise flat (from data) or
smoothly embedded (from theory) surfaces in 3-space. Recently the new
computational technique of circle packing has allowed computational
approximations to these conformal maps. Implementing such approximations for
large scientific datasets faces both theoretical and computational challenges.
The investigator and his colleagues work on three related topics: theoretical
superstructure of the circle packing technique, refinement and parallelization
of the circle packing algorithm for use on large datasets, and the application
of these conformal maps to visualization and analysis of scientific data. The
main application focuses on conformal flattening of human brain cortical
surfaces. The investigators use uniqueness of conformal maps to install surface-
based coordinate systems on these surfaces; these coordinate systems allow
localization of activation foci in Positron Emission Tomography (PET) and
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) brain scans. Conformal flattening
has wider applicability as a visualization and graph embedding technique, and
these connections inform the research. This Focused Research Group develops
algorithms to bring a classical mathematics theorem (the Riemann Mapping
Theorem, 1854) to bear on problems of visualization of data. The Riemann Mapping
Theorem guarantees the existence of unique conformal (angle-preserving) maps
between surfaces, but does say how to compute these maps. Modern computers and
new algorithms have changed all that, because our new computational ability can
breathe life into classical existence theorems of mathematics, turning theory
into computational tools. This project develops algorithms to implement the
computation of conformal maps on complex spatial surfaces. The main application
is the flat mapping of human brain cortical surfaces. The brain surface is
highly convoluted and folded in space, and most of the brain surface is folded
up and hidden from view. If one flattens the surface, one can simultaneously see
down into all the folds. The mathematically unique conformal maps produced by
the algorithms allow surface-based coordinate systems to be computed on the
brain surface so that surface positions can be precisely determined. Moreover,
if one puts foci of functional activation onto the flattened surface, one can
then visualize and measure the relationship between brain function and brain
anatomy. These new surface-mapping techniques and their application to the brain
surface permit biomedical researchers and clinicians to rapidly and accurately
map and compare the locations of physiological and pathological "events" in the
brains of research subjects and of patients with a variety of neurological and
psychiatric disorders. The project is supported by the Computational
Mathematics, Applied Mathematics, and Geometric Analysis programs and the Office
of Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS and by the Computational Neuroscience
program in BIO.
