
* 0139771
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Fully Nonlinear, Three-Dimensional, Surface Water Waves in Arbitrary Depth
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2002,06/19/2006
* John Carter,WA,Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2007
* USD 83,892.00

The overall objectives of this work are to develop a thorough understanding of
three-dimensional water waves of finite amplitude, and ultimately to develop a
practical model to describe these waves efficiently. A model that is both
accurate and computationally efficient could have many practical applications.
Specific problems to be addressed are: (1) the existence and stability of three-
dimensional, doubly-periodic, traveling water-wave patterns, through the full
range of depths; (2) the prevalence of hexagonal, rectangular or crescent-shaped
waves (or other multiply periodic wave patterns) among ocean waves; (3) the
long-wave and modulational descriptions of water waves, and the subsequent
stability analyses that are feasible in these cases; (4) the design and
implementation of algorithms to make practical use of exact solutions of
asymptotic models in shallow and deep water; (5) the relation between the
detailed dynamics of three-dimensional, nonlinear waves and some commonly used
ocean-wave transport models; and (6) the impact of a detailed local description
of nonlinear wave dynamics on these transport models, in the presence of large
amplitude nonlinear waves or under conditions of nonlinear wave focusing. These
problems will be studied using analysis, computation, asymptotics, and algebraic
geometry, involving the full equations and approximate models, all in
conjunction with state-of-the-art physical experiments.

The destructive force of large-amplitude ocean waves is well known. Large-scale
ocean waves have a major impact on the design of ocean- going ships, of off-
shore oil platforms, and of other structures in a coastal environment. These
waves also impact the scheduling and routing of shipping patterns, and they
strongly affect air-sea transport processes. Yet most theoretical models of
ocean waves now in use are based on waves of small amplitude. In this
investigation we focus on developing a thorough understanding of large-amplitude
waves. The ultimate goal is to develop a practical, mathematical model that may
be used operationally in the applications listed above. In particular, the
investigators plan to build on their recent work in which they have observed
certain coherent patterns of large-amplitude waves. They have observed these
patterns in laboratory experiments, as solutions to the well-known equations of
water waves, and as solutions to other equations that are (more) approximate
models of water waves. Their work involves a variety of mathematical and
computational tools as well as state-of-the-art laboratory experiments. In the
present work the investigators will combine all of their tools to understand and
describe these coherent patterns and to use them as the building blocks for a
practical model of ocean waves.
