
* 0139772
* Collaborative Research: FRG: Class numbers, hyperbolic manifolds and dynamical systems
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Darren Long,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2006
* USD 88,164.00

DMS-0139772 Darren Long

The problem of constructing infinitely many number fields of class number one
descends from Gauss's work on quadratic forms, and remains one of the major
unsolved problems in algebraic number theory. This has been the inspiration for
many new ideas and techniques in algebraic number theory and arithmetic
geometry. The proposers plan a sustained attack on this problem using geometric
methods based upon recent advances in the theory of hyperbolic manifolds coupled
with a natural broadening of the classical Bianchi- Hurwitz theorem. Possible
important mathematical by-products include new techniques for estimating class
numbers and an improvement of the understanding of properties of the trace
fields of hyperbolic manifolds.

Further consequences of this work of a somewhat broader impact also seem
possible. The most obviously relevant applications seem to come from the
direction of cryptography. The difficulty of factoring numbers into primes is
the basis for the RSA cryptosystem. The fastest known algorithm for factoring
large whole numbers into primes is the so-called number field sieve, and the
techniques from algebraic number theory involved in this sieve were developed in
part from work on class numbers. This project could impact such algorithms and
progress on factoring problems would have significant implications for
cryptography.


