
* 0244529
* FRG: Synchrony and Structure in Coupled Cell Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
* 06/01/2003,02/27/2006
* Kresimir Josic,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/2007
* USD 960,758.00

Golubitsky 0244529 A coupled cell system can be described by a collection of
individual interacting differential equations. Cell systems are used as models
in a variety of applications such as neuronal networks, speciation, arrays of
Josephson junctions, and gene dynamics. In this Focused Research Group (FRG)
project, the investigators develop a mathematical theory for coupled cell
systems and with colleagues explore implications of that theory in applications.
The network architecture is a graph that shows the couplings between cells and
which cells and couplings are identical. Symmetries in the network architecture
have been used previously to explore certain properties of solutions to cell
systems, such as synchrony or traveling waves. Symmetry, however, applies
directly only to the most regular of networks. For a larger class of coupled
cell networks, local symmetries defined on part of the network can replace
symmetries as a predictor of interesting and important dynamics. These local
symmetries form a groupoid and it is this groupoid structure that is used to
analyze properties of solutions and transitions between solutions in coupled
cell systems. The investigators and students develop a theory of robust
synchrony and investigate synchrony-breaking bifurcations in coupled cell
systems (for example, network architecture often forces Takens-Bogdanov
singularities to occur in codimension one at such bifurcations). They also
investigate the consequences for coupled cell systems of particular features of
the internal equations of single cells, such as symmetries and fast/slow
variables. Symmetry and symmetry-breaking have been used widely by scientists
and mathematicians to investigate a variety of physically and biologically
interesting topics, including important types of fluid flows, crystal lattices,
the existence of elementary particles, and the characteristic markings of the
skins of tigers and leopards. The crucial feature of this approach is that it is
model-independent in the sense that in appropriate situations symmetry permits
the development of a menu of possible outcomes and the physics or chemistry or
biology chooses from this menu. Indeed, the theory of coupled cell systems with
symmetry has been applied succesfully to the analysis of different gaits in
animals, pattern formation in the visual cortex, and speciation. Relaxing the
requirement that the network under consideration has symmetries extends the
applicability of this approach to a wider range of problems, in particular to
models of gene networks, as well as other network models from neuroscience. In
these applications it is rare that the exact model equations are known. It is
therefore important to develop mathematical tools that study model-independent
features of solutions, tools that focus on solution properties that are
determined by the general structure of the equations (such as network
architecture) rather than by the details of the equations. This approach will
benefit researchers outside of mathematics by describing a menu of possible
dynamics that a network can be expected to exhibit.


