
* 0244295
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Multi-Dimensional Problems for the Euler Equations of Compressible Fluid Flow and Related Problems in Hyperbolic Conservation Laws
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2003,04/24/2007
* Constantine Dafermos,RI,Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 191,400.00

ABSTRACT

FRG: Multi-Dimensional Problems for the Euler Equations of Compressible Fluid
Flow and Related Problems in Hyperbolic Conservation Laws

Historically, fluid and solid mechanics study the motion of incompressible and
compressible materials, with or without internal dissipation. For gases and
solids with internal dissipation as a secondary effect, the gross wave dynamics
is governed by inviscid, thermal diffusionless, dynamics. Within these
categories, compressible motion for solids corresponds to the study of elastic
waves and their propagation; compressible motion for fluids is usually
associated with inviscid gas dynamics. Furthermore both compressible solids and
fluids exhibit shock waves and hence we must search for discontinous solutions
to the underlying equations of motion. Incompressible motion on the other hand
concerns itself with the motion of denser fluids where the idealization of
incompressibility is useful, e.g. water or oil, as well as the motion of certain
solids like rubber. While there are still many important mathematical issues to
be resolved for incompressible fluids, for example, the well-posedness of the
Navier-Stokes equations in three space dimensions, the mathematical study of
compressible solids (as represented by the equations of nonlinear
elastodynamics) and fluids (as represented by the Euler equations of inviscid
flows) in two and three space dimensions is even less developed. This provides
the motivation to the proposers to collaborate in a three year effort to advance
the mathematical understanding of the multi-dimensional equations of inviscid
compressible fluid dynamics and related problems in elastodynamics. The core of
our plan is to arrange a sustained interaction between and around the members of
the group, who will (1) collaborate scientifically, focusing on the advancement
of the analysis of multi-dimensional compressible flows by developing new
theoretical techniques and by using and designing effective, robust and reliable
numerical methods; (2) work together over the next several years to create the
environment and manpower necessary for the research on multi-dimensional
compressible Euler equations and related problems to flourish; and in the
meantime, (3) share the responsibility of training graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows.

The project is devoted to a mathematical study of the Euler equations governing
the motion of an inviscid compressible fluid and related problems. Compressible
fluids occur all around us in nature, e.g. gases and plasmas, whose study is
crucial to understanding aerodyanmics, atmospheric sciences, thermodynamics,
etc. While the one-dimensional fluid flows are rather well understood, the
general theory for multi-dimensional flows is comparatively mathematically
underdeveloped. The proposers will collaborate in a three year effort to advance
the mathematical understanding of the multi-dimensional equations of inviscid
compressible fluid dynamics. Success in this project will advance knowledge of
this fundamental area of mathematics and mechanics and will introduce a new
generation of researchers to the outstanding problems in the field.
