
* 0353964
* Collaborative Research: FRG: Applications of Multiple Dirichlet Series to Analytic Number Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/15/2004,04/12/2005
* Solomon Friedberg,MA,Boston College
* Continuing grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 120,000.00

Abstract for Collaborative FRG proposals DMS- 0354534, DMS -0353964, DMS-0354662
and DMS-0354582 of Hoffstein, Bump Friedberg and Goldfeld

The object of this proposal is to continue to develop the theory of multiple
Dirichlet series along a number of highly promising directions. These include
the formulation of a classification theory via Dynkin diagrams and metaplectic
forms, analysis of natural constructions as inner products of automorphic forms
on GL(n), and investigating examples coming from Eisenstein series related to
deformation theory of universal elliptic curves. Many applications are expected
to the analysis of various families of L-functions

The theory of L-functions of one complex variable is central in modern number
theory. Special values of L-functions have provided links between such diverse
areas of mathematics as algebraic geometry, topology, probability and
statistics, the representation theory of infinite dimensional Lie groups, and
mathematical physics. In contrast, the theory of L-functions of several complex
variables (multiple Dirichlet series) is still in its infancy. A large part of
the foundational theory was developed by the PI's and Postdocs of this proposal,
who have been collaborating in teams, over the last twenty years. The
accumulated scientific results, combined with a mass sustained joint effort of
the PI's, now point to the possibility of major breakthroughs. There is also an
additional training component. Workshops will be held each year as well as short
courses aimed at attracting graduate students, postdocs, and mathematicians in
related fields. The motivation will be to categorize and advertise the major
accessible problems in the field, to map out progress made, and to prepare the
participants for research projects.


