
* 0354639
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Geometric Flows and Applications
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2004,05/21/2009
* Richard Hamilton,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2010
* USD 370,000.00

Proposals DMS-0354639/0354621/0354737 Title: FRG- Geometric flows and
applications P.I.s: R.Hamilton, P.Daskalopoulos (Columbia University)/ H-D Cao
(Lehigh University)/ S-T Yau (Harvard University)

ABSTRACT

Geometric flows give rise to nonlinear parabolic partial differential
equations. It can be used to understand how a geometric structure evolves to a
more canonical one or the union of canonical structures. In most cases, there is
a tension field which governs the evolution. The most notable cases are the
harmonic map flow, the Ricci flow, the mean curvature flow, the Gaussian
curvature flow, and the inverse mean curvature flow. The long time existence and
asymptotic behavior of the geometric structure has revealed deep understanding
of geometry and topology. Even short time existence have immediate consequence
of smoothing out the structure. For example, the short time existence of the
Ricci flow for complete manifolds with bounded curvature provides smoothing
effect to approximate the metric by metrics with bound covariant derivatives of
curvature. All these geometric flows have many common features, most notable is
the fundamental role of solitary solutions of the flow. It gives strong
understanding of singularity of the nonlinear system and lead to good estimates:
like the Li-Yau-Hamilton estimate which play important roles on singularity
formations. While working on the Ricci flows, there are constant insight by
working on the mean curvature flow and other geometric flows, and vice versa.
The works of Huisken and Sinestrari will be important for this purpose. And so
is the work of Huisken-Ilmanen on the inverse mean curvature flow. The most
recent breakthrough of Perelman will of course be the central piece of
discussion for the whole project. Not only that we like to make sure the whole
program of geometrization for three manifolds, but also we like to strengthen
and apply the technique to various important geometric situation: the Ricci flow
for compact Kaehler manifolds with positive Chern class, and to four dimensional
manifolds. Note that the recent work of Cao-Chen-Zhu has already pointed to the
importance of the argument of Perelman in the Kaehler case. Perelman's most
recent work in the Kaehler case made further progress. We hope to incorporate it
in a bigger picture of Kaehler geometry. When one studies the Kaehler geometry,
a very important ingredient to understand Mirror geometry for Calabi-Yau
manifolds is the study of special Lagrangian submanifolds. This has been pursued
by M.- T. Wang using the Lagrangian mean curvature flow . The existence and
regularity of such submanifolds will play important roles in the future of
geometry. As was mentioned above, the inverse mean curvature flow will also be
important for our discussions as it was demonstrated by the work of Huisken-
Ilmanen in solving the Riemannian Penrose conjecture. In terms of general
relativity, Bray, Huisken, M.-T. Wang and Yau will be very much involved in the
analysis of various flows that appeared. (Huisken-Yau used the mean curvature
flow to study center of gravity, Bray studied the Penrose conjecture) As a
whole, there will be close cooperation and many students will be trained under
this joint program. We also expect to have joint consultations. Applied
mathematicians will also be consulted on questions like porous media flow,
diffusion of oil, imaging sharpening, etc. Daskalopoulos has been active on
porous media flow, the Gaussian curvature flow and related questions.


