
* 0354560
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Singularity Formation for the Three-Dimensional Euler Equations and Related Problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2004,06/07/2004
* Michael Siegel,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Henry A. Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 253,522.00

The question of singularity formation for the three-dimensional Euler equations
of incompressible inviscid fluid flow is a celebrated open problem in
mathematics and physics. The existence of Euler singularities is likely to have
substantial implications for physical fluid dynamics, in particular a role in
the onset and structure of turbulence. This research will utilize a combination
of numerical and analytical methods to study Euler singularity formation, as
well as examine the significance of these singularities for fluid dynamic
turbulence. A centerpiece of the project is a new method for constructing
singular Euler solutions, starting from a semi-analytic approach using complex
space-time and singularities in the complex plane. The results should be
amenable to rigorous analysis and direct numerical validation. A full numerical
and analytic validation of the singularity construction forms a main component
of this proposal. Several related projects involving singularity formation in
interfacial internal waves, and in incompressible nondissipative
magnetohydrodynamics will also be undertaken. The incompressible Euler equations
are a system of partial differential equations that describe the flow of
inviscid fluids. Although these equations have been known for nearly 250 years,
basic mathematical questions concerning the nature of solutions are still open.
In particular, it is still not known whether solutions of the three dimensional
Euler equations can form a singularity, that is, an infinite value in a flow
quantity such as the velocity or vorticity (which measures circulation) in
finite time. Due to its implications in turbulence theory, the question of Euler
singularities has received intense attention over the last 20 years. Successful
construction of Euler singularities would solve a major problem of mathematics
and would establish a new method for addressing singularity formation. A fluid
dynamic understanding of these singularities could lead to important insights on
the structure of turbulence, one of the major open problems of classical
physics. This in turn could lead to important new methods for understanding and
simulating turbulent flows, essential in a wide range of engineering
applications, including the design of aircraft and watercraft.
