
* 0455906
* FRG: Asymptotic and probabilistic methods in geometric group theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2005,06/05/2007
* Efim Zelmanov,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2008
* USD 204,875.00

The main theme of this project is amenability and related concepts (Kazhdan
property T, property tau, unitarizability, etc.) and its applications in
different areas of mathematics from number theory to topology and functional
analysis. In particular, the PIs will concentrate on the following problems:

* Classification of amenable groups and associative algebras, * Amenability of
Golod-Shafarevich groups and related problems in 3-dimensional topology and
number theory, * Expander graphs, property tau for lattices in SL(2,C),
probabilistic methods in group theory, * The Dixmier Unitarizability problem, *
Constructing new examples of finitely presented groups with property T, *
Linearity of discrete and pro-p-groups, * Asymptotic properties of discrete
groups.

The PIs are going to organize several conferences and workshops on different
aspects of the projects. The NSF grant will support several graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows working under their supervision.

Group theory was born as the theory of symmetry. The work of Gauss,Abel,
Galois, Lie and others showed that groups of symmetries carry essential
information about solvability of algebraic and differential equations. Group
theory plays crucial role in many areas of mathematics and physics. Moreover,
recent advances in group theory showed that many areas of mathematics are
closely related. In turn, group theory has benefited tremendously from its
connections with other areas. About 80 years ago, von Neumann, Banach and Tarski
introduced the concept of amenabile group and connected it with basic questions
like "Can one assign a weight to any set of points in our space so that the
weight is invariant under all symmetries of the space?". The PIs will explore
various aspects of amenability of groups and algebras, and deep connections
between amenabile groups, number theory and topology.


