
* 0554247
* Collaborative Research: FRG: Eigenvalue and Saturation Problems for Reductive Groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2006,06/23/2006
* Shrawan Kumar,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2011
* USD 296,514.00

DMS 0554254, PI: John Millson, Co-PI: Thomas Haines DMS 0554349, PI: Michael
Kapovich DMS 0554247, PI: Shrawan Kumar, Co-PI: Prakash Belkale Research in Lie
theory has undergone striking advances in a number of directions spurred by and
giving rise to discoveries in topology, symplectic and algebraic geometry and
combinatorics. The recent solutions by Klyachko of the eigenvalues of a sum of
Hermitian matrices problem and by Knutson and Tao of the saturation and Horn
conjectures are of particular relevance to this proposal. Both these problems
are associated to the group of invertible n by n matrices. The discovery of
quantum cohomology and the quantum Schubert calculus led to the solution of
analogous problems for the group of unitary n by n matrices. The PIs P.Belkale,
T. Haines, M. Kapovich, S. Kumar and J. Millson propose to attack for a general
reductive group G the problems previously solved for the groups of invertible
unitary n by n matrices. The history of Lie theory has shown that it is of
critical importance to understand in the context of general Lie groups results
proved initially for the group of invertible n by n matrices.

A large part of mathematics and physics has been involved with the study of
eigenvalues, for example determining the modes of vibration of a violin string
or the energy levels of an atom amounts to finding eigenvalues of a Hermitian
linear operator. A fundamental problem is to determine the possibilities for the
eigenvalues of the sum of two operators given the eigenvalues of each one.
Another fundamental problem with its roots in physics is the problem of studying
the representations of an abstract group as a group of matrices. This problem in
turn has been organized into subproblems. One of the most important of these is
the problem of decomposing (tensor) products of representations as sums of
representations. The point of this proposal is that these two basic problems,
the eigenvalue of the sum problem and the decomposing (tensor) products problem
are very closely related. The authors propose to pin down this relationship
(already well-understood for special cases) for the general case. This FRG grant
will play a fundamental role in the further development of a national group of
scientists working on the area common to Lie theory, topology, algebraic and
symplectic geometry, combinatorics and the theory of buildings. A class of young
mathematicians especially graduate students and postdocs in the mid-Atlantic
area (including Washington and Chapel Hill) and the greater (San Francisco) bay
area (including Davis) will have the opportunity to learn about and work on
exciting and fundamental problems through the Meetings and Workshops envisaged
by the PIs. This class already includes the nine graduate students presently
advised by the PIs. We expect to include other graduate students and postdocs
associated to the very strong programs in representation theory and geometry at
the University of Maryland, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and
the University of California at Davis. We also expect that graduate students,
postdocs and faculty from neighboring universities such as Johns Hopkins, Duke,
North Carolina State University, UC-Berkeley and Stanford will participate in
and profit from the FRG grant. This award is jointly funded by the programs in
Analysis, and Algebra, Number Theory, & Combinatorics, and Geometric Analysis.
