
* 0554374
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Understanding Low Volume Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2006,03/23/2006
* David Gabai,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2010
* USD 398,029.00

The goal of this Focused Research Group is to prove the following Complexity
Conjecture: that the complete low-volume hyperbolic 3-manifolds can be obtained
by filling cusped hyperbolic 3-manifolds of small topological complexity. In
particular, our goal is to find the low-volume closed and cusped manifolds and
to explain the success of the SnapPea census in determining the low-volume
manifolds. Up to the mid 1990's the best lower bounds for volume of closed
orientable hyperbolic 3-manifolds appeared to be approximately 1/1000 of the
likely lowest volume. Then the paper "Homotopy Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds Are
Hyperbolic" improved the low-volume bounds by a factor of one hundred.
Subsequently, many authors have used this result to achieve further improvements
in the lower bound estimate. Now, the PI's believe they have developed a
fundamental new tool (the MOM technology) which will not only find the low-
volume closed and cusped hyperbolic 3-manifolds, but also explain in sharp
detail why the Complexity Conjecture is correct. Our method is a satisfying mix
of elementary hyperbolic geometry, 3-manifold topology, Morse Theory, and
rigorous computer analysis. The implementation of our approach will involve
mathematicians with expertise in different core areas of math, and with a sound
knowledge of the other areas utilized in our methodology.

180 years ago, W. Bolyai, C. F. Gauss, and N. Lobachevsky started a revolution
in scientific thought by creating an alternative geometry to Euclidean geometry.
This non Euclidean geometry, called hyperbolic geometry, has proven to be a
remarkable tool in mathematics. For example, the work of W. Thurston in the
1970's and 1980's showed that the vast majority of 3-dimensional spaces
(3-manifolds) possessed geometric structures modeled on hyperbolic geometry, and
that this geometric structure could be used to answer fundamental questions
about the underlying 3-dimensional manifold. In fact, hyperbolic 3-manifolds
have been the subject of intense scrutiny these last 40 years with striking
results achieved; most recently, the proofs of the Ending Lamination and
Tameness Conjectures, by Y. Minsky et al. Despite these advances and the
possible spectacular resolution of the Geometrization Conjecture by G. Perelman,
one of the most basic elements of the theory remains to be understood. In
particular, the most natural tool for analyzing a hyperbolic 3-manifold is to
use the geometry to measure its size, i.e., to compute its volume, but the
behavior of the volume function remains mysterious: Thurston proved that there
is a least volume hyperbolic 3-manifold, and a next lowest volume, and a next
lowest, and so on, but despite 25 years of effort, none of the 3-manifolds
possessing these low volumes have been conclusively identified. This proposal
introduces a startling new technique--the MOM Technology--that the PIs plan to
develop to find all these low-volume manifolds and to explain what properties
low-volume hyperbolic manifolds must have.
