
* 0554239
* Focused Research Group: Collaborative Research: Geometry and Deformation Theory of Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2006,06/14/2006
* Richard Canary,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2010
* USD 131,923.00

Since Thurston formulated his geometrization conjecture, the study of infinite
volume hyperbolic 3-manifolds has risen to a prominent position in low-
dimensional topology and geometry. For the past 30 years four major conjectures
have guided this area: Marden's Tameness Conjecture, Thurston's Ending
Lamination Conjecture, the Bers-Thurston-Sullivan Density Conjecture and
Ahlfors' Measure Conjecture; all have been resolved in the last four years. The
solutions of these conjectures have introduced new techniques into the field and
opened the door to deeper investigation and the exploration of new directions.
In this Focused Research Group, the principal investigators propose to use these
new techniques to deepen their understanding of the geometry of hyperbolic
3-manifolds, both of infinite and of finite volume, to explore further their
still mysterious deformation theory, to pioneer new directions for research in
the field, and to develop connections with related branches of low-dimensional
geometry and topology.

Since the time of Poincare, topologists have pursued the idea that certain
spaces called 3-manifolds might be simply described. In the 1970's, Thurston's
geometrization conjecture showed topologists the power of bringing geometry to
bear on this problem, and opened the possiblity for broad connections between
topological, geometric and dynamical features that arise. Using technical tools
arising from recent breakthroughs, the PIs hope to interconnect further these
different perspectives on the field, and expose early career mathematicians and
graduate students to the new range of problems emerging from this fertile area.
The Focused Research Group will fund small conferences during its first and
final year focused on emerging research areas, with introductory workshops to be
run on the day prior to the beginning of the conference. This project will also
support the research of the principal investigators' graduate students and
provide travel funding for their interaction across institutions. Each of these
efforts will allow young geometers and topologists both to learn about the
exciting recent developments in the field and to explore the new directions
opened up by these developments.
