
* 0628952
* FRG: Collaborative Research on Mathematical Methods for Defaultable Instruments
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 12/31/2005,05/03/2006
* Jean-Pierre Fouque,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 12/31/2008
* USD 179,567.00

Award Abstract DMS-0456195 / DMS-0455982 / DMS-0456118

Rene A. Carmona and K. Ronnie Sircar, Princeton University Jean-Pierre Fouque,
North Carolina State University Thaleia Zariphopoulou, University of Texas at
Austin

FRG: Collaborative Research on Mathematical Methods for Defaultable Instruments

This project investigates problems in financial mathematics motivated by credit
markets in which a major source of risk is the potential default of debtors on
their payment obligations. Specifically, the problems under consideration are i)
utility-indifference valuation of default risk; ii) design of instruments to
optimally enhance credit worthiness; iii) asymptotic analysis of stochastic
intensity models to study the time-scale content of corporate yield spreads; iv)
computational issues related to the analysis of correlation between defaults
across firms, modeled as large systems in interaction. The first part involves
stochastic control problems related to random intensity models and infinite
dimensional interest rate models. The second also overlaps and involves
filtering of partially observed systems. The third uses singular and regular
perturbation techniques for the class of interacting potential partial
differential equations arising in this context, and the fourth uses interacting
particle systems to compute probabilities which are sensitive to correlation of
defaults, as well as Monte Carlo computations designed for the analysis of rare
events. The intellectual merit of this project is in developing applicable
scientific tools to address the particular class of optimization, design,
calibration and computation issues which are essential for managing default
risk.

Defaultable instruments, or credit-linked derivatives, are financial securities
that pay their holders amounts that are contingent on the occurrence (or not) of
a default event such as the bankruptcy of a firm (or a country or municipality),
non-repayment of a loan or missing a mortgage payment. The market in credit-
linked derivative products has grown more than seven-fold in recent years, from
$170 billion outstanding notional in 1997, to almost $1400 billion through 2001.
These instruments raise new challenges in modeling, analysis, computation and
estimation, some of which we propose to study here by bringing together a
Focused Research Group with expertise in applied mathematics, stochastic
processes and computational statistics. The broader impact of the project is in
deeper understanding of credit risks, which affect people from large commercial
institutions to individuals with pension funds and mortgages, and designing and
correctly valuing instruments to control for it. The project is also strongly
geared towards training of five graduate students and one postdoctoral
associate, who will benefit enormously from interaction with all parts of the
broad-based group through many meetings, and in particular a large international
conference on the research area at the end of the three years. The experience
gained by the PI's will be reflected in their teaching of specialist graduate
and undergraduate classes, and advising Senior Thesis projects in this field. As
well as the closing conference, the results of the work will be disseminated
through academic and industry meetings, classes and articles written for peer-
reviewed journals.
