
* 0652167
* FRG Collaborative Research: Noncommutative Geometry and Number Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2007,05/15/2007
* Henri Moscovici,OH,Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2012
* USD 210,001.00

The interaction between noncommutative geometry and number theory represents a
new direction, which has rapidly matured in the past few years. The proposed
collaborative research project is devoted to applying the methods and tools of
noncommutative geometry to specific topics in number theory, pertaining to the
study of the explicit class field theory problem (Hilbert's 12th problem), of
the Riemann zeta function and of the L-functions of algebraic varieties. One
anticipated outcome will be a novel understanding of the Weil explicit formulae
as Lefschetz trace formulae in the context of cyclic cohomology. Another central
aspect of the project involves supplementing Manin's approach to Stark's
conjectures for real quadratic fields (via noncommutative tori with real
multiplication) with ideas stemming from the recent investigation of the quantum
statistical mechanical properties of noncommutative spaces of Q-lattices modulo
commensurability. New results on modular forms and Hecke operators are expected,
arising from the transfer of transverse geometry concepts and constructions to
the setting of modular forms. The formalism of spectral triples together with
the local index formula in noncommutative geometry will be exploited to
investigate rigid analytic spaces more general than Mumford curves. Significant
progress is also anticipated in the uncovering of the relationship between
residues of Feynman graphs in quantum field theory and periods of mixed Tate
motives.

This collaborative research project aims to shed light on a number of important
topics pertaining to the rich and largely untapped interconnection between the
fields of noncommutative geometry, number theory and mathematical physics. These
topics address central aspects and open problems, that involve some of the key
mathematical objects in the latter fields, such as the celebrated Riemann zeta
function and its generalizations called L-functions in number theory and Feynman
integrals in perturbative quantum field theory. Their investigation will be
approached in a novel and unified manner, through the methods of noncommutative
geometry, a discipline which grew out of the fusion between one of the oldest
branches of mathematics -- geometry, and one of the youngest -- quantum
mechanics.
