
* 0652833
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Integrated Mathematical Methods in Medical Imaging
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2007,10/20/2008
* Anne Gelb,AZ,Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2012
* USD 818,374.00

This grant supports a collaborative team of researchers from Arizona State
University and the Keller Center for Imaging Innovation at the Barrow
Neurological Institute. The research team consists of five mathematical
scientists, representing complementary expertise in pure and applied harmonic
analysis, computational mathematics, and statistics, and two experts in Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI). The project highlights scientific challenges in the
domain of MR data acquisition and reconstruction, including image formation from
sparse and/or non-uniformly collected data, restoration of data corrupted by
system imperfections, as well as rapid and robust image construction from data
acquired by multiple receivers. The crosscutting expertise of the research team
is enabling development of rigorous tools for addressing these challenges,
providing the underpinnings for provable results, quantifiable measures of
performance, and efficient algorithms. The team's approach entails in-depth
mathematical study of data collection procedures utilized in MRI, including the
physical constraints under which they must be undertaken. This understanding
provides the basis for conceptualization, analysis, implementation, and
validation of accurate, efficient and effective practical algorithms for
processing imaging data. A particular emphasis of the project is unification of
the data collection and image generation aspects of MRI, which are often
considered independently even by informed researchers. Methodology is sought to
enable joint design of acquisition and post-processing techniques that can
optimally serve medical requirements. In particular, this research aims to
facilitate design of data post-processing methods that are fully informed about
the characteristics of the raw sensor data, such as its non-uniformly sampled
spectral nature and underlying statistical variations.

The activities of the collaborative research team from Arizona State University
and the Barrow Neurological Institute (BNI) are expected to have significant
impact on strengthening the mathematical foundations of magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI). The project focuses several areas of applicable mathematics on a
circle of application problems where the introduction of improved mathematical
techniques offers potential for substantial performance improvements. These, in
turn, will ultimately have broad social impact by improving the fidelity of
medical diagnoses, decreasing the cost of medical tools that are presently very
expensive, and alleviating patient discomfort by decreasing imaging time and the
need for patients to remain motionless for extended periods for accurate
imaging. Broader impact will be realized through the connections of the planned
research to other application areas, such as synthetic aperture radar, where
algorithmic challenges in acquisition and post-processing are similar to those
in MRI. Aligned with the research program is a plan for integration of
educational components which includes support of undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as the design of new courses. Junior participants will be
provided with the modern mathematical training which is needed for their later
pursuit of cross-disciplinary cutting-edge professional careers.
