
* 0652624
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Overcomplete Representations with Incomplete Data: Theory, Algorithms, and Signal Processing Applications
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2007,03/30/2009
* Marianna Pensky,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 159,990.00

Driven by accumulated scientific results and recent breakthroughs in sparse
representations, recent years have seen an ever-increasing interest in
overcomplete expansions with incomplete data---a critical subject requiring
close cooperation and exchange of ideas amongst statisticians, mathematicians,
and engineers. A number of indicators suggest the appropriateness and timeliness
of a Focused Research Group (FRG) involving these three communities as the best
means to approach to this high-potential yet challenging research area. In
particular, this project follows a comprehensive and vertically integrated
research plan for (1) deriving new theoretical results for statistical
estimation in the context of overcomplete Gabor time-frequency representations
and multiresolution wavelet dictionaries; (2) leveraging these results to
develop algorithms tailored for canonical problems in signal and image
processing, where practitioners are often faced with missing data or more
generally incomplete measurements; and (3) addressing ubiquitous and important
cross-cutting applications, including curve fitting as well as audio and color
image enhancement. To respond to these pressing scientific needs and prepare the
ground for significant developments in the mathematical sciences, the FRG team
is exploiting recent results from harmonic analysis and the theory of frames to
develop a coherent framework for statistical modeling in the case of
overcomplete expansions, including an examination of key open questions such as
the impact of the choice of prior coefficient distributions in a Bayesian
framework and asymptotic risk bounds for regression when the set of potential
predictors is overcomplete. As a definitive first step toward these grand
challenges, the team proposes and investigates an innovative common-component
model for frame coefficients that recovers currently used methods as special
cases but opens up important new avenues for advancement. The FRG team has
significant prior experience in multiresolution analysis, computational Bayesian
inference, and self-consistency methods for missing data, and hence is also
developing and applying state-of-the-art procedures to implement the resulting
new algorithms.

The Focused Research Group (FRG) project team combines scientists from an
established institution (Harvard University) and a young, rapidly growing one
(University of Central Florida). The project's research agenda is set to
substantially advance the theoretical knowledge and understanding of the
applicability of overcomplete representations (a new and important cross-cutting
area of mathematics, with many major open questions relating to the area of
"compressed sensing" recently featured in the New York Times, The Economist, and
elsewhere in the mainstream media) in both statistical and engineering practice.
This will ultimately lead to development of more efficient algorithms for signal
processing and data analysis in situations where data must be collected at a
very low rate (as in the compressed sensing regime described above), or when a
portion of available data has been lost or highly contaminated. The latter
scenario is particularly salient both for commercial applications (e.g., voice
data in the case of cellular communications) as well as military and homeland
security concerns (for instance, to recover unobserved data from related
sources). Another benefit of the project it its emphasis on close collaboration
amongst mathematicians, statisticians, and engineers through a single team,
which will lead not only to solution of the specific problems under study, but
also to formulations of new important areas of research and their application to
the real world. Using support from NSF, the team trains a number of students who
are ready to carry out research on the cutting edge of mathematics, statistics
and engineering, and holds regular workshops to increase the involvement of new
researchers and disseminate results to the wider scientific community.
