
* 0652326
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Algorithmic Randomness
* DMS,FOUNDATIONS
* 07/01/2007,07/15/2009
* Rebecca Weber,NH,Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2011
* USD 19,188.00

This Focused Research Group is a collaborative effort by researchers at many
sites who bring ideas from recursion theory, complexity theory, and other
specialties to bear on questions about algorithmic randomness. Important
background notions include the ideas of Kolmogorov complexity and Martin-Lof
randomness, which have separately and jointly received large amounts of
attention, and which come together in many of the examples and problems
described in this proposal. Issues to be studied during the project include
relationships between Martin-Lof random sets and Hausdorff dimension or other
measures of dimension, methods for extracting randomness from a semi-random
source of data, dimensions and other properties of complexity classes of
strings, distinctive properties of sets with low Kolmogorov complexity, and
relationships between algorithmic randomness and reverse mathematics, which
seeks to understand the axiomatic strength required by particular theories.

The forms of randomness studied by this group of researchers are based on some
appealing ideas regarding infinite strings, such as the record of an infinitely
repeated series of coin tosses. Intuitively, the Kolmogorov complexity of a
binary string like the record of heads and tails from coin tosses is the length
of the shortest definitive description of the string. Digitization methods for
voice and picture transmission take advantage of the regularity and repetition
in typical voice signals or digitized images, using much less space or time to
record the sound or image data than might seem necessary. From the point of view
of Kolmogorov complexity, a genuinely random binary string is probably its own
shortest description, or nearly so. Some of the problems studied by this
research group seek to establish properties of subsets of strings that have the
same complexity, such as their dimension. Activities of the group will include
workshops, summer schools for graduate students, and travel for collaboration.
