
* 0652648
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Affine Schubert Calculus: Combinatorial, geometric, physical, and computational aspects
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2007,08/17/2011
* Mark Shimozono,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2012
* USD 129,565.00

This project concerns the development of a vast extension of Schubert calculus
to affine Grassmannians and affine flag varieties, called ``affine Schubert
calculus". Classical Schubert calculus, a branch of enumerative algebraic
geometry concerned with counting subspaces satisfying certain intersection
conditions, is the outcome of the solution to Hilbert's Fifteenth problem. In
the modern formulation, Schubert calculus is usually interpreted in cohomology
theories of homogeneous spaces, most notably flag varieties. The full
development of affine Schubert calculus will solve long-standing open problems
in Macdonald theory and have an impact on physical questions, such as
generalizations of Wess-Zumino-Witten conformal field theory models and
extensions of Calogero-Sutherland quantum mechanical models whose eigenfunctions
are k-Schur functions. The new approach to affine Schubert calculus is made
possible by the recent discovery of certain explicitly defined symmetric
functions called k-Schur functions. The k-Schur functions, which arose in the
study of the seemingly unrelated Macdonald theory, were recently shown to be
connected to the geometry and topology of the affine Grassmanian. The novel
combinatorics of k-Schur functions will be exploited to deduce formulae for
various multiplicities, including intersection multiplicities in the affine
Grassmannian and the affine flag manifold. Some of these multiplicities are
known to occur in Macdonald theory and as Verlinde fusion coefficients for the
WZW model.

This many-faceted project involves and ties together various problems from
combinatorics, geometry, representation theory, physics, and computation. The
main questions that will be addressed can be viewed from several points of view:
a geometric perspective (questions such as "how many lines are there satisfying
a number of generic intersection conditions?"), a combinatorial perspective
("how many elements are in given sets and what properties do these sets have?"),
a physics perspective ("how do fields correlate?"), and computational aspects
("are there efficient algorithms for calculating these numbers or objects?").
The project is an international cooperative research venture, with core group
members located in Canada, the United States, Chile, and France, and
interdisciplinary, involving mathematicians, physicists, and computer
scientists. Graduate students will receive professional training by direct
involvement in the research and will benefit from interaction with the research
team. A summer school at the Fields institute for graduate students is also
planned at the conclusion of the project. The investigation is largely fueled by
extensive computational experimentation. The robust implementation of algorithms
derived from the project, will lead to the development of new packages for
computer algebra systems. The dissemination of this new software through an
open-source computational package, will not only advance the proposed research
program but will also have an outreach impact on the mathematics, physics, and
computer science communities.
