
* 0757245
* FRG: Collaborative Research: How the Algebraic Topology of Closed Manifold Relates to Strings and 2D Quantum Field Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2008,04/29/2008
* Dennis Sullivan,NY,CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2012
* USD 491,778.00

Two dimensional quantum field theory and string theory are mathematically very
interesting but still not precisely defined. Two dimensional field theories are
algebraic and analytic structures associated to geometric surfaces. String
theories are averages or integrals of two dimensional field theories over all
surface geometries. In this project we study various two dimensional field
theories , their integrals and their common underlying structure. For example we
will study a supersymmetric refinement of the Atiyah-Segal-Witten notion of 2D
field theories with a nontrivial internal stucture related to modular forms. The
point here is to construct examples and relate these ideas to the topological
modular form cohomology theory. We will explore a new infinity categorical
version of 2D field theory. There are many natural examples to investigate and
categorifications of two dimensional theories relate to three dimensional
topological quantum field theories. We intend to clarify the "string topology"
two dimensional field theories associated to any "target manifold" . These
theories feature a master equation solution, dX + X*X = 0, required to form the
analogue of the string theory integral. The algebraic formalism resonates with
the J holomorphic curves of symplectic topology. More generally, we will
research the conceptual meaning of solutions to master equations, deformations
of structures with duality, and the formalism related to multilinear functions
or operations called correlators.

The different parts of science and mathematics are woven together in a rich
tapestry and this phenomenon is well illustrated by the above. The studies of
this project will impact a wide range of younger researchers in the universities
as well as PhD students and undergraduates. Other impacts might eventually
include improved technology. Practical applications by scientists are sometimes
accidental like penicillin and synthetic rubber. Sometimes however, like the
discovery of transistors and microelectronics, they depend on a deep
understanding of subjects like quantum theory. A very speculative application of
a deeper understanding of two dimensional quantum field theory, the subject of
this project, could be to the physical realization of quantum computers. One
knows quantum computers can theoretically solve problems not known to be solved
theoretically by non quantum computing systems. One such problem is the
theoretical possibility of cracking the factorization part of the security
systems used by financial systems and government agencies. The technical
difficulties to realizing quantum computers can be recast according to Michael
Freedman, using the three dimensional topological theories alluded to above.
Furthermore the relationship of these three dimensional theories with two
dimensional theories suggests a direction to look to solve the technical
difficulties: the experimental physics that takes place in two dimensions, the
very active area of condensed matter research. There is an opportunity just now
to organize these different perspectives and energies of the participants of the
project into a coherent campaign to illuminate the area. The circle of ideas
from two dimensional field theory, string theory, and deformations of structures
with duality may very well become an important organizing center for twenty
first century mathematics in the way that topology influenced the twentieth
century.
