
* 0757236
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Semidefinite optimization and convex algebraic geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2008,08/06/2008
* Bernd Sturmfels,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 245,734.00

The goal in this proposal is to develop the mathematical foundations and
associated computational methods for the study of convex sets in real algebraic
geometry. This work requires a combination of ideas and mathematical tools from
optimization, analysis, algebra and combinatorics. The proposed program will
lead not only to theoretical insights, but also to new algorithms and software
that will enable novel applications in mathematics, engineering, and beyond. The
work is organized in five main thrusts: semidefinite programming and sums of
squares, convex semi-algebraic sets, sparsity and graphical structure, numerical
polynomial optimization and applications, and deformations and variation of
parameters. The PIs will focus on the development of a comprehensive theory and
practical new algorithms for convex sets defined by polynomial inequalities.
Specific problems and techniques include the formulation of semidefinite
descriptions of convex hulls of real algebraic varieties, determinantal
representations of hyperbolic polynomials, sparse polynomials and their
symmetries, tropical geometry and homotopy techniques, and geometric
programming.

Many areas in mathematics, as well as applications in engineering, finance and
the sciences, require a thorough understanding of convex sets. This is a class
of geometric shapes, with several different but complementary interpretations.
The goal in this project is to achieve a better understanding of how these
geometric properties emerge from their algebraic descriptions in terms of
polynomial equations, and the corresponding computational implications. One of
the main motivations is the possibility of applying these results in the context
of optimization. The proposed research will contribute to existing knowledge,
both in algebraic-geometric techniques as well as in mathematical optimization.
It will create synergies between different branches of applied mathematics, and
their engineering and scientific applications (e.g., in computational biology
and statistical modeling). Successful completion of this project should
contribute to the availability of efficient and reliable computational tools for
solving polynomial systems, which have clear technological and economic
interest. Other key features of this proposal include its integration with
curriculum development, undergraduate research projects, training of graduate
students and postdocs, and the development of new software tools for
computational optimization.
