
* 0757527
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Prediction and Risk of Extreme Events Utilizing Mathematical Computer Models of Geophysical Processes
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2008,04/26/2010
* Maria-Jesus Bayarri,NC,National Institute of Statistical Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2012
* USD 219,468.00

The goal of this project is to develop the mathematical, statistical and
computational tools needed to assess and predict the risk associated with
geophysical hazards such as volcanic pyroclastic flows. Based on a preliminary
data analysis, the investigators develop stochastic models beginning with
stationary independent increment processes employing (possibly tapered) Pareto
distributions for the volumes of pyroclastic flows exceeding some observational
threshold, in the domain of attraction of an alpha-stable process governing the
aggregate flow volume of multiple smaller eruptions. Von Mises distributions are
used for flow initiation angles. The deterministic TITAN2D two-dimensional
computational environment is employed, which uses available digital elevation
maps to predict the impact at various sites of interest from flows of specified
volume and initiation angles. TITAN2D is a depth-averaged, thin-layer
computational fluid dynamics code based on an adaptive grid Godunov solver,
suitable for simulating geophysical mass flows. A rapid emulator based on a
simple Gaussian random-field approximation to the TITAN2D model enables the
investigators to emulate hundreds of thousands of TITAN2D runs and construct an
estimate of the set of possible flow volumes and initiation angles that would
lead to significant impact; a hierarchical Bayesian statistical model then
reflects the probability of such an impact over a specified period of time.

Recent advances in computing power and algorithms have led to the application of
mathematical and computer modeling to such highly complex phenomena as storms,
floods, earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. It is increasingly being understood
that development of mathematical models of these phenomena is only one part of a
much more complex process needed for making reliable estimates and predictions
of risk. This project develops the mathematical, statistical and computational
tools needed for assessing and predicting the risk associated with such natural
hazards. A particular focus of the work is the study of how these risks vary in
space and time, and of how uncertain they are. This methodology is developed in
context of the specific problem of volcanic avalanches and pyroclastic flows
(so-called geophysical mass flows), but much of it will be applicable more
broadly to problems in the analysis and quantification of risk in problems
featuring spatial variability and model uncertainty. It brings together a unique
team of scientists with specialties including volcanology, to guide the
development of realistic models for the geophysical processes under study; in
stochastic processes, to reflect uncertainty and variability about initial
conditions, flow frequencies, and other features in realistic and verifiable
ways; in deterministic computer modeling, for the difficult task of making
detailed spatial predictions of the consequences of the most probable and of the
most hazardous possible events; in computer model emulation, to accelerate many
thousand-fold the computations necessary for predicting the risk of rare events
under a wide range of possible scenarios; and in statistical modeling and
analysis, to reflect honestly all the different sources of uncertainty and
variability in this analysis, leading to a full quantification of the risk of
hazardous events. Only with such a broad range of expertise can investigators
build the tapestry of science that is required to develop tools for studying
devastating natural hazards.
