
* 0757309
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Kinetic Description of Multiscale Phenomena: Modeling, Theory and Computation
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2008,05/23/2008
* Christian Ringhofer,AZ,Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2012
* USD 121,273.00

Kinetic equations play a central role in many areas of mathematical physics,
from micro- and nano-physics to continuum mechanics. They are an indispensable
tool in the mathematical description of applications in physical and social
sciences, from semi-conductors, polymers and plasma to traffic networking and
swarming. The ultimate goal of this proposal is to develop novel analytical and
numerical methods based on kinetic descriptions of complex phenomena with
multiple scales and with a wide range of applications. The objective is to
achieve a better understanding of problems which are in the forefront of current
research and to contribute to the solution of long-standing problems by
synergetic collaboration of theory, modeling and numerics. To this end, this
Focus Research Group (FRG) will provide a platform, led by leading researchers
from Universities of Maryland, Brown, Iowa State, Wisconsin-Madison, Arizona
State, Austin-Texas and Toulouse, France, who will merge their expertise in the
construction, analysis and implementation of kinetic descriptions for a selected
suite of problems with crossing scales from quantum and micro scales to the
macro scales. Topics to be discussed include kinetic descriptions of microscopic
and quantum phenomena, and kinetic descriptions of macroscopic phenomena. As a
recent novel example for the kinetic methodology we will use kinetic
descriptions to study hyperbolic flows for complex supply chains. The
theoretical and modeling aspects of this research program, on both microscopic
and macroscopic scales, will be integrated with kinetic-based numerical methods
for capturing ``smaller scales phenomena".

The rationale behind this proposal is a timely effort to address several
important issues in modern applied mathematics. Kinetic theories are not new.
Yet, there have been many major developments in kinetic modeling, kinetic
theories and related numerical methods, with the potential for a considerable
impact on emerging new fields in physical and social sciences. The proposed
effort will significantly strengthen the leading role that the US researchers
can play in pursuing cutting-edge research and training a new generation of
applied mathematicians in this important field. We expect this project to
contribute to the development of scientific workforce by advanced training for
doctoral and postdoctoral researchers and by providing a platform for
interdisciplinary interactions with researchers from related disciplines.
Internal and external interactions will be maintained through synergetic
collaborations which will come to fruition during the three annual workshops to
be held in Maryland (Year 1), France and Brown (Year 2), and Wisconsin (Year 3).
International meetings will be held as part of a series of interdisciplinary
workshops organized by the Center for Scientific Computation and Mathematical
Modeling (CSCAMM) at the University of Maryland. Project researchers will
collaborate with the DOE Center for Multiscale Plasma Dynamics in CSCAMM, the
DOE Ames Laboratory at Iowa State University, and the Institute for
Computational Engineering and Sciences (ICES) at UT Austin.
