
* 0854841
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Models of Balanced Multiscale Ocean Physics for Simulation and Parameterization
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2009,06/22/2009
* Edgar Knobloch,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2013
* USD 111,431.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The vast range of scales occurring in the Earth's climate system cannot be
explicitly captured in global climate models, even on emerging petascale
computers. This project will further understanding of the effects of physics at
a scale that is too small to be resolved by models on the larger climate system
by: 1) exploring potentially novel asymptotic expansions that provide reduced
single-scale equations for each of the three important small-scale processes:
convection, mesoscale eddies, and submesoscale eddies; 2) extending the
asymptotic expansion technique to explicitly derive the coupling between small-
scale regimes and large-scale &#64258;ows; 3) developing state-of-the-art high-
performance parallel codes to simulate the reduced single-scale and multiscale
equations; 4) performing high-resolution simulations on high-performance
computers; 5) analyzing the simulations to extend understanding of the behavior
of each small-scale process, including &#64258;ow dynamics, energetics, and
transport properties; and 6) testing a range of existing parameterizations and
superparameterizations of unresolved physics using eddy-resolving models to
understand the scope and impact of our multiscale approach.

The development of coupled asymptotic expansions to study multiscale phenomena
has potential applications across many fields of science and engineering, in
addition to the geosciences. This research is intended to demonstrate and apply
the advantages of this approach to improve mathematical and computational study
of the climate system. In geosciences, the asymptotic mathematical approach has
long been used to improve computation--the first numerical weather forecasts
were only possible because of the quasigeostrophic asymptotic expansion. The
geosciences have long led asymptotic analysis as well, among the earliest
examples of matched asymptotic expansions are studies of oceanic western
boundary currents, such as the Gulf Stream and Kuroshio. Finally, the research
is intended to directly improve climate models' representation of small-scale
physics, which will aid our goals in improved forecasting and understanding of
climate and mankind's influence on it.
