
* 0968221
* FRG: Collaborative Research: The Calculus of Functors and the Theory of Operads: Interactions and Applications
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2010,05/05/2010
* Michael Ching,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2011
* USD 115,598.00

The focus of this FRG project is on the Calculus of Functors, a systematic
method of studying fundamental geometric objects, particularly spaces of
functions of various sorts (e.g. embeddings), through focusing on whole
processes (functors) which construct the geometric objects. It allows for
systematic stratification of objects in a hierarchical way that reveals
invariants that satisfy `polynomial' local-to-global behavior. Pioneered by Tom
Goodwillie and Michael Weiss in the late 80's and early 90's, it is only more
recently that the broad power of these methods has been becoming clear.
Principal Investigators Arone, Ching, Dwyer, Kuhn, Lesh, and Turchin have all
been involved in important discoveries in this area, which range from new
results about the periodic homotopy of spheres, to giving new models for spaces
of knots. Operad Theory is another algebraic machine that has been developed to
study systems of operations satisfying specified algebraic properties
(associativity, commutativity, etc.) up to some sort of controlled deformation.
The current work of the PIs has led to the emerging perspective that Functor
Calculus has deep connections with the more studied Theory of Operads, and that
one might be able to use equivariant homotopy methods to measure how much
simpler the latter is than the the former. The range of application is also
growing with the placement of Calculus within the broader context of Homotopical
Algebra.

In Topology, one is studying geometric objects ranging from manifolds (higher
dimensional versions of curves and surfaces) and knots, in the case of Geometric
Topology, to spaces of continuous functions and structured rings up to
deformation, in the case of Algebraic Topology. One studies such things by means
of algebraic invariants. Such invariants need to be computable, which in
practice means that if a `global' object is built out of `local' pieces, there
is some process that allows one to attempt to calculate the global invariant
from the local invariants. The purposes of this project are to (a) investigate
the Calculus of Functors method of organizing and constructing such invariants,
(b) to connect this to Operad Theory, the very important theory of algebraic
operations, and (c) to bring these methods to a broad spectrum of mathematicians
through workshops and a conference. The methods studied in this project should
give new insights into many mathematical topics of ongoing and wide interest,
ranging from topological complexity of algorithms to representation theory to
topological field theory.
