
* 1065438
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Error Quantification and Control for Gravitational Waveform Simulation
* DMS,Gravity Theory, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2011,04/29/2013
* Lee Lindblom,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2014
* USD 384,753.00

The purpose of this project is to develop practical rigorous methods for
estimating the error in computed waveforms from gravitational wave simulation
with reliable accuracy, in support of the NSF-funded Laser Interferometer
Gravitational Observatory (LIGO). The project brings together a team of applied
and computational mathematicians with expertise in constructing error estimates
for solutions of partial differential equations and physicists with expertise in
numerical solutions of the Einstein equation and gravitational wave data
analysis. The primary technical goal is to develop and analyze new mathematical
and computational methods that can be used by the gravitational physics
community to compute rigorous and reliably accurate estimates for the errors of
numerical solutions of the Einstein equations and the gravitational waveforms
that are determined from them. In particular, this research explores the
following issues: (1) Error quantification and a posteriori analysis using
adjoint sensitivity techniques, and their associated numerical implementation;
(2) Adaptive algorithms that are driven by goal-oriented error control, and
their associated theoretical convergence analysis; and (3) The role of
covariance symmetry and associated geometric structures in error analysis and
the construction of numerical methods. As part of the a posteriori analysis, the
project team will develop the basic theory of adjoint operators and duality for
the Einstein equations. This will provide the foundation for future
investigations into sensitivity analysis, data assimilation and uncertainty
quantification for using LIGO data. It should be emphasized that the main
thrusts of the proposed research are discretization-neutral, and therefore have
broad applicability to the breadth of numerical relativity codes in existence.

The NSF-supported Laser Interferometer Gravitational Observatory (LIGO) can be
successful only if highly accurate gravitational waveform models are available
for use as part of the data analysis process, both for detecting gravitational
waves and also for measuring the physical properties of any detected signals.
The strongest sources of gravitational waves are expected to be collisions
between heavy, dense stars or black holes, which can only be modeled accurately
using complex numerical simulations to calculate the anticipated gravitational
waveforms. Such waveforms are needed to construct the filters that allow
detection of the weak gravitational-wave signals in the noisy detector, and such
waveforms are also needed to measure the physical properties of the sources of
any detected signals. The waveform accuracy needed to accomplish the required
data analysis tasks is quite high. However, the numerical relativity community
has yet to develop the analytic and computational tools needed to evaluate
rigorously the accuracy of the numerical waveform models. If the qualitative
accuracy measures currently used by the numerical relativity community are too
optimistic, the rigorous new methods developed by this project could make the
difference between success and failure of LIGO. If the current numerical
waveforms are in fact accurate enough, the methods developed by this project
could improve the computational efficiency of determining waveforms with a
specified accuracy level, and thus reduce the cost of producing them.
