
* 1156636
*  Conformal Stochastic Geometry, Dyson Gas, Potential Theory and Conformal Field Theory
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 11/01/2011,10/26/2011
* Pavel Wiegmann,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 10/31/2015
* USD 149,999.00

The award supports research and education in the emerging area of stochastic (or
random) conformal geometry and its applications to physics and complex analysis.
In recent years several subjects in physics and mathematics have received a
tremendous boost by focusing on problems of stochastic conformal geometry -
statistics of random shapes, loops, paths and surfaces whose probabilistic
measure is largely determined by conformal symmetry. These problems are of
interest to various fields in physics and mathematics, especially modern complex
analysis where respective insights and methods are often shared. The class of
problems described in the proposal is probabilistic in nature, and the use of
probabilistic methods is essential. On the other hand, conformal stochastic
geometry can be seen as "quantum" extension of classical conformal analysis,
therefore methods of modern potential theory and complex analysis are yet
another essential part. A unifying theme of the proposal is Dyson gas and Dyson
diffusion. In physics Dyson gas appears in Quantum Hall Effect, in Calogero
models describing particles with fractional charge and statistics, quantum chaos
and random matrix theory. In mathematics Dyson gas appears in the theory of
Selberg integrals, complex analysis, the theory of orthogonal polynomials and
integrable models of statistical mechanics. In recent years it became clear that
Dyson gas has an intrinsic relation with conformal stochastic geometry and
representations of Virasoro algebra. Since Dyson's gas can be studied by methods
of classical analysis one of the aspect of the target of the proposal to use
Dyson gas as a plat to form to attack difficult problems of conformal geometry
rigorously.



The notion of stochastic geometry has originated in the field of critical
phenomena in studies of random interfaces starting and ending on boundaries, but
recent quest for statistics of random geometrical objects such as critical
fluctuating clusters, critical surfaces, random self-avoiding walks and randomly
growing patterns showed that methods and concepts of conformal geometry are at
the core of a broader class of developing fields of physics and mathematics.
Among them unstable fluid flows, random Gaussian fields, quantum gravity, random
matrices, non-equilibrium growth processes including the diffusion limited
aggregation, critical phenomena in systems with quenched disorder and Fractional
Hall effect. Together, these problems constitute a newly emerging field of
conformal stochastic geometry. An important feature of the field of conformal
stochastic geometry is a natural interaction of mathematical and physical
approaches, methods, and intuition. The proposal builds on the momentum of such
unification by focusing on interdisciplinary problems of current interest that
fall into the realm of conformal stochastic geometry. Some of them have accurate
mathematical formulations; others have not been so far formulated in a rigorous
way. One of our goals is to develop mathematical formulations of important
physical problems in the domain of conformal stochastic geometry. The broader
impact of the proposed research lies in bringing together ideas from various
fields of physics and mathematics including complex analysis, probability
theory, random matrices, conformal field theory, non-equilibrium growth
phenomena, and disordered systems. The proposed research will result in bringing
these fields closer by communicating the results to various research communities
and promoting collaborations between practitioners in diverse areas. The
education and outreach component of the proposal will integrate research into
teaching of physics from high school to graduate level. The project will provide
research and training opportunities for several graduate students.
