
* 1160379
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Chemically-active Viscoelastic Mixture Models in Physiology: Formulation, Analysis, and Computation
* DMS,MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 09/15/2012,08/19/2016
* Grady Wright,ID,Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 106,873.00

This project concerns development and analysis of mathematical models of several
complex biological processes, each with major importance to the fundamental and
health sciences: cellular blebbing and its role in cellular locomotion through
extracellular matrix, platelet deposition and fibrin gelation in arterial blood
clotting, mucin secretion and its role in acid transport in the stomach, protein
sorting and trafficking by the Golgi apparatus. Although the details of the
biology of these processes are vastly different, a common theme is that each
involves a complex viscoelastic material mixture whose behavior is determined by
the dynamic interplay of mechanics, flow, physical structure, and chemistry. The
mathematical description of these processes requires equations describing
multiphase flow, the evolution of composition, structure and chemistry, and the
relationship between stresses and composition/structure. The solution and
analysis of sophisticated models that combine these elements will pose
substantial mathematical and computational challenges. To meet these challenges,
the investigators will develop and apply advanced numerical algorithms to gain
fundamental insights into the mechanisms of function of these important
physiological processes. This work will lead to novel and important advances in
understanding the essential role of the mechanics and dynamics of complex
materials in the function of biological systems. This, in turn, will support
improved diagnosis and treatment of a range of serious medical disorders
including coronary artery disease, cancer, and metabolic disease. The work will
also lead to better understanding of complex materials in general and contribute
to the design of novel new materials for meeting pressing technological
challenges. Furthermore, the design of new computational algorithms will lead to
new capabilities in the use of high-performance computing in science and
engineering. The highly interdisciplinary nature of the project will provide
many opportunities for training young scientists in the new multi-disciplinary
approach to science.

Many important physiological processes involve interactions between materials of
different types (for example, water and cells or water and polymer gels) and
which move relative to one another. The physical interactions between the
materials can be strongly influenced by chemical reactions, and the chemical
reactions in turn are influenced by the materials' motion and other
interactions. Better insight into how such complex systems work and are
regulated is critical to understanding these important processes and how they
can be manipulated to improve human health. Because these processes are governed
by physical and chemical principles and properties, and because these principles
and properties can be expressed mathematically, mathematical tools can be
brought to bear on these problems. Through mathematical analysis and
computational simulations, new insights into the materials' behavior can be
developed and a wealth of data can be obtained that complements the data
obtainable from traditional laboratory experiments. Hence the combination of
mathematical and experimental investigators brought together in this project is
expected to lead to significant new insights in important physiological and
pathological situations including blood clotting, metabolism, and cancer
metastasis. Further the mathematics and computational tools developed in the
project will impact the development of non-biological complex materials to meet
pressing technological challenges.
