
* 1265202
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Statistical Modeling and Inference of Vast Matrices for Complex Problems
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/15/2013,06/11/2015
* Ming Yuan,WI,Morgridge Institute for Research, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2017
* USD 278,004.00

Technological advances make it possible to collect and store large data with
relatively low costs. As a result, scientific studies in a wide range of fields
routinely generate a massive amount of data. Oftentimes, our ability to obtain
measurements outpaces our ability to derive useful information from them. These
pressing challenges serve as the ultimate motivation for the proposed research.
In particular, this collaborative proposal presents novel research plans on the
development of statistical theory and methodologies as well as computational
techniques for a host of problems involving large matrices ranging from
covariance matrices, volatility matrices, density matrices to relational
matrices.

The past few years have witnessed an explosion of data as a result of scientific
and technological advances. As data storage cost continues to fall, the focal
point on these big data has been transitioning inevitably from data management
towards deriving actionable insights from them. There is a pressing need to
respond to these challenges and understand the profound impact of large data on
scientific research and knowledge discovery. The proposed research project deals
with emerging problems that arise naturally at the frontier of a multitude of
scientific and technological fields such as systems biology, high-frequency
finance, and quantum computing among others. As a consequence, the proposed
research effort will not only push forward the state-of-the-art of statistical
understanding of large matrices, but also facilitate the advancement of various
scientific fields and their embracement of the digital revolution.
