
* 1361185
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Vectorial and geometric problems in the calculus of variations
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2014,05/18/2016
* Lawrence Evans,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 459,903.00

This project focuses on mathematical methods for problems that appear naturally
in physics and engineering, for example, non-linear elasticity, phase
transitions and interaction energies. Apart from being fascinating mathematical
problems that require new ideas and methods, their study is also of great
importance for a deeper understanding of the physical phenomena themselves. For
instance, understanding the best way to crumple a paper is a natural problem in
elasticity which has several applications in material sciences, while nonlocal
interaction energies appear in physics and chemistry as a way to describe the
energy of nuclei. Our mathematical research will shed new light on the range of
energies under which nuclei are stable. The project will also have important
impact on human resource development. We propose a system of personnel exchanges
between our home institutions, designed to provide a rich training experience to
students and postdocs. We propose to coordinate our activities and to have an
emphasis month every year in one of the home universities of the PIs. We also
propose summer schools designed to bring members of the group together
(including graduate students and postdocs) to stimulate scientific progress,
while exposing the fruits of our research to a broader audience and helping to
educate and attract a new generation of researchers to this exciting area of
emerging mathematical challenges and ideas.

The goals of this project include developing new general methods to study
variational problems both in a vectorial setting and in the case of non-local
interaction energies. The problems we plan to study include: variational
problems in nonlinear elasticity related to crumpling; existence of gradient
flows for quasiconvex energy functionals and variational problems involving
surface tension and nonlocal energies. We focus on central issues in the
calculus of variations, such as proving existence of minimizers of energy
functionals and understanding their (possible) uniqueness and regularity. While
much is known in the scalar case, very few results are available in the
vectorial setting (both in the static and evolutionary cases) and for geometric
problems involving non-local energies. Through a common effort, bringing
together the investigators and collaborators for this Focused Research Group
Grant, we expect some general methods to emerge, allowing us to obtain new
substantial results. In addition to its purely mathematical interest, this
project will improve the understanding of the phenomena that these models
attempt to reflect.
