
* 1463797
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Super Approximation and Thin Groups with Applications to Geometry, Groups, and Number Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2015,02/28/2020
* Darren Long,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2021
* USD 271,680.00

One of the most fundamental objects in mathematics is the "group," a set with a
rule analogous to multiplication for combining elements of the set. Groups can
be viewed as precise ways to capture the symmetries of sets, shapes, and other
mathematical objects. The last decade has seen an explosion of activity that can
be viewed through the lens of what is called Super Approximation. Very roughly
speaking, this refers to the idea that walking around randomly on the points of
a group mixes things up very rapidly. The growth of this subject was swiftly
followed by a variety of applications to geometry, groups, and number theory.
The striking symbiosis of the resultant collection of problems and fields has
inspired this team of researchers to unify and more deeply connect these and
related themes of research, in order to make further advances.

The Principal Investigators, as well as their postdocs and students, will work
on a variety of projects concerned with the group theoretic, geometric, and
number theoretic aspects of Super Approximation. Exponential sums and "Affine
Sieve" methods will be developed further to "Local-Global" settings, including
attacks on McMullen's Arithmetic Chaos Conjecture and Zaremba's Conjecture. The
PIs will furthermore explore the use of privileged circle and sphere packings to
understand the construction of trace (and invariant trace) fields for hyperbolic
manifolds, a long-standing and almost completely untouched aspect of the theory.
Moreover, the PIs will investigate the construction of interesting subgroups of
arithmetic lattices via geometric deformations, as well as study problems in
combinatorics and computer science.
