
* 1564376
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Innovations in Statistical Modeling, Prediction, and Design for Computer Experiments
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2016,05/29/2018
* Peter Chien,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2020
* USD 299,330.00

The explosive growth in the use of computer simulators in the last fifteen years
has helped galvanize a revolution in scientific, engineering, and biological
research that includes advances in the aerospace industry, material science,
renewable energy, and biomechanics. Researchers can make a detailed exploration
of scientific design alternatives under a wide set of operating environments
using runs from a simulator of a physical system, possibly coupled with those
from a traditional physical system experiment. This research project will
advance the statistical modeling, design, and analysis of experiments that use
computer simulators. The first research area is Improved Modeling of Simulator
Output: The investigators will develop flexible stochastic models that will
allow more accurate prediction in settings where the simulator provides related
multivariate output of the performance of a physical system. Current prediction
models either assume output independence (knowledge of one output gives no
information about other outputs) or a linear dependence on a common set of
latent drivers. The second research area concerns Advances in Emulation: The
investigators aim to devise efficient emulators of simulator output for novel
input and output settings such as when gradient information is available or when
the output consists of both point and integrated measures. They plan to
construct predictors that incorporate natural invariances present in the
simulator output. For example, the predicted response should be constant under
permutations of the inputs when the output satisfies this condition; the project
will quantify the uncertainty in the invariant predictors. The investigators
also plan to quantify the uncertainty of a recent, theoretically-justified
method of calibrating computer simulators based on physical experimental data.
The third research area is the Design of Simulator Experiments: Efficient
designs of simulator experiments will be devised to minimize the computational
effort required to determine the sensitivity of a simulator output to each of
its inputs.

This research will build a statistical framework for the modeling, design and
analysis of experiments that employ computer simulators. The specific goals are
(1) to devise flexible interpolating stochastic models for computer simulators
with multivariate output; (2) to invent efficient predictors for novel input and
output settings such as when gradient information is available or when the
output consists of both point and integrated responses; (3) to develop emulators
of simulator output that incorporate the same invariances present in the
simulator responses; (4) to quantify the uncertainty of L2 calibrated predictors
for expensive computer codes; and (5) to construct new sliced Latin hypercube
designs to allow the efficient calculation of global sensitivity indices. The
investigators will develop new modes for training statistics graduate students
having interests in engineering applications. Opportunities will be created for
subject matter specialists to provide critical practical challenges in three
areas: aerospace/mechanical engineering, biomechanics, and material science, and
to conduct joint applied projects with the researchers.
