
* 1854220
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Statistical Approaches to Topological Data Analysis that Address Questions in Complex Data
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, TOPOLOGY, STATISTICS, , CDS&E-MSS
* 09/01/2019,06/26/2019
* Jessica Kehe,CT,Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2020
* USD 368,706.00

As both real and simulated data become increasingly complex due to improved
instrumentation and deeper understanding of the underlying data-generating
mechanisms, improved statistical methodology is required for proper analysis.
Fields such as astronomy and biology that have spatial intricate, web-like data
(e.g., the large-scale structure of the Universe, fibrin networks) can benefit
from methodology that exploits the web-like information. The field of
Topological Data Analysis (TDA) has great potential for the innovations needed
to address these important and challenging scientific questions. This project
will extend existing TDA algorithms, statistical theory and applications, and
make the advancement easily accessible by incorporating the work into the freely
available R package TDA. Moreover, the research will train undergraduate and
graduate students in an interdisciplinary and collaborative environment.

The goals of this project are (1) to extend existing algorithms in TDA to allow
statistically rigorous inferences and improved visualization, (2) to develop the
statistical theory necessary to apply hypothesis testing to sets of topological
descriptors, (3) to develop justifiable algorithms for parameter selection, and
(4) to apply these methods to complex data, especially to critical areas in
astrophysics. These developments will make TDA more accessible to scientists and
data analysts across disciplines and will give TDA a rigorous statistical
foundation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
