
* 1952751
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Randomized Algorithms for Solving Linear Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,04/24/2020
* Vladimir Rokhlin,CT,Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 375,172.00

The objective of this project is to develop faster and more energy-efficient
algorithms for one of the most fundamental tasks in computational science:
solving large systems of coupled linear equations. Faster algorithms will both
accelerate computations that can already be performed, and enable computations
that are beyond the reach of existing methods. More energy efficient algorithms
will help to reduce the power consumption of data centers, and to extend the
battery life of mobile devices such as cell phones and tablet computers. The
fundamental innovation behind our approach is to harness mathematical properties
of large collections of random numbers to build new stochastic algorithms that
dramatically outperform existing deterministic ones. In a nutshell, the idea is
to use randomized sampling, and randomized averaging, to reduce the effective
dimensionality of the problems to be processed. In addition the project provides
research training opportunities for postdoctoral fellows and graduate students.

We seek to develop computationally efficient methods for solving linear systems
of equations involving large numbers of variables, both in terms of asymptotic
complexity, and in terms of practical speed at realistic problem sizes. Such
systems of equations arise ubiquitously in science and engineering, and solving
them is often the bottleneck in terms of time that decides how large of a
problem can be handled. In particular, this is what limits how large of a data
set can be analyzed, or how realistic a computational simulation can be when
modelling some physical phenomenon. By developing faster and more efficient
algorithms, we will accelerate computations that are done today, and enable many
others that are outside the reach of currently existing methods. The project is
premised on the recent development of new randomized algorithms for solving
linear algebraic problems. Such methods have proven to dramatically outperform
classical deterministic methods for certain tasks such as computing low rank
factorizations to matrices - the crucial computational step in e.g. Principal
Component Analysis, the PageRank algorithm by Larry Page and Sergey Brin,
numerical coarse graining when modeling complex multiscale systems, and many
more. Randomized algorithms have also been used to build faster solvers for
linear systems. However, while the theoretical results obtained at this point
are extremely encouraging, it remains to develop randomized linear solvers that
are decisively faster in practical applications. To achieve this goal, the
project will support a research group that brings together four researchers with
complementary skills in numerical linear algebra, random matrix theory,
computational harmonic analysis, optimization, and high performance computing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
