
* 2052926
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Flexible Network Inference
* DMS,STATISTICS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2021
* Jianqing Fan,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 230,000.00

Scientists have been studying many natural systems by viewing them as networks,
a term used to describe collections of entities and their interactions. Networks
are ubiquitous in many fields, including epidemiology, economics, sociology,
genomics and ecology, to name a few. A number of statistical models have emerged
over the last two decades to describe network data. One common type of model is
the latent space model, where each entity?s behavior is governed by its position
in some unobserved (latent) space, and if we knew these positions, we could
fully describe the statistical behavior of the network. While these models have
been useful in many problems, real systems tend to be more complicated. The goal
of this project is to fill this gap between models and reality by developing
network analysis methods that still perform well even when the model does not
fully match the data.

The specific aims of this project are to improve our understanding of existing
network analysis methods under model misspecification, heterogeneous noise, and
incomplete or missing data, and to develop novel network methods that are robust
to these sources of error. We consider both these problems under one unified
framework that represents the adjacency matrix of a network as its expectation
plus entry-wise noise, which encompasses most popular network models. Within
this framework, the project will examine the effects of model misspecification
on downstream inference, both for global inference tasks (e.g., network-level
summary statistics) and local inference (e.g., node-level statistics). One core
goal of the project is developing bootstrap and resampling algorithms for
networks, two extremely useful tools in classical statistics that do not yet
have full network analogues. Another core goal is developing more general
notions of community membership and node similarity, allowing the extension of
robust algorithms to a broader collection of network models. Finally, the
methods developed will be extended to the analysis of multiple networks. Taken
together, these tools will substantially expand the toolbox of network
techniques, while accounting for the realities of noisy and incomplete network
data and imperfect network models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
