
* 2052665
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Derived Categories, Moduli Spaces, and Classical Algebraic Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2021,08/11/2022
* Xiaolei Zhao,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2024
* USD 155,713.00

Algebraic geometry is the study of algebraic varieties, the geometric objects
defined by systems of polynomial equations. A driving goal of the subject is the
classification of algebraic varieties, involving questions like how to determine
when one variety can be transformed into another using algebraic functions, or
how to construct varieties with highly constrained geometric properties.
Surprising connections have been found between these classical problems and
modern tools in the subject, especially derived categories and their moduli
spaces of objects. This project aims to further develop these tools in order to
make progress on outstanding conjectures. Through conferences, workshops, and
mentoring opportunities, the project will also train a new generation of
mathematicians in this area. The project has three related research goals. The
first is to use noncommutative resolutions of singularities to prove structural
results about derived categories of coherent sheaves, motivated by conjectures
of Bondal-Orlov and Kuznetsov relating these categories to birational geometry.
The second goal is to construct Bridgeland stability conditions and study the
geometry of their moduli spaces, both in general settings and cases of special
interest. The third goal is to apply advances on the above topics to classical
problems, like the classification of hyperkahler varieties and the rationality
problem for cubic fourfolds.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
