
* 2052846
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Trace Methods and Applications for Cut-and-Paste K-Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/2021,05/10/2021
* Michael Mandell,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2024
* USD 156,887.00

This research brings together ideas, techniques, and insights from two long-
standing programs in mathematics: scissors congruence and algebraic K-theory.
Scissors congruence originated in Hilbert's 3rd Problem, which asks when two
polyhedra in three-dimensional space are "scissors congruent," meaning one can
be obtained from the other by cutting it into smaller polyhedra and reassembling
in a different way. This question, together with its solution by Dehn, initiated
an extensive program of research. Over the past 120 years these ideas have grown
and now connect to almost every branch of geometry. Ground-breaking recent work
provides a fundamental link between this program and algebraic K-theory, which
is itself a deep and rapidly developing area of research. Algebraic K-theory
intertwines three major fields of mathematics: topology, algebraic geometry, and
number theory. Developing the connection between scissors congruence and
algebraic K-theory will significantly advance research in both. This work also
provides the platform for striking new research avenues that will bring to bear
the tools and techniques of modern algebraic K-theory research on a wide range
of geometric questions. This project additionally includes a number of efforts
to support students and new researchers in the field, expanding and broadening
access to these innovative ideas.

This broad new program of research develops the foundations of combinatorial,
or "cut-and-paste," algebraic K-theory, applies these new tools to resolve
outstanding geometric questions, and expands the scope of combinatorial K-theory
to new applications. It brings modern techniques in algebraic K-theory to the
emerging K-theoretic approach to cut-and-paste invariants, and applies this
approach to a variety of problems in algebraic topology, differential topology,
and algebraic geometry. Algebraic K-theory has seen a stunning revolution in the
last thirty years due to the invention of trace methods, but these tools have
not yet been developed for combinatorial K-theory, a deficiency that this
project hopes to remedy. This requires developing the foundations of this new
theory and exploiting connections to equivariant homotopy theory. New
computational and analytic tools for combinatorial K-theory will lead to
progress on a wide variety of geometric problems, including applications to
manifolds and invertible TQFTs, varieties and motivic measures, and fixed point
theory. Many questions in these fields have natural interpretations in terms of
cut-and-paste invariants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
