
* 9803791
* Research and Scientific Training in Applied Mathematics
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1998,08/09/2005
* Irene Fonseca,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2005
* USD 835,508.00

This award will support the continuation and expansion of the research and
scientific training in applied mathematics at the Center for Nonlinear Analysis
in the Department of Mathematical Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University. Research
will focus on the mathematical description and prediction of a range of
phenomena that occur in material science applications. The study of mathematical
models for novel man-made materials such as shape memory alloys, ferroelectric,
magnetic and magnetostrictive materials, composites, liquid crystals, and thin
films, will play a central role in the program. Phase transitions, defectiveness
and defect propagation, grain boundaries and their evolution, the prediction of
macroscopic behavior and its interplay with microstructural features,
superconductivity, elasto-plastic systems, hyperbolic conservation laws,
stability, metastability, and other topics will be addressed. The study of these
questions will advance the frontiers of nonlinear analysis and scientific
computation.

The goal of this work is to identify and develop new applications of the
mathematical sciences. The main focus will be on nonlinear behavior of materials
and concomitant issues in analysis and computation. Large scale computing will
play a central role in all of our work. The Center will promote close
collaboration between mathematicians and scientists from other fields. Main
activities will be centered around intense, short workshops on selected topics
at the forefront of interdisciplinary research, a postdoctoral training program
where emphasis will be placed on research opportunities available at the
interface between the mathematical and physical sciences, and a visitors
program. The visitors program and the workshops will be coordinated around
research themes selected on an annual basis. Some of our resources will be
devoted to a secondary research thrust in mathematical finance.
