* 0300321
* Tree Representations and Probabilistic Zeta Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Nigel Boston, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2005
* USD 64,000.00

DMS-0300321 Boston, Nigel

Abstract

Title: Tree Representations

The investigator and his collaborators are developing a theory of Galois group
actions on rooted trees, in analogy to the well-established theory of such
actions on p-adic vector spaces. The Fontaine-Mazur conjecture and
generalizations of it predict that for Galois groups of number field extensions
unramified at p the latter actions have finite image whereas there should exist
tree actions with infinite image. The investigator's program will identify these
actions and hence these (as yet mysterious) Galois groups, allowing direct
verification of Fontaine-Mazur in these cases. Possible spin-offs of this
include improved root-discriminant bounds and a quantitative version of
Fontaine-Mazur along the lines of Cohen-Lenstra heuristics, together with
applications for the pro-p group theorists such as new families of branch pro-p
groups. Number theory has been revolutionized in recent years by the use of
"Galois representations", most notably by Wiles in his proof of Fermat's Last
Theorem. In particular his co-author, Taylor, has gone on to apply these
techniques to many other longstanding problems. The only drawback is that these
methods only work in one half of cases, the "p-ramified" ones. This proposal
develops a new theory of Galois representations suited to handling the other
half. The work of Taylor and Wiles proves cases of the fundamental Fontaine-
Mazur conjecture, from which solutions to Fermat's Last Theorem and similar
equations simply follow - in the other half the Fontaine-Mazur conjecture has
many striking consequences and the new theory presents a program for verifying
the conjecture and hence its corollaries.

