* 0300205
* CombinaTexas:  A Combinatorics Conference for the South-Central U.S.
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2006
* Huafei C Yan, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 03/31/2006
* USD 31,800.00

Principal Investigator: Huafei C. Yan&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: DMS-
0300205&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Texas A&amp; M University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for CombinaTexas: A Combinatorics Conference for
the South-Central U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Departments of Mathematics at
Texas A\&amp;M University and Southwest Texas State University will host annual
combinatorics conferences in March or April of the years 2003-2005, as part of
the CombinaTexas series initiated in 2000. CombinaTexas has served as an
important meeting place for the expanding group of researchers in combinatorics
in the South-Central United States. CombinaTexas'03, to be held at Southwest
Texas State University on April 5-6, 2003, will focus on Graph Theory
&lt;br/&gt;and its Applications. The program is built around seven one-hour
talks delivered by internationally recognized researchers on topics including
Computational Graph Theory, Topological Graph Theory, Random Graphs; and their
applications to Algorithms, Geometry, and Number Theory. There will also be
short communications, poster sessions and social events to encourage
communication and collaboration among participants. To be consistent with the
goal of building research infrastructure, the target audience is advanced
graduate students and junior faculty. The 2004 and 2005 conferences will be
formatted similarly; the 2004 conference will focus on Algebraic Combinatorics
and Algorithms, and the 2005 conference will focus on Probabilistic Methods and
Combinatorial Number Theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent progress in graph
drawing, random graphs, and computer-aided microchip design has been dramatic.
Continuing research in graph theory and its applications will contribute
advances in internet modeling, algorithm design, and bioinfomatics; each area is
of independent and intense interest. The CombinaTexas series has become a major
regional research and educational activity in the above areas, which is welcomed
&lt;br/&gt;and supported by its participants and beneficiaries. CombinaTexas
will continue to broaden and diversify participation and to enhance the
infrastructure for research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;