* 0300970
* RUI:  An HPLC-MS for Conducting Studies of Responses to Environmental Stresses in Marine Organisms
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Kathryn Van Alstyne, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 04/30/2006
* USD 164,673.00

This award provides support for purchase of a high performance liquid
chromatography - mass spectrometer (HPLC-MS) for the Shannon Point Marine Center
(SPMC) of Western Washington University. Because of the Center's location, SPMC
scientists have been actively involved in research on the local marine flora and
fauna and in training students in marine research. In recent years, faculty
research at the Center has become more focused on the physiology and
biochemistry of marine organisms. Many of these studies involve the measurement
of physiological and biochemical responses of organisms to changing
environmental conditions. The use of HPLC is an important tool for such research
because it allows researchers to identify, separate, and measure individual
metabolites as their amounts change in response to a variety of environmental
conditions. The scope of the studies that can be conducted at SMPC has been
limited by a lack of appropriate mass spectroscopy capabilities throughout the
entire Western Washington campus. The combination of HPLC and MS allows
researchers to confirm identifications of known compounds and aid structural
determination of newly discovered natural products. The instrument to be
purchased, which has both analytical and preparative-scale capabilities, will be
located in a new common-use analytical laboratory at the Center where it can be
accessed by researchers at the Center and those from the main campus in
Bellingham as well. Shannon Point has a strong record in supporting graduate and
undergraduate research and education programs. The instrument will be available
to students at all levels, including undergraduates participating in two NSF-
supported training activities: the Minorities in Marine Science Undergraduate
Program (MIMSUP) and the Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site
program.