* 0300574
* Nanophases and Nanofabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Hong Liang, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 09/30/2005
* USD 280,306.00

In this research program, Professor Hong Liang at the University of Alaska
Fairbanks seeks to develop a new and perhaps revolutionary nanofabrication
process to generate nano-scale phases - a crucial step for further expansion of
the fledgling nanotechnology manufacturing industry. There are two objectives in
this program. The first objective is to develop nanofabrication processes to
generate nanodimension phases. The second objective is to understand the role of
mechanical stimulation on phase formation and transformation at small scale. The
primary experimental approach is to use an atomic force microscope (AFM) to
conduct mechanical stimulation. Professor Liang will use several contact and
scanning modes to dope elements from an AFM tip to a substrate surface. The
doped surfaces will be subsequently heat-treated to form desired phases. The AFM
will also be used for surface characterization, along with X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy and high-resolution transmission electron microscope techniques.
How structure-surface properties are impacted by the effects of mechanical
energy and heat treatment processes will be studied. The simplicity and
flexibility of the mechanical manipulation techniques is a significant advantage
for synthesis and characterization of nano-structures. The potential
applications in nanomachining, assembly, nanosensors, and development of MEMS
and NEMS are extremely exciting. Intellectual merit also lies in developing
scientific understanding of a series of new phenomena and non-equilibrium
transformations. These include: properties of nanophases, nanoscale phase
transformation, and their property-performance relationships with materials.
Understanding friction-induced nanophases and phase transformation will open new
areas of materials research in surface science and nanostructured materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is integrated with education activities,
including ongoing program development in Materials Science and outreach to
Alaskan K-12 and schoolteachers. Both graduate and undergraduate level students
will be involved in this research. Students will have an opportunity to explore
the most advanced manufacturing technologies. Expanding such new technologies
and bringing them to public attention in the local community is the first step
to encouraging small companies in Alaska. Such companies can create more job
opportunities in the state, and could change Alaska's technology infrastructure
for the better.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;