* 0300511
* Harmonic analysis and applications to geometric PDE's
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Atanas Stefanov, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2007
* USD 98,000.00

PI: Atanas G. Stefanov&lt;br/&gt;DMS-
0300511&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal deals with several problems arising in geometry and in the theory of
electromagnetism. The main goal is to study analytically the behavior of the
solutions &lt;br/&gt;of the partial differential equations, describing these
processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will concentrate on the study of the
following equations: the Wave map problem, the Schroedinger map problem and the
Yang-Mills fields equations. Following the fundamental physical principle that
every physical system is trying to minimize its energy, one form and studies the
solutions to these nonlinear partial differential equations, which arise as the
minimizers of the corresponding energy functionals. The questions for existence,
uniqueness and stability for these equations have been studied extensively in
various settings. However to conform to a more natural physical situation, one
needs to consider low regularity data. Stefanov will concentrate on showing
regularity for solutions with critical degree of regularity. That is, one
requires the least possible amount of smoothness in order to show that the
solution exists globally in time. In the physically interesting case of small
energy data (modeling systems that are very close to their equilibrium), the
proposal will address the question of stability, i.e. whether the system will
remain close to its initial state or will eventually develop some singularities.
Stefanov proposes to study these problems, by using a variety of techniques
including frequency analysis and gauge theoretic methods. A concurrent aim of
the project is to make these methods more readily applicable to other problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The wave equation models the propagation of different kind
of waves in materials. Nonlinear models of conservative type arise in the study
of vibrating systems and semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;The nonlinear Schroedinger
equation describes the propagation of a laser beam in a medium whose index of
refraction is sensitive to the wave amplitude. Better theoretical understanding
of the time evolution of these models will allow one to better predict the
physical behaviour of such systems. For example, if a physical system of the
kind described above, is stable (rigid) with respect to small perturbations, one
could afford to have certain amount of noise/impurities in the&lt;br/&gt;system.
The analytical study of the equations governing such processes will lead to a
better understanding of the corresponding physical phenomenon. &lt;br/&gt;