* 0300510
* Partial Differential Equations and Complex Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Jeffery McNeal, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 106,390.00

DMS - 0300408

PI: J McNeal

Inst: Ohio State

ABSTRACT

In this project, I will work on four basic problems in several complex
variables: A). The continuous extension of biholomorphic mappings between
general smoothly bounded, pseudoconvex domains, in higher dimensional complex
space, to their boundaries; B). The square-integrable cohomology of the Cauchy-
Riemann operators in the Bergman and other Kaehler metrics; C). Hoelder
regularity of solution operators to the Cauchy-Riemann equations; D). Potential-
theoretic conditions related to compactness of the Neumann operator associated
to the Cauchy-Riemann complex. Our attack on these problems will be through
certain partial differential equations associated to the Cauchy-Riemann and
Laplace operators. In our problems, we are in a situation where classical
estimates do not provide enough information on the Cauchy-Riemann and Laplace
operators to conclude the results we expect. Thus, our approach will be to
perturb the Cauchy-Riemann and Laplace operators suitably, obtain strong
estimates on the perturbed operators, and then connect these estimates to the
unperturbed operators. The starting point is a twisted version of the Cauchy-
Riemann complex.This twisted complex has already produced some powerful results
in complex analysis and it is currently being extended to other contexts by
several mathematicians, including the proposer. We view its continued
development as one of the very fertile ideas presently ongoing in several
complex variables.

We also currently have three graduate students who are working on problems
closely related to these topics; their problems deal with estimating the
weighted Bergman projection on some finite type domains, studying the condition
of self-bounded gradient and its relationship to subellipticity of the Neumann
problem and hyperbolicity, and strengthening the Sobolev embedding theorem on
convex domains of finite type.

Our proposed research will make a significant contribution to certain
broad,general question: by how much may one perturb a system of partial
differential equations and still obtain information on the unperturbed system
from the perturbed system? The results we expect will have many connections to
areas of mathematics outside complex analysis, especially topology (through the
connection between square-integrable cohomology and ordinary homology),
differential equations,and algebraic geometry (by deepening our understanding of
order of contact between algebraic and analytic varieties).In addition, however,
since partial differential equations are ubiquitous throughout science and
engineering, our perturbation methods will be useful outside pure mathematics.
We believe that adaptations of our perturbation methods will apply to partial
differential equations which arise in parts of current scientific theory and our
proposed research will thereby strengthen ties and establish new connections
between complex analysis and other fields of science.

