* 0300025
* Development of a Common Modeling Framework for The Sensitivity Analysis, Optimal Dispatch, and Control Design of Multiple FACTS Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Joe Chow, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 03/31/2007
* USD 216,000.00

Flexible AC Transmission System (FACTS) Controllers are useful in improving
power system reliability and relieving congestions in power systems, which are
particularly important in deregulated electricity markets using locational
marginal prices and thus are of national interest. The proposal addresses the
development of a common modeling framework suitable for implementing both
thyristor-controlled and voltage-sourced converter (VSC) based FACTS
Controllers. This common power system model will have the ability to include
injected series voltage sources, which can circulate active power with other
injected voltage sources, thus expanding the capability of power system models.
In this framework, network sensitivities can be readily computed and be used to
evaluate the effectiveness of FACTS Controllers for steady-state power transfer
and voltage support, and transient power and voltage swings. The proposed
research will develop the FACTS Controller models and the sensitivity
computation tools. The models and tools will be used in determining the optimal
FACTS Controller dispatch for a given power transfer condition, as well as
evaluating the maximum transfer capability over a congested transfer path. In
interarea-mode damping control design, they will be used in computing the
controllability of a FACTS Controller; the observabilities of potential input
signals for the controller, and the inner-loop gain limitations of the
individual input signals. In addition, the use of the common FACTS Controller
model in state estimation will be investigated.