* 0300034
* Enumeration and Structure in Families of Partitions, Compositions, and Combinations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Carla Savage, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2007
* USD 183,287.00

Abstract for award DMS-0300034 of Savage

The proposed research is an investigation of fundamental questions involving the
structure of combinatorial families and relationships between families with
intrinsically different characterizations. The first part concerns partitions
and compositions constrained by linear inequalities. Recent research has shown
this framework to provide a common setting for many partition identities. It has
produced surprising connections with families defined by rank conditions, by
forbidden parts, and by difference conditions. The PI seeks to identify the
families that can be characterized in this way, the partition statistics that
can be captured, and the new insight that might be gained. The second part of
the research studies identities of the Rogers-Ramanujan type. There has been a
growing recognition of the importance of these identities in statistical physics
and Lie algebra and, as a result, an explosion of research uncovering new
identities of the Rogers-Ramanujan type. Nevertheless, these identities are
still not well understood combinatorially. The PI investigates new tools to
analyze the combinatorial aspects. The third part of the project focuses on
structure in partially ordered sets, specifically, symmetric chain
decompositions. This extends recent work of the PI and colleagues that used
symmetric chain decompositions to solve an open geometric question about the
existence of symmetric Venn diagrams. It pursues a new approach to the
outstanding open question of the existence of symmetric chain decomposition in
certain important posets.

Combinatorics is the mathematics used to investigate, analyze, and manipulate
structured data sets: the pages of the world-wide web, the nucleotides forming
DNA, the customers in a telephone network, or the configuration of subatomic
particles in the nucleus of atoms. Combinatorics underlies critical computer
algorithms for retrieving information, for designing communication networks, for
encrypting transactions, and for sequencing DNA. It is of economic and strategic
importance to have a scientific workforce with expertise in this critical area,
which has yet to enter the traditional public school curriculum. The
investigator of this project is committed to the training and involvement of
students in all aspects of the research. It is the nature of the work that the
compelling open questions attract students at both the undegraduate and graduate
level, many of whom have made substantial contributions in previous projects
with this P.I. The results of this project will be useful to other areas of
mathematics, such as ordered sets and representation theory of Lie groups, to
the study of the statistical behavior of bosons and fermions in lasers and
superconductors, and to the visualization of data in statistics.