* 0300806
* Superefficient Fits to Linear Models
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Rudolph Beran, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* grace yang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 200,000.00

Recent theory for shrinkage estimators, techniques from signal-processing, and
effective algorithms for computing orthonormal bases now make it possible to
exploit the superefficiency loophole in classical information bounds for
estimation. In linear regression, if the first few vectors in the regression
basis closely approximate the unknown mean vector, then the risk of an estimator
that shrinks to zero those regression coefficients associated with the
unimportant basis vectors can be much smaller than the risk of the least squares
estimator. Such shrinkage estimators, which are particular symmetric linear
smoothers, realize the benefits of C. Stein's and M. S. Pinsker's pioneering
ideas on estimation of high- or infinite-dimensional parameters. Specific goals
of the research are: (a) to construct and interpret confidence sets centered at
a superefficient fit; (b) to handle, through multiple shrinkage, cases where the
chosen basis is sparse but not well-ordered; (c) to develop within- and between-
observation shrinkage techniques to handle the multivariate linear model; (d) to
draw on relations with signal-processing techniques that use the discrete cosine
basis or wavelet bases.

Regression models fitted by the method of least squares are widely used in
scientific research and other disciplines to establish quantitative
relationships within sets of data. Studies related to the program on Environment
and Global Change and to the program on Manufacturing are examples. The broad
goal of the proposed research is to improve the reliability of these fitted
relationships by replacing least squares with better adaptive linear smoothers.
Recent statistical theory supports the general feasibility of this project. How
to realize what is possible in theory is the essence of the work. The author's
REACT method, described with references in the proposal, is a practical
technique for regression with one response variable that demonstrates real-world
improvements over least squares fits. REACT competes well with current
nonparametric regression methods while offering certain advantages, such as
built-in diagnostics that indicate the quality of the fit. The proposed research
will extend REACT methods to finding relationships among sets of variables and
will develop practical methods for assessing the uncertainty of the estimated
relationships. Least squares regression, a standard function in modern
statistical packages and spreadsheets, is widely used in data-analysis. This
circumstance provides strong motivation for improving on least squares.