* 0300396
* GOALI:  Welding Bulk Amorphous Alloys and Producing Fully Amorphous Joints  Using Reactive Multilayers
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Timothy Weihs, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Joycelyn S. Harrison
* 03/31/2007
* USD 319,928.00

Metallic glasses are a revolutionary class of alloys that have the outstanding
mechanical properties of metals, but which may also easily formed into complex
shapes, much like polymers. One limitation, however, is the difficulty in
joining individual metallic glass components into larger assemblies. Traditional
welding techniques cannot be easily applied to metallic glasses, because the
heat applied tends to crystallize the alloys, degrading their mechanical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A promising approach to joining metallic
glasses is to use reactive multilayer foils, which are a new class of nano-
engineered materials consisting of hundreds of alternating nanoscale layers of
elements which have a strong tendency to react with each other. An extremely
rapid chemical reaction can be generated in such a foil with a small spark,
generating temperatures of 1500 C or more in a few thousandths of a second. This
makes it possible to use a reactive multilayer as a local heat source for
joining metallic glasses. Because the heating is highly localized at the
interface and readily dissipated, reactive multilayers are ideally suited to
joining heat-sensitive materials, including metallic glasses. By combining
experimental and computational tools, the design of the foils will be optimized
to produce high strength, high toughness joints. A second goal is to develop an
entirely new class of multilayers that themselves form amorphous metallic phases
(similar to metallic glasses) as a result of the chemical reaction. Because
amorphous alloys soften at low temperatures, have excellent wetting
characteristics, and are strong and tough, these foils should be outstanding for
bonding a wide variety of engineering materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
GOALI program, researchers from Johns Hopkins University and Howmet Research
Corporation will work together to develop reactive multilayers tailored to
joining of metallic glasses. As part of this interaction, graduate students will
spend several months each year on site at Howmet. In addition to the industry-
academia interaction, the PIs will continue to add to their strong record of
undergraduate participation in research, including female and minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;