* 0300106
* Local Langlands Theory for Real Lie Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Peter Trapa, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/2006
* USD 89,920.00

The proposed research is most naturally understood in terms of the geometric
framework of the representation theoretic part of the local Langlands
conjecture, a framework which originated in the work of Deligne and Kazhdan-
Lusztig. Roughly speaking, the conjecture asserts that the representation theory
of a reductive algebraic group over a local field is dual to a geometric
category of equivariant sheaves on an associated dual space. In this
formulation, the Arthur conjectures may be interpreted as suggesting a very
precise relationship between local components of automorphic forms and the
microlocal geometry of the dual space (codified in the characteristic variety of
certain equivariant perverse sheaves). When the local field is archimedian, the
local Langlands conjecture is a theorem, but the Arthur conjectures are
ineffective in the sense that they fall well short of providing a conjectural
enumeration of the automorphic spectrum. We propose a project to extend the
framework of the local Langlands conjecture to real groups that arise as
nonalgebraic "metaplectic" double covers of the real points of algebraic groups.
Our approach is predicated on an intricate relationship between the algebraic
and nonalgebraic theories which may be interpreted as a kind of ramified local
Shimura correspondence. This allows us to pursue some of Arthur's ideas in the
nonalgebraic setting. Finally in a separate project we propose a series of
nontrivial and computationally powerful restrictions on the form that the
characteristic variety computations can take. (These computations are relevant
for the Arthur theory for both algebraic and nonalgebraic groups.) The
restrictions we pursue give insight into making the Arthur conjectures effective
for real groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research deals with
understanding the theory of semisimple (real) Lie groups. These objects arise
most naturally as symmetries of finite-dimensional structures; the modifier
"semisimple" means, roughly speaking, that the Lie group cannot be broken into
smaller Lie groups. An example of historical import is the Lie group of
rotations in three dimensions (which codifies the symmetry of the spherically
symmetric hydrogen atom). One is often interested in how Lie groups can act on
infinite-dimensional linear spaces (like the solution space of the Schroedinger
equation for the hydrogen atom). Such actions are called representations. In the
1960's, Langlands suggested an astonishing relationship between the
representation theory of semisimple Lie groups and a set of data of essentially
arithmetic origin. This is remarkable because it connects two subjects-
representation theory and number theory-which are ostensible unrelated.
Subsequently the arithmetic parameters that Langlands suggested (and much more
of Langlands ideas) became understood as a shadow of a deep geometric theory of
singular algebraic varieties. The proposer's research seeks to extend some of
the ideas of Langlands, and consequent refinements due to Arthur, to a larger
class of "nonalgebraic" Lie groups than originally considered in the original
"algebraic" setting. (The distinction is a little too delicate to make precise
here, but suffice it to say that the nonalgebraic setting has been demonstrated
to be very interesting from many perspectives.) Our research has a
representation theoretic part and a geometric part. Qualitatively the
representation theoretic part is predicated on a precise relationship between
the nonalgebraic and algebraic theories (revealing new information about each)
and the geometric part turns on a latent structure of the parameter set
mentioned above. It is worth mentioning that for particular examples, these
latent structures amount to a lovely (and very concrete) combinatoric which is
accessible to bright undergraduates; I plan to direct undergraduate research
projects based on this combinatorial theory.