* 0300132
* Statistical &amp; Computational Intelligence Methods for Prognostics in Condition-Based-Maintenance Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Emmanuel Ayorinde, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 06/30/2006
* USD 100,000.00

This grant provides funding for the development of theory and algorithms
necessary to establish effective prognostics methods and technologies for
Condition-Based Maintenance (CBM) of critical equipment and systems through
statistical and computational intelligence methods and sensor-fusion technology.
The objective is to develop prognostic algorithms that facilitate accurate
estimation of Remaining-Useful-Life (RUL) values and confidence levels for
components and equipment. The prognostic methods for signal modeling and
forecasting will exploit existing theory in three promising areas: Statistical
Nonlinear Mixed-Effect Models, Dynamic Bayesian Network Models, and Structural-
Learning Neural Networks. In order to accurately establish a definition of
failure in the degradation signal domain, several probabilistic and fuzzy-
inference methods will also be developed to accommodate physics based failure
mechanisms and experiential and/or empirical knowledge. The resulting methods
and technology will be further refined and validated using a Computer Numerical
Control (CNC) machining test-rig.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research will lead to a better understanding for the science of
equipment prognostics (often regarded as the Achilles' heel of CBM) and a
methodology to work with it in a generic framework. The generic nature of these
algorithms could lead to a more widespread permeation of CBM technology, thus
bringing down the cost of maintenance operations while avoiding unnecessary
maintenance. Another benefit is improved availability of equipment (resulting
from reduced or eliminated equipment breakdowns). The resulting methods and
technology are relevant for almost all industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;