* 0300390
* Cell Insertion and Manipulation Using MEMS
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Makarand Paranjape, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2008
* USD 263,601.00

A program of multidisciplinary research and education is proposed to address the
scientific and engineering challenges associated with manipulating and injecting
living cells using microfabricated devices. The goal of this project is to
develop an integrated microfluidic chip-scale structure, employing Micro-
Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) technology, to efficiently inject functionally
useful material within living cells, and to separate these cells from those that
experience unsuccessful insertions. Such a high throughput device would find
application in several areas of biology and medicine. The incorporation of
specific functional DNA segments into the nucleus of a host cell holds
tremendous potential for gene therapy applications. Conversely, the device can
be used in reverse to extract DNA from cells. Injecting contrast agents for
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or low-dose therapeutics enables the
encapsulating cells to be re-introduced in vivo and immuno-guided (via antibody-
antigen binding) to specific target locations to function as diagnostic cellular
beacons, or for highly localized drug delivery. The device also has application
in the agriculture industry for large-scale in vitro
fertilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In addition to
the device development, this project will strengthen and broaden the education
and training of physics undergraduate and graduate students in technologically
advanced topics offered through the facilities of the Georgetown Advanced
Electronics Laboratory (GAEL), located in the Physics Department, where the
majority of microsystem development will be undertaken. This research will also
foster interdisciplinary collaborations with Biology, Genetics, Pharmacology,
and the Medical Center. The principal investigator has an established record of
involving undergraduates in research, and this project will provide tangible
examples of the applied physics involved in micro- and bio-engineering for
improving the human condition. Plans are also underway to initiate MEMS short-
course for local high school students and teachers, emphasizing state-of-the-art
technologies with the opportunity of experiencing hands-on learning through
device design and fabrication. Teachers from the Arlington County School
District (Virginia) were contacted and expressed great interest in participating
in such a program. Select participants will be actively involved in the proposed
research during the summer months, while continuation of both student and
teacher involvement beyond the summer will be encouraged, in particular for
students interested in science fair projects. The experience gained by students
and teachers alike will have a positive, long-term impact on education,
especially in grades 9-12, in the areas of science and technology - both
fundamentally important subjects for the future.&lt;br/&gt;