* 0300130
* Propagation and Capacity Studies for Multi-Polarized MIMO Communication Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Dennis Goeckel, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Lawrence S. Goldberg
* 05/31/2007
* USD 311,999.00

0300130 Janaswamy

Future wireless systems, providing high data-rate services with limited
spectrum, will increase capacity by exploiting additional degrees of freedom
provided by the spatial dimension. Examples of such systems are multiple-input
multiple-output (MIMO) systems, where multiple antennas are employed at each end
to scale the number of degrees of freedom. Further degrees of freedom can be
obtained through employing various electric and magnetic field components of the
electromagnetic wave. Assuming that the same configuration is employed at both
the transmitter and receiver, information theoretic results for independent
fading demonstrate that the system capacity scales linearly with the product of
the number of antennas and the number of field components per antenna employed.
This has led system designers to consider systems with a vast number of antennas
where possible. However, as these systems push rapidly towards implementation,
it is important to be able to analyze and design such systems for realistic
propagation environments, where the amount of independence is inherently
limited. Thus, under this project, the PIs will: (1) develop stochastic
propagation models that include depolarization and multiple scattering of waves
(2) study capacity limitations arising from element correlation and mutual
coupling that results from restricting antennas to a fixed volume and realistic
environment, and (3) design and analyze robust single-user and multi-user
communication techniques that exploit various forms of channel state information
in these environments.

The technical merit of this project is significant both in fundamental advances
in the individual areas of the PIs and also in the close connection of such. The
modeling techniques for MIMO systems will represent significant advances in
electromagnetic modeling for this important new environment. The capacity
analyses will introduce new techniques and mathematical devices that will prove
of general use to the community. The techniques of design and analysis of
communication systems based on the derived electromagnetic models represent a
new approach to robust communication system design. Just as importantly,
however, is how the connection of the two areas of the PIs furthers the goals of
the project; in particular, the communications research helps define the
parameters of the electromagnetic model that will have a significant impact on
system design and analysis, and the electromagnetic models drive the techniques
and tools required to design and analyze MIMO systems. This promising technical
merit is substantiated in this proposal by the description of the proposed and
recent work of the PIs - both individually and in collaboration.

The broader impact of this project will be significant in a number of ways.
First, the models and techniques developed in this research will be used widely
by researchers and designers of MIMO systems. In particular, the development of
such models and techniques by this multidisciplinary team will guarantee both
the accuracy of such and that the results are in a form that can serve the
research community in the analysis and design of algorithms. Second, this
project will continue the team's successful program of undergraduate research,
which has sent a number of University of Massachusetts undergraduates to top
graduate programs around the country, and supports two PIs with a sincere
dedication to undergraduate teaching. Finally, this project will further the
strong collaboration of the PIs across the boundary that separates
electromagnetics from communication theory, and it will further the
understanding that integrated academic research is not only needed across layers
in the typical networking model but also within the physical layer itself.