* 0300268
* Strain Path Control and Defect Formation and Suppression During Forming of Highly Contoured Composite Parts Using Active Tooling
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* George Dvorak, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Joycelyn S. Harrison
* 03/31/2007
* USD 315,920.00

Complex products requiring a large number of high-performance parts characterize
the aerospace industry, but this product complexity is contrasted by an
extremely low volume throughput. For aerospace applications, advanced composite
materials offer a number of advantages over metals including relatively high
specific strengths and elastic moduli, which can lead to tailoring of shape and
microstructure to meet performance requirements. Unfortunately, the use of
composite parts in this industry has been severely limited by the prohibitive
fabrication cost and time of advanced composite component, along with the need
to store and maintain many under-utilized molds at great expense. In response to
this need, the use of active discrete tooling (i.e., matrix of pins tooling that
changes shape during the forming process based on electronically stored
geometry) for composites forming is currently being considered. Recently, the
PIs have successfully demonstrated that (1) composite forming using active
tooling is possible and (2) it increases the number of components that can be
successfully manufactured by the forming process. In addition, mold development
and storage is greatly simplified because a single reconfigurable tool is used.
This 3-year project sponsored by the National Science Foundation will seek to
develop a fundamental understanding of composites forming process with active
tooling, emphasizing particularly the effects of process variables on part
formability and fiber reorientation. The research will concentrate on process
development and on developing mathematical models and numerical modeling schemes
that relate the material deformation modes necessary to form complex shapes, to
advanced forming techniques and geometric features. The project includes support
from Northrop Grumman in the form of materials testing, expertise in composites
forming, and access to a larger reconfigurable tool, resulting in more rapid
technology transfer to the aerospace industry. In addition, the proposal
includes involvement of undergraduates (REU) and the integration of the research
into specific undergraduate and graduate courses as case studies, semester
design projects, and laboratory exercises. Overall, the proposed research has
the potential to significantly improve part formability and reduce process time
and cost for low to medium volume forming of relatively large parts from
composite sheet. This can extend beyond aerospace to specialized automotive,
marine, and biomedical applications. The research will also lead to improved
simulation of composites forming, which is currently a major barrier to expanded
use of composites.

