* 0300463
* Collaborative Research:    Integrated Parameter and Control Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Murti Salapaka, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 03/31/2007
* USD 208,713.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by design problems i anotechnology and by
key theoretical problems of interest,&lt;br/&gt;we consider a paradigm whereby
the plant description depends on one or several parameters that&lt;br/&gt;are
subject to design.We propose a general framework for I tegrated Parameter and
Controller&lt;br/&gt;(IPC)design that allows multiple performance
requirements.We propose to address the problem&lt;br/&gt;of designing these
parameters in conjunction with the feedback controller i order to achieve one
or&lt;br/&gt;more objectives.We then propose to address and solve the underlying
optimization problem.The&lt;br/&gt;theoretical underpinnings will rely o ew
results in the non-convex optimization literature that&lt;br/&gt;utilize convex
relaxation i order to get global optimal solutions.The potential of our
approach&lt;br/&gt;to yield e .ective solutions to the resulting problems is
demonstrated by our recent work that&lt;br/&gt;applies the proposed methods to
the robust synthesis problem in 1 giving the only global
optimal&lt;br/&gt;solution to this important problem.Aside from its contribution
to the theory of control design,&lt;br/&gt;the IPC design tools to be developed
will be used to address several practical problems where
the&lt;br/&gt;simultaneous parameter and controller design can have a large and
measurable impact.Speci .cally,&lt;br/&gt;we will address a signi .cant
nanotechnology design problem i volving ultra-high resolution
micro-&lt;br/&gt;cantilevers.This problem will take adva tage of existing
expertise i the laboratory of the PIs and&lt;br/&gt;will be conducted i close
collaboration with the relevant industry.Based o the
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;tools eeded for IPC design theory,we also address
educational goals that are made possible by&lt;br/&gt;the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal stems from the novel
approach for a well recognized&lt;br/&gt;unsolved problem of integrated
parameter and controller (IPC)design.The proposal will
contribute&lt;br/&gt;signi .cantly to optimization based methodologies in
control theory solving hitherto unaddressed&lt;br/&gt;problems that are of
importance for practical control design.The proposal lays particular
emphasis&lt;br/&gt;on applying the theory developed to micro-cantilever based
technologies in the context of IPC&lt;br/&gt;design.The theoretical paradigm is
well suited and timely for furthering this technology.&lt;br/&gt;Apart from the
theoretical impact the related technology to be developed will be
applicable&lt;br/&gt;to practical problems i the two hundred million dollar
scanning probe industry.The PIs have&lt;br/&gt;signi .cant collaboration with
industry and the technical knowhow developed will be guided
and&lt;br/&gt;transferred e .ectively to the industry.E .ort will be placed on
integrating the software developed&lt;br/&gt;on a typical Matlab platform.This
will enable wide use of the tools developed by the
related&lt;br/&gt;communities.The main topic of the proposal provides a unique
opportunity to expose the student&lt;br/&gt;to the importance of plant structure
that facilitates good overall plant-controller performance.A&lt;br/&gt;novel
course that builds o the ideas and results of this project to motivate the
general philosophy&lt;br/&gt;and techniques of integrated parameter and control
design will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;1