* 0301841
* Research in Particle Physics with ATLAS at the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Oliver Baker, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Morris Pripstein
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,800,000.00

This proposal from the Center for the Origin and Structure of Matter (COSM) at
Hampton University requests funding to support the group's participation in the
investigations of the physics of multi-TeV collisions with the ATLAS detector at
the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) under construction at CERN, Geneva. Coupled to
this is the objective to integrate this activity with education, with a
particular focus on underrepresented groups. The long-term goals of the
investigators are to advance our understanding of particle physics and to
increase the number of underrepresented minorities (particularly African
Americans) entering careers in science and engineering. The COSM will help
build, install and operate the barrel region of the Transition Radiation Tracker
(TRT), a drift-tube detector. In the physics analysis area, the group will
establish simulation capabilities and trigger schemes and analysis approaches
will be developed. The broader impact of this activity will consist of the
promotion of teaching, training and learning; the participation of students,
mostly African American, in the research activities; and the development of
infrastructure for research and education. Through the COSM QuarkNet Center,
local high-school physics teachers will have research experience, access to
teaching materials and connections to colleagues. The COSM's network of
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) is designed to involve
faculty and students from these universities in this work.