* 0301862
* Workshop On Model Validation And Benchmarking For Tsunami Generation By Submarine Mass Failure; May 30-31-2003; Honolulu, HI
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Stephan Grilli, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2004
* USD 37,000.00

This action provides support for a workshop on Model Validation and Benchmarking
for Tsunami Generation by Submarine Mass Failure. The workshop will be held in
Honolulu, Hawaii, May 30-31, 2003, following the ISOPE 2003 conference
(International Society for Offshore and Polar Engineers). The latter conference
will have a special session on modeling of long wave propagation and runup,
which will complement the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the workshop
is to define relevant benchmark problems to validate submarine mass failure
tsunami numerical models through a number of objectives:&lt;br/&gt;Present
existing numerical models of submarine mass failure tsunami
generation.&lt;br/&gt;Discuss the range of validity of each model as a function
of their basic assumptions.&lt;br/&gt;Identify geological/geotechnical data
needed to run each model.&lt;br/&gt;Present existing experimental and field
studies of submarine mass failure tsunamis.&lt;br/&gt;Define new experimental
benchmark problems needed for model validation.&lt;br/&gt;Identify future
landslide tsunami research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;Publish workshop results in
a special journal issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comparison of submarine mass
failure tsunami generation models with experimental data for idealized benchmark
problems is used to evaluate and criticize the state of the art. Validating the
numerical models against a rigorous set of benchmark problems provides these
models with a predictive capability, in the sense that they can be applied to
similar problems with some degree of confidence.&lt;br/&gt;