* 0301582
* Geometric Analysis of Deformations of Finite Distortiion via Nonlinear PDEs and Null Lagrangians
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Tadeusz Iwaniec, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2008
* USD 359,268.00

Project Abstract: DMA 0301582&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;T Iwaniec, Syracuse
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual Merit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Prominent advances in analysis will continue to&lt;br/&gt;enhance both theory
and applications. In this challenge, there is enormous&lt;br/&gt;opportunity for
contributions from geometric function theory and&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear partial
differential equations. Broadly speaking, this theory is&lt;br/&gt;about weakly
differentiable mappings which distort small circles in a controlled manner
(finite distortion). It elevates all&lt;br/&gt;the analytic and geometric spirit
of holomorphic functions in the complex&lt;br/&gt;plane to higher dimensions;
domains of the Euclidean n-space or&lt;br/&gt;Riemannian manifolds, Mappings of
finite distortion owe much of their&lt;br/&gt;importance to recent developments
in&lt;br/&gt;several fields of applied mathematics: continuum mechanics,
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;elasticity, material science, composites with
microstructure, crystals,&lt;br/&gt;and so forth. However, in this proposal we
focus on practical questions&lt;br/&gt;only through mathematical formulations,
sometimes without proclaiming&lt;br/&gt;definite answers. We emphasize the
fundamental role of the Jacobian&lt;br/&gt;determinant and other nonlinear
differential expressions, called null&lt;br/&gt;Lagrangians, which have driven
(over the past twelve years) a very&lt;br/&gt;productive study of mappings with
unbounded distortion. The present&lt;br/&gt;knowledge of null Lagrangians will
tell us something about the regularity&lt;br/&gt;and topological behavior of
those mappings. This also brings us closer to&lt;br/&gt;the methods of harmonic
analysis and nonlinear partial differential equations. However, we
depart&lt;br/&gt;from the earlier theories, which are governed
by&lt;br/&gt;uniformly elliptic systems, and move into the realm of degenerate
elliptic&lt;br/&gt;equations, where important new applications lie.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hopefully this
proposal gives some appreciation of the&lt;br/&gt;diversity of applications and
directions in which current research of the&lt;br/&gt;PI is moving, as well as a
glimpse of the substantial body of joint work&lt;br/&gt;with young scholars. It
is at this point where the proposed research meets&lt;br/&gt;the broader impact
criteria, such as: effective training and educational&lt;br/&gt;materials,
enhancing partnerships, participation of under-represented&lt;br/&gt;groups from
non-PhD granting institutions in the USA and abroad, women and&lt;br/&gt;men.
&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator plans to organize a conference at Syracuse
to bring together&lt;br/&gt;researchers in geometric function theory and in
applied areas. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed program reflects continued efforts of the
PI to reach out&lt;br/&gt;graduate students. In the final analysis, education is
the path to&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for countless individuals, and the
mathematical community as&lt;br/&gt;a whole is the
beneficiary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;