* 0301937
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Defining Functional Groups Among French Guianan Rain Forest Trees Using Phylogenetically-independent Contrasts
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Christopher Baraloto, Baraloto                Christopher    J
* Fellowship
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 08/31/2006
* USD 104,700.00

0301937 Baraloto

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Christopher
Baraloto to work with Dr. Damien Bonal at the Institut National de la Recherche
Agronomique in Kourou, French Guiana.

This project will join a community ecologist (the PI) with an experienced
tropical forest ecophysiologist in French Guiana (the host) to examine seedling
functional morphology within and among five genera of tropical rain forest
trees. The project involves two components: a trait screening manipulation to
examine associations between seedling ecological and ecophysiological traits;
and a demographic survey of the local taxa to examine associations between
functional morphology and seedling recruitment. The project represents two major
contributions to the study of tropical forests. First, it is one of the first
approaches to incorporate phylogenetic relationships into the study of tropical
tree functional ecology. Second, the project is one of the first to link data
from controlled experiments of ecophysiological parameters with performance
under field conditions. These strengths represent the potential for a major
advancement in tropical forest ecology.

Dr. Bonal has been conducting similar trait screening in French Guiana for more
than five years, and this project will build on this research.