* 0301729
* Rheometrical techniques for the characterization of clay based suspensions relevant to geotechnical engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Maria Caterina Santagata, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2006
* USD 78,352.00

Investigation of the rheological behavior of clay-water suspensions is important
in many civil engineering problems. These materials are both present in nature,
for example in mudflows, and are employed by man, appropriately engineered in
some cases through the addition of additives (e.g. polymers, cement), in a
variety of applications (as drilling and lubricating fluids in microtunneling
and pipejacking, as grouts for soil improvement, as stabilizing fluids in
tunnels and excavations, etc.). To date, investigations of these materials have
been quite isolated by application and have often relied on empirical tests and
on behavioral assumptions. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research intends to explore
the use of advanced rheometrical techniques for the rheological characterization
of "engineered" clay-based suspensions employed in geotechnical applications.
For this investigation use will be made of state of the art rheometers capable
of performing viscosity, creep and oscillatory tests, which allow
characterization of both the flow and the visco-elastic properties of these
materials, and provide insight into their microstructure, in a manner so far
never employed in geotechnical engineering. These properties will be
investigated for different "systems": plain bentonite - water suspensions (base
case), suspensions enhanced with three types of additives (one binder and two
polymeric products), and suspensions prepared from commercially available
products widely used in the drilling industry. These "systems", which pertain to
different applications in geotechnical engineering, have different "performance"
requirements and thus have the potential to illustrate the wide range in
rheological behavior that can be observed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More traditional
measurements (e.g. rheological measurements with traditional viscometers and
pressure filtration tests) will also be performed to provide a link between
fundamental behavior and properties used in practice for design and evaluation
of fluids employed in geotechnical construction and to lay the basis for a more
performance based design of these materials.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In terms of
broader impact the contributions of the study can be summarized in the following
main points:&lt;br/&gt;- The proposed research will tackle the problem of
engineered clay based suspensions with an interdisciplinary approach drawing on
the methods and knowledge developed in other disciplines, such as fluid
mechanics and soil science. With this approach, methods of testing and analysis
previously not employed in geotechnical engineering will be applied to
geotechnical "materials". Utilization in education of the experimental and
analytical methods developed will contribute to innovate (graduate) teaching of
experimental soil mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;- Collaboration with industry at the
forefront in designing and manufacturing clay based materials for use in
geotechnical applications will ensure that the research performed contributes to
the solution of problems of practical significance, and will facilitate short
term transfer of the fundamental lessons learned to the practical
realm.&lt;br/&gt;- The agreement of collaboration with the Technical University
of Torino in Italy will lay the basis for developing a continuous international
partnership with one of the most renowned technical institution in Italy, and
will promote broader dissemination of the work. &lt;br/&gt;- As a result of the
above the project will provide unique development opportunities for the students
involved in the research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;