* 0301824
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Evolution, Diversification and Biogeography of Tribe Gnaphalieae
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,11/30/2006
* Matthew Unwin, Unwin                   Matthew        M
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 11/30/2006
* USD 81,816.00

0301824 Unwin

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Matthew M.
Unwin to work with Dr. Randall J. Bayer at the Commonwealth Scientific and
Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO), Plant Industry, in Canberra,
Australia.

This project will use molecular data to resolve evolutionary relationships of
the Gnaphalieae (paper daisies or everlastings), a tribe of sunflowers
(Asteraceae) with great diversity in South America, southern Africa and
Australia. In the PI's dissertation research he focused on the evolutionary
relationships of the Eriocaulaceae, a primarily South American plant family.
Many similarities exist between the Eriocaulaceae and the Asteraceae,
principally in that small flowers are aggregated into individual heads that
mimic solitary flowers to pollinators. This feature, in part, has made it
difficult to resolve evolutionary relationships in both families. Understanding
the evolution and diversification of two distantly related plant families that
share convergent patterns in their floral displays may reveal interesting trends
when compared. This project will provide an excellent example of the application
of molecular information to a major taxonomic group and contrasting it with
inconsistent results from morphology and other approaches. The geographic
distribution and time of divergence of the tribe will also make this study of
broader importance as many taxonomists are dealing with such issues. The
Asteraceae is one of the families that are intensively studied in the U.S.