* 0301584
* Investigation of the Deformation, Fatigue and Fracture Properties of Amorphous Diamond-like Carbon Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Ioannis Chasiotis, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 04/30/2005
* USD 270,487.00

Investigation of the Deformation, Fatigue, and Fracture Properties of
Tetrahedral Amorphous Diamond-Like Carbon (ta-C)
Films&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ioannis Chasiotis&lt;br/&gt;University of
Virginia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Tetrahedral amorphous diamond-
like carbon (ta-C) films are characterized by extreme strength, modulus,
durability, inertness to chemical agents, and low friction. These special
properties may enable the fabrication of durable and reliable MEMS and NEMS
devices. This award will help to establish the connection between
microfabrication, material nanostructure, and mechanical properties of
freestanding thin (ta-C) films. The focus of this research is on the effects of
fabrication parameters, post fabrication treatment, and sp3/sp2 carbon bonding
ratio on the mechanical properties of freestanding ta-C films. The research will
be conducted in close collaboration with Sandia National Laboratories who are
developing a unique process for the fabrication of robust ta-C MEMS.
Measurements will be conducted via electrostatically actuated microdevices as
well as externally actuated test structures, currently under development at the
PI's laboratory. The local deformations/strains will be predominately measured
via Atomic Force Microscopy based methodologies. The investigation is expected
to support our understanding of the sub-micron fatigue and fracture phenomena in
ta-C films, provide quantitative evidence for the development of composition-
based predictive models for material mechanical behavior, and contribute to the
optimization of Sandia's current microfabrication process for robust at-C MEMS
and NEMS devices. The multidimensional character of this research program will
provide interdisciplinary education and training to graduate as well as
undergraduate students who will conduct their degree theses in the fields of
MEMS, nanomechanical materials characterization, and scanning probe microscopy,
and attend the special interdisciplinary courses offered by the PI at the
University of Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;