* 0301140
* Agent-Based Approach to Smart Sensing for Health Monitoring of Civil Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Billie Spencer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 12/31/2007
* USD 360,000.00

This investigation seeks to develop a broad foundation for innovative smart
sensing and health monitoring concepts utilizing advanced sensing, micro-
processing, digital signal processing, wireless communication, and damage
diagnostic methods. This work is aimed at providing near real-time structural
condition assessment for extreme events (e.g., strong earthquakes), as well as
long-term deterioration. The goal is to develop a computational framework that
can take full advantage of the continuous and periodic wireless monitoring
strategy and that can automatically and reliably detect possible damage
locations or deteriorated regions in a structure. Autonomous agents and multi-
agent systems represent an important new way of analyzing, designing, and
implementing complex distributed computing systems represented by smart sensors.
The Mote platform developed at the University of California at Berkeley with
funding from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) offers, for
the first time, an open hardware/ software environment for broad smart sensing
research and will be employed as a basis for this research. The comprehensive
research plan has four primary tasks: (i) design and construct new high
sensitivity acceleration and strain sensors for the Berkeley-Mote platform to
facilitate global/local monitoring of civil infrastructure systems, (ii)
conceptualize, develop, and implement an agent-based framework for monitoring
and damage detection in civil infrastructure systems based on the Berkeley-Mote
platform, (iii) develop new structural health monitoring algorithms that can be
executed in the smart sensor's distributed computing environment, and (iv)
prototype and test developed hardware and software in both the laboratory and
field environment. This effort includes a significant US-China collaborative
portion with three institutions. Successful completion of this research is
expected to accelerate economic and practical implementation of innovative
strategies for protecting our respective nations' infrastructure.

