* 0301833
* NSF-Europe:  Molecular-Based Objects: Nanoscopic Control of Physical and Mechanical Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Karen Wooley, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2007
* USD 360,000.00

The scientific mission of this NSF/SSF collaborative proposal is to develop new
synthetic approaches and characterization techniques for the preparation and
study of well-defined, nanoscopic, molecular-based objects. Cellulose fibers,
nanocrystals or single molecular chains, functionalized with linear polymer
chains or dendritic-linear hybrid macromolecules, will be used as a framework to
construct macromolecular objects having a core-shell morphology. Crosslinking of
the external shell of these nanostructures will then be accomplished using a
selection of functional groups and chemistries. According to this approach, the
cellulose polymers or fibers serve as templates, upon which will be constructed
crosslinked polymer networks, followed by the degradation of the cellulose core
to produce hollowed objects containing a central channel. Definition of the
objects from nanometer to micrometer dimensions will be demonstrated via control
over the thickness of the polymer network coating the cellulose substrate and
control over the dimensions of the cellulose material. Furthermore, the assembly
and manipulation of these shell crosslinked structures as templates for the
fabrication of nanowires, and access to their central channels for molecular
sequestration and delivery will be key features of these efforts. A more
fundamental challenge will be to develop an understanding of the relationship
between structure, property and function for individual nanostructures or small
assemblies thereof based on the rigidity and functionality of the crosslinked
shell.

A vigorous and interdisciplinary teaching and outreach program is a critical
feature of this proposal and will significantly build on these scientific
foundations. By integrating educational expertise in polymer chemistry, physics
and processing at world class research centers located at both academic
institutions and at an industrial laboratory, a unique collaborative research
and educational environment will be established. This exposure of undergraduates
and graduates to combined international academic-academic and industrial-
academic settings will provide an invigorating research experience and lead to a
dynamic exchange of personnel between all three institutions. The exchange of
teaching concepts and course structure will also permit cross-fertilization and
exchange of ideas at the K-12 level as well as in undergraduate and graduate
courses. It is anticipated that new concepts and frameworks for electronic
collaboration and teaching of courses in materials chemistry will be developed
based on this international collaboration and the exposure of all principal
investigators to the different educational settings provided by the three
institutions.

This NSF project is co-funded by the Division of Materials Research (Polymers),
the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, and the International Office
(Western Europe) as a Cooperative Activity in Materials Research between the NSF
and Europe (NSF 02-135). This project is being carried out in collaboration with
the Royal Institute of Technology of Sweden (KTH) and the International Business
Machines Corp. (IBM).

