* 0301719
* Optimal Design and Multiple-input Multiple-output Control Strategies for Media Handling in Copier and Printer Machines
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2009
* Roberto Horowitz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 03/31/2009
* USD 270,000.00

Media handling systems such as copier and printing machines are optimized for a
narrow range of sheet properties. As a result, they often perform poorly when
using media with non-standard characteristics, such as recycled paper. This is
due to the fact that copier machines are predominantly controlled in an open
loop fashion. Recent research activities by the PI and his collaborators have
addressed the aforementioned robustness problems. However, the results obtained
only pertain to media control in the longitudinal direction and most modern
media and packaging handling systems also require precise lateral and skew
control of the media.

The goals of this GOALI project are: 1) To formulate and implement a
mechatronics solution for media handling systems that will allow accurate
steering of the media along three in-plane degrees of freedom, while maintaining
high throughput and robust performance to a wide variety of media
characteristics. 2) To formulate and implement new extended hybrid control
architecture, for media handling systems that can effectively control switching
media dynamics with coupled degrees of freedom and nonholonomic dynamics. 3) To
develop a new optimal mechatronic design methodology for media handling systems
and other distributed mechatronic systems. 4) To develop a fully functional
rapid-prototyping research and instructional platform, which will be re-
configurable and capable of testing in real-time a variety of control
methodologies.

The outcomes of this project will introduce and demonstrate new mechatronics
approaches for solving fundamental problems in the control and design of media
handling devices, which are currently of critical importance to the American
copier and printing industries, and are common to a large class of assembly,
manufacturing, robotics and transportation systems. The new developments in this
project will be carried out in close collaboration with the Xerox Corporation,
the industrial partner in this GOALI project.

