* 0301519
* Collaborative Research: Theoretical, Experimental, and Stochastic Multi-Scale Analysis of Concrete
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Surendra Shah, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 05/31/2005
* USD 93,025.00

In the analysis and design of concrete structures, the assumption is often made
that concrete is a homogeneous and isotropic material. Although these
assumptions have suitable applications, consideration of local events, such as
the fracture and failure of concrete, requires consideration of the random
microstructure of concrete. This proposal outlines a research program that will
link the microstructure and the mechanical behavior of concrete. The research
will be developed along three lines: theoretical, experimental, and stochastic.
The basis of the theoretical analysis is the moving-window generalized method of
cells (GMC) composite model, which allows for consideration of local failure
initiation such as debonding between aggregates and hydrated cement paste. The
GMC model, when used in conjunction with finite element models, will predict
fields of local stress, strain and displacement that would develop in a given
sample of concrete, either before or after the onset of damage, directly from
digital microstructural images.&lt;br/&gt;For experimental aspects of the
research, digital image correlation (DIC) will be employed to determine the
displacement fields in concrete resulting from mechanical loads. DIC uses
correlation between pixel alignments in undeformed and deformed images of a
specimen to determine surface displacement fields. The results of DIC will be
used to calibrate the GMC model. A number of sto-chastic methods will enhance
the experimental and theoretical techniques, including probabilistic
characterization of local failure events and stochastic simulation of mechanical
properties and local maximum stresses and strains in concrete. The final steps
of the project will include extension of the models to three dimensions, and
characterization of the reliability of concrete structures based on the results
obtained from the analytical and experimental models of local
damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;