* 0301905
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Modeling Conservation Strategies for Threatened Eagles and Vultures in the Former Soviet Union
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,09/30/2009
* Todd Katzner, Katzner                 Todd           E
* Fellowship Award
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 09/30/2009
* USD 147,750.00

0301905&lt;br/&gt;Katzner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research
Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to
twenty-four months of research abroad. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-four month
research fellowship by Dr. Todd E. Katzner to work with Dr. E. J. Milner-Gulland
at Imperial College in London, Dr. Evgeny Bragin, at Naurzum Zapovednik,
Kazakhstan, Dr. Sergei Sklyarenko, Institute of Zoology, Almaty, Kazakhstan and
Mr. Alexander Gavashelishvili, Georgian Center for Conservation of Wildlife,
Tbilsi, Georgia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective of this project is to
use mathematical models to evaluate population status and identify conservation
approaches for two threatened species of large raptors - Eurasian Griffon
Vultures and Imperial Eagles. He will collaborate with local biologists in the
Republics of Kazakhstan and Georgia to collect field data to estimate
demographic parameters for each species. The PI will develop matrix population
models and conduct sensitivity and cost-benefit analyses to identify those
parameters crucial to model stability and well suited to conservation
monitoring. He will also work with these biologists to develop long-term
conservation monitoring programs to evaluate future changes in eagles and
vulture populations. A second objective will be to collaborate with his UK host
to develop and implement science training workshops for Former Soviet Union
(FSU) researchers. Such training is important because the often closed
educational system in the FSU provides little exposure to outside scientific
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Milner-Gulland has extensive experience
collecting and modeling ecological data from the former Soviet Union.
&lt;br/&gt;