* 0301330
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Children's Understanding of Religious Rituals
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Rebekah Richert, Richert                 Rebekah        A
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 08/31/2005
* USD 124,394.00

0301330 Richert

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Rebekah
A. Richert to work with Dr. Harvey Whitehouse at Queens University in Belfast,
Northern Ireland and Dr. Paul Harris at Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.

The goal of this project is to gain experience in cross-disciplinary research
methods studying the cognitive science of religion. The PI will explore the
development of religious concepts, which can be divided into religious rituals
and religious teachings. The first phase of the project will explore the
meanings children create for different ritual types as defined by Dr.
Whitehouse's theory on 'modes of religiosity.' The second phase will explore how
children understand specific underlying features of rituals and how ritual
participation interacts with verbal testimony to result in belief in religious
entities. Dr. Harris has recently begun research on the role that verbal
testimony plays in children's knowledge of religious entities and will provide
training in experimental methods in the study of childhood cognition and
religious beliefs. The hypothesis is that when children are not provided with an
explicit interpretation of a ritual, they will rely on processes of analogical
reasoning for interpretation of its meaning.