* 0301513
* A Revolutionary Boundary Element Approach Based on Energy Conservation for Interior Noise Predictions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Linda Franzoni, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2007
* USD 262,382.00

The analysis of high frequency broadband sound fields is of interest in
architectural acoustics and in the aircraft and automotive industries, where
interior noise prediction and reduction are important. This project will provide
a computationally efficient and accurate analysis tool for the prediction of
sound pressure levels in enclosures that contain broadband, high frequency sound
waves. The novelty of the proposed boundary element method is that the problem
and boundary conditions are recast in terms of time-averaged variables (mean-
square pressure, energy, and intensity) rather than the time-varying quantities
of pressure and velocity, and the infinitesimal sources that comprise each
element are broadband directional uncorrelated sources. Furthermore, this method
is unique among emerging energy-based boundary element or finite element methods
because it does not need to assume that the acoustic medium is dissipative, nor
does it assume that the boundaries are entirely diffusely reflecting.
&lt;br/&gt;The difficulty with analyzing broadband systems in the high frequency
range is that they contain a large number of modes and frequencies. Therefore,
approaches based on modal analysis, as well as traditional finite element or
boundary element methods, become computationally cumbersome. The proposed method
is extremely efficient because each frequency in the band does not need to be
considered separately and individual elements can be large compared to a
wavelength. The resulting gain in computational efficiency is orders of
magnitude over a traditional approach. Alternative efficient methods that have
been developed for lightly damped systems are inaccurate when damping levels are
not small. Typical structural-acoustic systems contain significant levels of
damping, since most systems are designed to reduce vibration and interior noise
levels. The method being proposed is not restricted to lightly damped situations
and therefore will be applicable to more practical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual merit: The development of the
boundary element method that was described above will provide a new tool for the
analysis of high frequency broadband sound fields. This novel boundary element
method will provide a much-needed alternative to traditional analyses, and
represents a paradigm shift in the way that these types of sound fields are
treated. Additionally, the availability of such an analysis tool will enable
more efficient and accurate analyses, and thereby facilitate design of better
acoustic spaces be they rooms or vehicle interiors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The proposed plan of work includes
theoretical, computational, and experimental components. All of these results
will be disseminated broadly, published, and presented at national and
international conferences. The boundary element method has the potential for
commercial development and use in architectural acoustics. Another broader
impact of this research project is the integration of research and education
through "hands on" experiences with acoustics both in a classroom setting and in
the laboratory. Students will have the opportunity to use the software developed
under this grant in order to simulate sound fields in enclosures of their
choosing and will be involved in performing experiments that support this
research. Both undergraduate and graduate students, with particular attention
being paid to underrepresented groups, will participate in this research.
&lt;br/&gt;