* 0301469
* International Research Fellowship Program: Variability of Arctic Ocean and Dovekie Foraging Ecology and Reproductive Success
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2008
* Nina Karnovsky, Karnovsky               Nina           J
* Fellowship
* Susan Parris
* 11/30/2008
* USD 142,261.00

0301469 Karnovsky

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Nina J.
Karnovsky to work with Dr. Jan Marcin Weslawski, Head of the Arctic Ecology
Group at the Institute of Oceanology, Polish Academy of Sciences (IOPAN) in
Sopot, Poland, and Drs. Geir Wing Gabrielsen and Stig Falk-Petersen at the
Norwegian Polar Institute (NPI) in Tromso, Norway.

This Fellow will investigate how dovekies, Arctic seabirds, respond to changes
in ocean currents passing near their colonies at Spitsbergen. There are two
major currents there, one from the Atlantic with small zooplankton and one from
the Arctic with large zooplankton. Prevalence of Arctic currents depend on
weather patterns that are driven by climate change. The PI will study how
dovekies adjust their foraging to variations in the distribution of these
currents. This study will provide evidence of how weather-driven changes in
currents may impact seabirds.