* 0301567
* Collaborative Research:  Kinematic Reductions for Underactuated Mechanical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Kevin Lynch, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 08/31/2007
* USD 200,999.00

One of the most fundamental capabilities for an autonomous or&lt;br/&gt;semi-
autonomous robot system is the ability to quickly plan and&lt;br/&gt;reliably
execute its own motions. We will study these fundamental&lt;br/&gt;problems for
underactuated mechanical systems -- systems with fewer&lt;br/&gt;actuators than
degrees-of-freedom. Our interest in controlling this&lt;br/&gt;class of systems
stems from two considerations. (1) It allows&lt;br/&gt;software control
redundancy (as opposed to mechanical or actuation&lt;br/&gt;redundancy) when one
or more actuators of a fully actuated system&lt;br/&gt;fails. (2) It is possible
to design inexpensive mechanical systems by&lt;br/&gt;minimizing expensive
mechanical elements such as actuators and&lt;br/&gt;transmissions and replacing
them with advanced control algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will explore a
novel concept for mechanical control systems called&lt;br/&gt;kinematic
reductions. A kinematic reduction of a mechanical system is&lt;br/&gt;a first-
order driftless system whose trajectories can be followed by&lt;br/&gt;the
second-order mechanical system. Kinematic reductions allow&lt;br/&gt;kinematic
constraints (such as obstacles and joint limits) and&lt;br/&gt;actuator limits
to be handled in a computationally efficient manner,&lt;br/&gt;allowing the
possibility of real-time trajectory generation for&lt;br/&gt;underactuated
systems. Kinematic reductions encode the notion of&lt;br/&gt;``preferred''
motion directions for the system, allowing the planned&lt;br/&gt;trajectories to
be followed quickly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To make full use of these properties
of mechanical systems for&lt;br/&gt;real-time trajectory generation and control,
we will study a number of&lt;br/&gt;open issues. These include understanding
when the kinematic reduction&lt;br/&gt;allows for closed-form calculation of
motion plans for underactuated&lt;br/&gt;systems; adapting efficient kinematic
motion planners from the&lt;br/&gt;robotics literature to kinematically
controllable systems; local&lt;br/&gt;trajectory optimization; feedback control
to stabilize trajectories of&lt;br/&gt;the kinematic reductions; and
implementation and validation of the&lt;br/&gt;control strategies on an
experimental vehicle. We also plan to&lt;br/&gt;explore the role kinematic
reductions will play in developing&lt;br/&gt;reduced-complexity hierarchical
hybrid motion models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;