* 0301868
* A Water Flume For Studies Of Organismal Interactions In Flowing Water
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Cheryl Wilga, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2006
* USD 72,986.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Rhode Island under the direction
of Dr. Cheryl Wilga for the acquisition of a custom designed water flume for
studies of dynamic biomechanical, physiological, behavioral, and ecological
phenomena. The apparatus will be designed as a recirculating tank with the flow
loop arranged in a vertical configuration. The overall dimensions will be
approximately 8 m x 0.6 m x 0.5 m (L x W x loop H) with a 1.5 m long working
section. The motor will enable variable speed flows to be attained (up to 2 m
s-1, or up to 6 m s-1 with the detachable reducer in place). Animals and plants
can be placed in the working section and studied under relatively natural
conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Behaviors such as swimming mechanisms in
sharks, reconfiguration of flexible seaweeds, aggregation in mussel beds, and
stream insect predator-prey interactions are easily observed using a flume. It
is essential that a water flume is used for these kinds of performance testing;
they cannot be conducted in still water aquaria. One benefit of a water flume is
that the organism will be confined to a working section and remains relatively
stationary to the observer and the recording camera, allowing for the effects of
water flow on the organisms. A second benefit of this water flume will be the
ability to vary flow speeds; flow speed must be adjusted for the size of each
organism to induce steady swimming or to study the effects of variable flow on
hydrodynamic force generation and behavior of benthic organisms. These factors
are critical in assessing organismal responses to flow and cannot be achieved in
still water tanks. A third major benefit of having the flow tank will be its
easy accessibility at any time of the year. In addition to being able to observe
and measure organismal responses directly, the flume readily allows researchers
to use analytical equipment, such as video, electromyographs (record muscle
activity), sonomicrometers (record motion using ultrasound), pressure probes,
and force transducers. As a result, the flume allows for a controlled
experimental arena and allows for the visualization and quantification of
behaviors in flowing water that cannot be accurately or effectively conducted in
the natural environment or in still water aquaria. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators all have a strong tradition of involving students at all levels of
their research, including attending professional meetings each year to present
results. The water flume will directly benefit the training and research
activities of the 10 graduate students currently in our laboratories, as well as
all future students. We typically have 6-8 undergraduate students that conduct
research projects each year who would also directly benefit from experience with
a water flume. Incorporation of experiments using the water flume in our courses
will enable us to illustrate the dynamic behaviors of aquatic organisms. There
is also great potential for increasing our network and partnership
infrastructure with colleagues from other colleges within our university, such
as Biological Oceanography, Mechanical and Ocean Engineering, and
Fisheries.&lt;br/&gt;