* 0301056
* Development, Characterization, and Application of Advanced Coatings for Improving the Reliability of MEMS/NEMS Devices
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Bharat Bhushan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 03/31/2007
* USD 270,000.00

Advanced coatings will be developed by molecular and atomic design and tailoring
of self-assembled monolayers (SAMs), diamond like carbon films (DLC), and
organic/inorganic bilayers (perfluoropolyethers or SAMs on DLC), which are
expected to have enhanced functionalities and to greatly improve the reliability
of MEMS/NEMS. Understanding of the relationship between micro/nanotribological
and mechanical performance of DLC and SAMs and their atomic and molecular
structures will be clarified. The microstructure of these coatings will be
characterized by various techniques. Their micro/nanoscale tribological
properties will be mainly characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and a
novel microtriboapparatus developed by our laboratory. The effect of length
scale, velocity, relative humidity, and temperature on the performance will be
investigated. The micro/nanoscale mechanical properties of advanced DLC coatings
will be mainly studied using a nanoindenter and AFM based bending and fatigue
tests. The relationship between the process, structure, and performance will be
addressed in order to obtain superior performance coatings. Computer modeling of
adhesion relevant for MEMS/NEMS will be performed, in which the contribution of
meniscus formation, electrostatic, van der Waals forces, and solid bridging will
be considered. Knowledge of optimum surface characteristics and advanced
coatings will be applied to an industrial application to improve their
reliability. The pixel failure mechanisms of digital micromirror devices (DMD)
will be studied. Methods to minimize adhesion, stiction/friction and wear will
be incorporated in DMD devices. (Two support letters from industry are
attached.) This study is expected to be beneficial to both the MEMS/NEMS
research and industry.

An award would support two graduate students and partially support one
postdoctoral researcher. This would provide an opportunity to recruit and fund a
minority or woman. The PI and his department have made efforts to attract such
students in recent years. The department regularly invites, and provides travel
grants for, students, particularly women and minorities, from other schools to
attract them for graduate studies. Undergraduate students would work on the
project as well. Projects like these provide hands-on opportunities for
undergraduate students in a high-tech lab. Past undergraduates in the PI's lab
have actually coauthored articles for technical journals. This project will
provide additional material for the PI's course on tribology and in soon-to-be-
developed nanotribology courses.