* 0301821
* Roughening, Etching, and Nanoscale Patterning of Si and Ge
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* John Weaver, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/2007
* USD 399,000.00

This project focuses on atomic-scale interactions associated with thermally-
activated dry etching, and with surface roughening without etching (desorption).
Silicon (100) surfaces with adsorbed halogens serve as model systems to address
problems of broad interest including how and why surface modifications occur
when there are competitive reaction pathways and how adsorbates and strain alter
the energetics of reaction. Comparison to results for germanium (100) will test
the generality of conclusions drawn for silicon (100). The emphasis is on
structural changes at surfaces. Variable temperature scanning tunneling
microscopy is used to advance the understanding of roughening, etching, and
nanoscale patterning to a new level by following modifications as they occur,
event-by-event, at high temperature.

%%%

A key component of the proposed program involves the education and training of
graduate and undergraduate students. Students supported by the NSF would join a
group made up of people from around the world. They would work with senior group
members while they become familiar with the laboratory. In general, students are
coauthors of publications by the end of the second year. They participate fully
in the preparation of manuscripts, both their own and those of other group
members, and of proposals such as this one. They are expected to compete for
student prizes, to present papers at conferences. They are also expected to
contribute to the education of younger students. Undergraduate students are
fully integrated into the group, and their contributions are reflected by
coauthorship of publications. Our laboratories are open for visits by
prospective undergraduate and graduate students, freshmen involved in
Engineering Open House and upperclassmen involved in senior design projects
benefit from access to them. Twenty-six percent of the graduate students in
Materials Science at UIUC are women; a goal is to increase the overall number
and to recruit into the Weaver group. Instrumentation will be developed for
variable temperature scanning tunneling microscopy, a state of the art
technique. Collaborative projects are encouraged. The results will be
disseminated through publications, contributed conference papers, and invited
talks and seminars, as in the past with results obtained under NSF support.
While there is a rich literature that describes atomic-scale growth of films and
nanostructures, frequently with key insights provided by scanning tunneling
microscopy, far much less attention paid to material removal and the prospects
of nanoscale patterning. Our focus on material removal provides important
insights that will broaden the knowledge base significantly and will contribute
to advanced technologies.



