* 0301753
* CAREER: Distributed Space Systems Control via Graph-Driven Hybrid Systems and Matrix Inequalities
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2002,09/30/2007
* Mehran Mesbahi, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 09/30/2007
* USD 306,826.00

A distributed space system is a collection of &lt;br/&gt;physically separated,
multiple space vehicles whose&lt;br/&gt;states are coordinated to achieve a
local or global objective.&lt;br/&gt;The distributed spacecraft paradigm shifts
the complexity of &lt;br/&gt;the space system design, traditionally associated
with the &lt;br/&gt;control of large flexible structures,to problems in
planning, &lt;br/&gt;coordination, inter-spacecraft communication and sensing,
and control.&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to &lt;br/&gt;(1)
develop a hybrid control design methodology which captures&lt;br/&gt;the
interaction between inter-spacecraft communication and sensing&lt;br/&gt;on the
one hand and the admissible distributed spacecraft&lt;br/&gt;control strategies
on the other, and &lt;br/&gt;(2) develop autonomous maneuver planning and
&lt;br/&gt;control for distributed space systems.&lt;br/&gt;This research leads
to novel analysis&lt;br/&gt;and synthesis techniques for a class of
&lt;br/&gt;hybrid dynamic systems that is tailored to capture&lt;br/&gt;the
interdependence of communication, sensing, and control&lt;br/&gt;of a
distributed system.It also examines a paradigm and a new &lt;br/&gt;set of
techniques in the matrix inequality approach to path&lt;br/&gt;planning and
control. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education plan is implemented through
&lt;br/&gt;course and curriculum development, &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate and
graduate mentoring, and an outreach effort.&lt;br/&gt;The undergraduate course
focuses on control theory and its applications in &lt;br/&gt;the design of space
systems,and emphasizes its interdependence on &lt;br/&gt;communication and
computing technologies. &lt;br/&gt;Two graduate courses, Hybrid Systems and
Optimization in Systems Sciences,&lt;br/&gt;emphasize the recent advances in the
modeling,&lt;br/&gt;analysis, and design techniques for a specific class of
&lt;br/&gt;dynamic systems, and lays out a rigorous framework,&lt;br/&gt;based
on optimization theory and computational techniques, &lt;br/&gt;for general
dynamic system analysis and synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;The outreach effort focuses on
an interactive Internet website and&lt;br/&gt;two teachers' workshops, through
which concepts of control and &lt;br/&gt;space system engineering are
communicated to the high school students and &lt;br/&gt;grades 9--12
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;