* 0301898
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Mechanisms for Increased Intake of Toxic Plants by Marsupial Herbivores
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Jennifer Forbey, Sorensen                Jennifer       S
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 01/31/2008
* USD 106,460.00

0301898&lt;br/&gt;Sorensen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Research
Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to
twenty-four months of research abroad. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by
Dr. Jennifer S. Sorensen to work with Dr. William J. Foley at the Australian
National University and Dr. Stuart McLean at the University of
Tasmania.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The paucity of mammalian herbivores (&lt;10
species) that consume a single plant species has been attributed to the high
concentrations of plant toxins present in such a diet. Little empirical work has
been conducted examining the mechanisms mammalian herbivores employ to cope with
plant toxins. This project will involve the examination of the role toxin
absorption plays in intake of toxic plants by mammalian herbivores. The
hypothesis that dietary specialists will absorb fewer toxins per unit ingested
than generalists will be tested by measuring toxin intake, blood concentration
of toxins, and fecal excretion of toxins by specialists (koalas) and generalists
(brushtail and mountain brushtail possums) fed the toxic plant, Eucalyptus. It
is predicted that lower absorption of toxins by specialists will result in
greater toxin intake yet lower concentrations of toxin in the blood. The PI has
found evidence within the genus Neotoma that specialists absorb fewer plant
toxins than generalists and proposed research will further expand these results
by comparing toxin absorption and the mechanisms that mediate toxin absorption
between specialist and generalist mammalian herbivores from different
families.&lt;br/&gt;