* 0301391
* Impacts of Extreme Events: A Systematic Analysis of Individual Travel Choice Decision
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Robert Paaswell, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 02/28/2007
* USD 242,190.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT: IMPACTS OF EXTREME EVENTS: A SYSTEMATIC ANALYSIS OF INDIVIDUAL
TRAVEL CHOICE DECISIONS The tragic events of September 11th, 2001 (9/11) have
had a profound and unimaginable impact on lower Manhattan, and the New York City
metropolitan region. The changing perception of the safety of the transportation
modes as a result of 9/11 is impacting the way in which the individuals make
choices of mode and place of work and residence, and the way in which businesses
make location decisions. 9/11 has also provided a monumental challenge to
transportation and city planners because there are no guidelines in the
literature on how to address travel and urban planning issues after such an
event occurs. The objectives of this investigation are: (a) to assess the
behavioral changes that have taken place as a response to the 9/11 tragedy; and
(b) to begin laying the theoretical and empirical foundation for the study of
the impacts of extreme events upon travel behavior. Among other things, this
knowledge would enable: (a) transportation agencies and municipalities to devise
policies aimed at restoring the perception of safety; and (b) a new generation
of planners to understand the dynamic impacts of extreme events on individual
choices. A contribution of this study will be the development of new approaches
to modeling and data assessment for travel models required by a rational
planning process. The research will assist in answering developing questions
concerning the future of lower Manhattan, as well as any other urban areas
affected by extreme events This project is expected to design and structure the
theoretical and empirical foundations for the advanced study of the impacts of
extreme events upon passenger and business location choice behavior. This
knowledge is of the utmost importance to transportation agencies and
municipalities that have to deal with the aftermath of extreme events. More
specifically, this project will lead to: (a) a better understanding of the
transient behavioral effects and best ways to speed up recovery; (b) an enhanced
policy making process based on more realistic depictions of choice processes;
and (c) an integrated theoretical behavioral decision-making framework able to
jointly consider the role of inter-alternative error structure, scale
difference, unobserved heterogeneity, state dependence and heterogeneity in
state dependence.

