* 0301279
* Travel Support for Fifth International Conference on Stochastic Structural Dynamics (SSD'03)
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Y.K. Lin, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 02/28/2005
* USD 20,000.00

Stochastic structural dynamics (SSD) is a broad technical field, and is
concerned with random variabilities of structural behaviors under dynamic loads.
The random variabilities may be caused by the uncertainties in loads, material
properties, construction processes, and others. The most well known random loads
include earthquake, winds, ocean waves, as well as man-produced forces, vehicles
and machines. Randomness in material properties is inherent in the distributions
of grain sizes and orientations at the micro- or even nano-scales. The
imprecisions in construction or manufacturing processes are unavoidable. All
these uncertainties must be considered at the design and retrofit levels, from
the point of view of possible structural failure, motion instability, and other
unacceptable performance standards, as well as control strategies to avoid them.
Following the successes of the previous four SSD conferences, all held within
the US, the Fifth International Conference on Stochastic Structural Dynamics
(SSD'03) will be held in Hangzhou, China on May 26-28, 2003. The objective is to
bring together researchers and engineers involved in SSD and related fields
throughout the world to exchange information on state-of-the-art research and
state-of-the-practice. After a decade-long economic development, including
construction of a large number of new structures with new materials, China
provides a unique opportunity for the US participation of SSD'03 to identify the
frontier research areas in structures and materials, especially for SSD
applications. To date, more than 80 abstracts have been accepted, including 25
abstracts from the US, 30 from mainland China, and over 25 from other countries
around the world. Partial travel support for US participants is requested.