* 0301322
* Strongly Nonlinear Highly Tunable Phononic Materials: Processing and Characterization
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Sungho Jin, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 04/30/2007
* USD 474,999.00

Strongly Nonlinear, Highly Tunable Phononic Materials: Processing and
Characterization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Vitali F.
Nesterenko, Professor, MAE Department, UCSD&lt;br/&gt;Co-Principal Investigator:
Sungho Jin, Professor, MAE Department, UCSD&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in
linear elastic phononic materials is an active area of basic research with
important applications for development of band filters for environmental or
industrial noise, delay lines, designing vibration free environment and
transducers. They also represent a class of man-designed materials with evolving
understanding of their properties and applications. Their properties are
different than properties of traditional materials and are based on periodic
arrangement of components with elastic contrast unavailable in normal
conditions. However, the major part of research is performed with so to speak
model structures rather than materials. For example the most favorable
configuration for obtaining large acoustic band gaps is a periodic array of
water cylinders in mercury. All examples of phononic materials are based on
linear wave dynamics in periodic structures. As a result these structures can be
tuned only due to an awkward rearrangement in the periodic array of components.
Also because sound speed of solid materials is in the range 2 - 10 km/s the
tunability of band gaps is limited. It is therefore desirable to design and
study new materials, which are capable of significant nonlinear tuning by
convenient and viable methods. The objectives of this proposal are therefore to
(1) design and process strongly nonlinear tunable phononic crystal (NTPC)
materials; (2) characterize their properties and (3) identify areas of their
practical applications.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has 3 unique aspects. First,
unlike other approaches it is based on emerging strongly nonlinear wave dynamics
in periodic structures based on solid theoretical, numerical and experimental
results. Secondly, the work proposed focuses on processing of clearly identified
examples of NTPC materials. Thirdly, the team synergistically combines unique
expertise in the nonlinear wave dynamics of "sonic vacuum" and in processing of
materials supported by full scale of processing equipment. &lt;br/&gt;The work
will prompt theoretical and experimental research in the diverse area of
strongly nonlinear wave dynamics creating a broader impact not only in acoustic
but in such areas as photonics and electrical transmission lines and signal
processing. The design and investigation of unique materials will most likely
lead to a discovery of new phenomena (like new type of waves, violations of
Snell's law, travelling metal insulator transition induced by small amplitude
waves or pressure induced transparency to sound wave) and an establishment of
new mechanisms of wave processes. &lt;br/&gt;Potential applications may include
(1) design of a sound scrambler/decorder for secure voice communications for
military and national security personnel, (2) improved invisibility of
submarines to acoustic detection signals, (3) noise and shock wave mitigation
for protection of vibration sensitive devices such as head mounted vision
devices, (4) drastic compression of acoustic signals into centimeter regime
impulses for artificial ear implants, hearing aid and devices for ease of
conversion to electronic signals and processing, and acoustic delay lines for
communication applications.&lt;br/&gt;