* 0302389
* Understanding and Characterization of Hemodynamics in Non-Stented and Stented Cerebral Aneurysms
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Dale Taulbee, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 06/30/2008
* USD 333,363.00

0302389 Meng Annually, 28,000 people in the United States suffer strokes from
ruptured intracranial aneurysms. Nearly half of these people will die and many
more will have severe neurological deficits requiring long term nursing facility
care. The placement of a stent in a cerebral artery across the orifice of an
aneurysm has the potential to alter the hemodynamics in such a way as to induce
self-thrombosis within the aneurysm sac, stopping its further growth and
preventing its rupture. Thus stenting might offer a new, minimally invasive
treatment paradigm.

The goal of this project is to obtain a quantitative understanding and
characterization of the alterations of the hemodynamic environment within a
saccular cerebral aneurysm caused by the placement of an endoluminal stent, a
miniature mesh tube implanted in an artery. In some clinical cases, stenting
alone has led to the healing of the aneurysms, but in other cases stenting has
generated adverse effects resulting in the rupture of the aneurysms. The
research will quantify how key parameters of a stent such as porosity, mesh
design, and strut thickness and vessel geometry affect the flow conditions.
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) and Stereoscopic Particle Image Velocimetry
(SPIV) will be used to evaluate key generic aneurysm geometries and stent
geometry alternatives and selected realistic patient specific aneurysm
geometries. Results will identify the desirable properties necessary for the
development of effective and novel intracranial stents.