* 0302917
* Planning for Regional Center for Automotive Technology
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Gregory Bennett, Gadsden State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 02/28/2006
* USD 69,000.00

This planning project pulls together the educational and workforce development
efforts of two-year colleges in Alabama to address the education of technical
workers in the automobile manufacturing industry. Target audiences are industry
and the faculty and students of the partner colleges and K-12.

The major goals of the planning grant and accompanying objectives are: To design
an infrastructure that will effectively coordinate the partnering institutions
of the Consortium; To link Consortium institutions with industry partners to
promote understanding and cooperation to meet both academic and industry
standards; To develop alliances and establish the necessary communication flow
between industry and education that will lead to the establishment of an ATE
Regional Center.

Intellectual Merit The project enhances Alabama's efforts in workforce training
and economic development by exploring the development of an automotive
manufacturing technology curriculum, to include both certificate and degree
programs. In a planned Regional Center, faculty, through their interaction with
industry, would become more knowledgeable and technically skilled. Students
would have opportunities for hands-on experience with industry and, therefore,
improve their intellectual capacity, while also comprehending the intricacies of
the automotive industry and its manufacturing processes. These consequences
would occur as the result of a stronger technology core and improved SMET
education being offered in the State's two-year colleges.

Broader Impacts The Consortium is developing and implementing activities that
broadly impact the individual colleges, students and faculty, and the community
as a whole. In a planned regional center, the level of automotive technical
education would be raised to a level higher than that of the ordinary
repair/mechanic programs. For students, the programs in the Center would
motivate them to higher levels of achievement, making them more highly skilled,
more highly paid, which in turn would provide a better standard and quality of
life. The Center would also provide greater incentives for a larger number of
minorities. The Center's programs would provide for improved teaching according
to the latest industry standards and equipment, as well as personal contacts
with industry representatives.