* 0302699
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Lure of Whiteness and the Politics of "Otherness": Mexican American Racial Identity
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Christopher Ellison, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 04/30/2005
* USD 6,050.00

&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation takes a constructed ethnicity approach, examining
the ways in which Mexican Americans label themselves both historically and
currently. Within this framework, racial or ethnic identity is viewed as a
process whereby identity is negotiated both through external forces and more
social psychological factors. A complex set of factors influence the
construction of ethnic or racial identities and how groups choose to call on
shared history and culture. Because of the complexity of the racial/ethnic
identification process, I rely on multiple methodologies including historical
analysis of archival resources, census data analysis, and in-depth interviews to
help garner a more thorough understanding of the racial identification of
Mexican Americans. I examine historical documents pertaining to the 1930 Census
and the development of the Mexican racial classification, as well as Mexican
American lobbying efforts against this racialized identity in favor of political
recognition as "White." I then explore contemporary Mexican American identity as
reflected in current racial self-reporting on the U.S. Census and in the
reporting patterns for children in households with Mexican-Anglo intermarriages.
Finally, I conduct sixty in-depth interviews with a strategic sample of Mexican
Americans in five Texas cities, investigating how such factors as socioeconomic
status, racial composition of neighborhood, proximity to the US-Mexico border,
social networks, nativity/migration history, Spanish language fluency, physical
appearance, and political attitudes affect their own racial and ethnic
identifications and their labeling choices for their children. This project
contributes to scholarship on Latino identity, as well as addresses broader
issues of the importance of multiple variables in the development and salience
of racial and ethnic identities not only in the US Census, but in the broader US
society.&lt;br/&gt;