* 0302691
* The WISE Project (Workshops for the Improvement of Science Education)
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Richard Connett, Monroe Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Karen F. Zuga
* 02/29/2008
* USD 746,312.00

The WISE (Workshops for the Improvement of Science Education) project is
enhancing the scientific laboratory skills of and knowledge base of pre-college
science teachers in western New York State. This helps the teachers prepare
their students to acquire the scientific and technological expertise needed in
the region and the nation in the 21st century. This project is a collaborative
effort facilitated by experienced MCC faculty working with a consortium of local
school districts in the region. Secondary teachers and MCC faculty are working
together to develop lesson plans that incorporate fundamental scientific
principals, the appropriate modern laboratory materials and cooperative learning
techniques. The principal aim is strengthening the skill of teachers by helping
them to attain pedagogical content knowledge, or the blending of content and
pedagogy into an understanding of how particular topics, problems, or issues are
organized, represented, and adapted to the diverse abilities of the learner and
presented for instruction. Science teachers are being recruited to participate
in one-week summer workshops with appropriate follow-up activities in the next
academic year. Over the three-year period, a total of 288 teachers are
participating in workshops in four scientific disciplines: biology, chemistry,
physics and earth sciences. The broader impacts of the WISE project address a
need identified in a National Science Foundation Report (December 1998) that
indicates many high school science students are taught by teachers with poor
preparation in their discipline. The WISE project is giving preference in its
application process to those teachers teaching in resource-poor urban or rural
districts and lacking the discipline-based educational background. In addition
to the critical shortage of teachers with discipline-based education, the WISE
project is helping teachers address major revisions to the high school science
curricula in New York State. The major aims of the revised curricula are to
increase students' scientific literacy, problem solving and reasoning skills.
Some key features of the project are: instruction and supervision by
experienced, well-qualified MCC faculty; hands-on training in the use of modern
technology, instrumentation and software; secondary teachers bringing the
equipment/software back to their home schools; teachers working cooperatively to
develop laboratory projects and experiments; participation of teachers from
schools with large minority populations (Rochester City School District);
participation of teachers from high-need rural school districts; follow-up
activities to assist and reward teachers in implementation; emphasis on
pedagogical content knowledge; and a web page for continuous sharing of
materials and networking. The WISE project is being evaluated by independent,
professional evaluators to assess the impact of the project on teacher
knowledge, attitudes, and the impact on their classroom activities. Project
results are being disseminated nationally and regionally through journal
publications, conference presentations, and a web site.