* 0302109
*  Preparing Science and Mathematics Teachers for Grades 7-12: A Community of Scholars at Work
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2009
* David Kirshner, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 05/31/2009
* USD 999,666.00

In response to the critical need for qualified STEM teachers, a team composed of
the Provost of Louisiana State University and Deans and faculty members of the
LSU Colleges of Arts and Sciences, Basic Sciences and Education and a team of
faculty members from all three colleges designed a new 4-year (128-credit hour)
undergraduate degree program to better prepare larger numbers of STEM majors for
teacher certification. Called the "Content Major with Concentration in Secondary
Education'', this program has been approved as a certification route by the
Louisiana Board of Regents and the Louisiana Board of Elementary and Secondary
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program adapts features of the UTeach
program (UT-Austin) but incorporates new elements that make it distinctive
nationally. It is a 4-year program within which students complete both an
undergraduate bachelor 's degree in a STEM discipline and all secondary teaching
certification requirements. It is heavily field-based and includes extensive
channels of cooperation with local schools. STEM faculty are broadly involved in
the preparation of these new teachers. A highlight is a collaborative course
structure in which STEM faculty, education faculty, and mentor teachers in the
field work together in the design, delivery, and supervision of course work and
field experience. This is a form and degree of collaboration that may be
unparalleled at major research universities in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target production rate is 80 graduates
annually, nearly tripling LSU 's recent production rate of certification-ready
STEM teachers. Candidates in the program have a deeper understanding of their
subject, are better prepared to meet the needs of local schools, and have the
advantage of a much broader-based support structure than teachers prepared under
the kind of programs that were dominant in the 1990s.&lt;br/&gt;