* 0302779
* Planning Grant for a New England Regional Center for Information Systems Security Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2003,12/31/2004
* James Kurose, Western Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 12/31/2004
* USD 69,269.00

This planning grant is laying the groundwork for a regional center for
information systems security (ISS) education to serve Connecticut,
Massachusetts, and other New England states. Activities in the project include:
(1) forming a board of directors, a project planning team, and three working
committees focusing on academic reform, professional development, and capacity
building; (2) conducting a comprehensive workforce assessment for the ISS field
in New England; (3) aligning planned curricula with the national cybersecurity
education standards being developed by the National Workforce Center for
Emerging Technologies; (4) enhancing and supporting two pilot "seamless" ISS
pathways among secondary and postsecondary educational institutions in
southeastern Connecticut and northwestern Massachusetts; (5) exploring online
and distance learning strategies, new certificate options, and faculty exchanges
among institutions in New England; and (6) involving business and industry,
economic development associations, and other research and educational
institutions in planning for the center's development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds on an innovative associate degree program in computer security
and data assurance based at Norwalk Community College, which has also been
developed with support from the Advanced Technological Education program (NSF
Award No. 0201873). The planning-grant project is examining the Norwalk
Community College curriculum and others to determine topics, courses, curricula,
and approaches that the center should pursue as it designs programs to serve the
region's educational needs in cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational
institutions, information systems companies, defense and financial services
companies, economic development associations, and research institutes are
collaborating in this planning-grant project. The partners include Western
Connecticut State University, the Connecticut Community College System, Norwalk
Community College, Springfield Technical and Community College, New Hampshire
Community Technical College-Berlin/Laconia, Holyoke Community College, Cape Cod
Community College, the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, Mass Mutual
Financial Group, Electric Boat, Deloitte and Touche, Greywolf Technologies, the
Connecticut Office for Workforce Competitiveness, the New England Board of
Higher Education, and regional school districts.