* 0302222
* Coulomb Blockade and Few-Electron Energy Spectra of Quantum Rings
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Alexander Zaslavsky, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2008
* USD 302,136.00

This Condensed Matter Physics project deals with nanoscale quantum conductors
that have a circular, i. e., "ring" geometry. Ideal quantum rings have a number
of fascinating properties: Ground-state persistent currents, strong Aharonov-
Bohm interference effects, and an oscillatory dependence of the wavefunctions
and all thermodynamic quantities on the enclosed magnetic flux, with period
given by the flux quantum. This research will focus on the properties of
individual and multiply-connected quantum rings in the few-electron and Coulomb
blockade regime. The PI has recently discovered that inhomogeneous strain
relaxation in sufficiently small Si/SiGe quantum dots leads to ring-like
confinement. Additionally, tunneling measurements have confirmed the expected
flux quantum periodicity. Given the control over device geometry, elliptical
rings and coupled ring structures will be fabricated and few-carrier energy
spectra, spin interactions, and Coulomb blockade effects will be measured as
these rings are filled by carriers from zero carrier occupancy. The work will be
coupled to state-of-the-art finite-element solid mechanics simulations.
Experiment data will provide feedback on the interplay between electronic and
mechanical properties in nanostructures. Graduate students involved in this
research will acquire a full complement of skills, from deep-submicron
fabrication, to low-temperature, low-signal measurements, to numerical
simulation, which will prepare them for employment in academia, the
semiconductor industry, or government. A teaching plan focusing on improved
undergraduate teaching of core courses in the Electrical Engineering program is
an integral part of this project.

Ideal quantum rings, in which carriers follow circular orbits without
scattering, have fascinating properties: Currents that flow without resistance,
phase-interference effects, and the oscillatory dependence of carrier energies
and wavefunctions on the enclosed magnetic flux. Quantum rings have also been
suggested as possible building blocks for quantum computation. This research
will focus on the properties of individual and multiply-connected quantum rings
in the few-electron and Coulomb blockade regime, where the one carrier circling
the ring affects the probability of another tunneling into the ring. The rings
in question arise from the strain relaxation at the sidewalls of etched
structures, making it possible to control the geometry (circular or elliptical)
and the topology (single-ring or multiply-connected ring) of the system.
Tunneling current measurements will study the carrier and spin interactions as
these rings are filled by carriers from zero; the results will be compared to
state-of-the-art finite-element strain simulations and our data will provide
experimental feedback on the interplay between electronic and mechanical
properties of nanostructures. Graduate students involved in this research will
acquire a full complement of skills, preparing them for research jobs in
academia, the semiconductor industry, or government. A teaching plan focusing on
improved undergraduate teaching of core courses in the Electrical Engineering
program is an integral part of the project.

