* 0302809
* Inter-American Materials Collaboration between U.S. and Mexico:     Novel Preparations and Characterizations of Polymer-Clay Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Benjamin Chu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2006
* USD 150,000.00

This Inter-American Materials Collaboration brings together two research
laboratories from the State University of New York at Stony Brook (SUNYSB) in
the U.S. and the Autonomous University of San Luis Potosi in Mexico to study
several fundamental issues of polymer and clay nanocomposites that can have
potential applications of benefits to both countries. These issues include (1)
the development of new pathways to prepare thermoplastic polymer-clay
nanocomposites with direct commercialization importance, (2) the applications of
advanced in-situ characterization methods (X-ray, Raman and rheology) to
understand the structure and property relationship during processing, and (3)
the modeling of clay morphology in nanocomposites based on in-situ X-ray, Raman
and rheological studies. The two teams have complementary expertise and research
capabilities. The U.S. scientists (Hsiao and Hsu) have considerable experience
in synchrotron X-ray scattering, rheological characterizations and structural
modeling of complex nanostructured materials and the Mexican scientist
(Medellin) is an expert in polymer nanocomposite
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An immediate benefit of the project is that the
proposed activities will produce tight links between two scientific institutions
in the US and in Mexico. The project takes particular advantage in exploring the
variations of clay materials between Mexico and the United States. The
fundamental approach may overcome several pressing problems encountered in the
commercialization of polymer/clay nanocomposites today. Furthermore, based on a
better understanding of clay exfoliation, clay morphology and orientation during
processing, and unique blends of U.S. and Mexican clays, the potential exists to
develop highly attractive new commercial products for tomorrow. The project
includes the training and the exchange of students and scientists between the
two countries. This award is supported by the Division of Materials Research,
the Office of International Science and Engineering, and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;