* 0302938
* Alabama Colleges for Engineering Technology Educational Advancements (ACETEA)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Terry Marbut, Lurleen B. Wallace Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 07/31/2006
* USD 814,657.00

&lt;br/&gt;Advancements in the fields of automated manufacturing, industrial
engineering, telecommunications, and electronics in the state of Alabama have
placed a challenge on the state's technical and community colleges. To meet this
challenge, 16 two-year colleges have formed the Alabama College System
Microelectronics Consortium in partnership with the Economic Development
Partnership of Alabama (EDPA). EDPA is an alliance of 67 leading business and
industry companies committed to supporting quality economic growth in the state.
Traditional engineering, electronics, telecommunications and manufacturing
programs are not adequate to prepare students for occupations in the high
performance workplace of the future. The shortage of highly trained engineering
technicians impacts the state's ability to keep its existing industries
competitive and to attract new industry to the state. Community and technical
colleges must play a major role in eliminating the shortage of highly trained
technicians in response to current and future industry needs. However, the cost
of advanced engineering-related programs limits the ability of any one college
to effectively meet the demands of a rapidly changing
workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ACETEA Consortium (Alabama Colleges for
Engineering Technology Educational&lt;br/&gt;Advancement) is a joint effort of
two-year colleges and engineering technology employers from throughout Alabama.
The Consortium's purpose is providing a statewide approach to the preparation
(education and training) of technicians in both traditional and specialized
fields of engineering technology. Through innovative and flexible strategies,
the Consortium is educating and training the work force for new, electronic
based, advanced engineering technology fields. These fields include
electromechanical automation (robotics), electronic manufacturing,
instrumentation/data acquisition, aerospace electronics, informational
technology, networking (WAN &amp; LAN), and computer maintenance. The ACETEA
Consortium is developing advanced engineering technology programs that begin
with a common core curriculum in engineering technology. Each college is
offering two to five advanced technology specialties that match the needs of
industry in its region of the state. This regional approach is resulting in a
statewide upgrade of current science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) curriculum; enabling colleges to grow with industry and meet the future
needs of the high performance workplace; providing upgrade training to current
industry employees; strengthening engineering technology education throughout
the state at the secondary, associate degree, and baccalaureate level; nurturing
new teaching methodologies in the classroom, laboratory, and workplace; and
attracting many students to engineering technology programs including low-
income, minority and other underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;