* 0302808
* New York State Professional Development Collaborative
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* David Burghardt, Hofstra University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen F. Zuga
* 04/30/2007
* USD 976,725.00

Five New York State community colleges (Dutchess Community College, Fulton-
Montgomery Community College, Mohawk Valley Community College, Monroe Community
College, and Suffolk County Community College) in partnership with Hofstra
University, the New York State Technology Education Association (NYSTEA), and 10
New York business/industry/government partners, are establishing a statewide
professional development collaborative. The project is initially providing
workshops in the areas of materials/manufacturing and information technologies
to 100 secondary school technology teachers through a program that brings
together community college technical experts, professional association
teacher/leaders, and university pedagogical experts. The overarching goals are
to provide contemporary professional development to technology educators using
standards-based exemplary materials, to forge sustainable alliances between
community colleges and the technology education community, and to create a
professional development model that the leadership of New York's Technology
Education Association will sustain. NYSTEA represents 3,000 secondary school
technology educators in the state and has an abiding interest in providing
professional development to its constituents. Year I of the project is devoted
to building the professional development leadership teams, comprised of two-year
college faculty from the five partnering community colleges, and high school
technology teachers who are leaders in NYSTEA. Year II is being spent conducting
weeklong workshops for technology teachers at each of the five community
colleges. Workshop content is based on curricular materials being developed as
part of the current NSF ATE project, New York State Curriculum for Advanced
Technological Education, as well as other exemplary materials developed by well-
known ATE projects and centers. Standards-based materials are being chosen on
the basis of a proven track record and relevance to technician education; and
the pedagogical focus is on informed design, which emphasizes science inquiry
and mathematical analysis in the context of design. Year III of the project is
devoted to widespread dissemination through technology education conferences and
mini-conferences at the community colleges. These activities are establishing
five ATE training centers at the community colleges, with NYSTEA as the
collaborative professional organization for these sites. By building the
capacity of professional association leaders to conduct further staff
development workshops, the project is creating a replicable and transportable
model of professional development and imparting a mechanism through which
ongoing staff development can be sustained by NYSTEA and the community colleges.