* 0302544
* High Anisotropy Magnetic Nanoparticles and Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* George Hadjipanayis, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2007
* USD 490,000.00

A major objective of the grant is to fabricate nanoparticles for high moment
high coercivity ferromagnets with emphasis on CoPt, FePt and rare earth
intermetallic compounds. The nanoparticles will be used to fabricate special
nanocomposite structures with tailored properties for high performance permanent
magnets and high-density recording. The influence of particle size, particle
separation, and matrix material on magnetic and hysteresis properties will be
studied using various experimental techniques such as transmission electron
microscopy, SQUID magnetometry, Mossbauer spectroscopy, Lorentz microscopy,
synchrotron radiation and neutron diffraction. The nucleation and growth of
compound nanoparticles and their phase transformations will be studied by both
experiment and modeling during in-situ annealing through light absorption. The
in-situ heat treatment of the particles is expected to transform their structure
into the desired phase before they are deposited onto the substrate, avoiding
the undesirable effects of alloying and oxidation. The proposed nanocomposite
structures, along with their technological importance, will serve as model
structures for the testing and refinement of existing hysteresis models that
will help the development of new advanced magnets. The proposed work on the
particle size-chemical composition-structure-properties relationship in
nanoparticles will benefit the technological development of these nanocomposite
materials. The high anisotropy of the proposed alloy/compound systems will make
it possible to fabricate thermally stable nanoparticles with a size in the range
of 1-4 nm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training of students includes nanoparticle
synthesis, structural and microstructural characterization by x-ray diffraction
and electron microscopy and magnetic measurement techniques. The students
further enrich their education through participation in special international
workshops on nanostructured materials organized by the PI. The interdisciplinary
nature of the proposed work will establish collaborations with other
departments, industry, and national labs, and would help the students broaden
and enrich their knowledge base. The proposed program will strengthen the
established partnership with the Delaware Department of Education, school
districts, business and industry, and the university community at large to help
K-12 math and science teachers implement new content and performance-based
standards in their classrooms. The students will be encouraged and supported to
attend workshops and meetings to disseminate their research findings to the
community.&lt;br/&gt;