* 0302351
* An Annual Review of Engineering Senior Design Projects to Aid Persons with Disabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* John Enderle, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 07/31/2009
* USD 333,524.00

0302351&lt;br/&gt;Enderle&lt;br/&gt;The award supports the publication of an
annual review of all student biomedical engineering design projects supported by
the Research to Aid Persons with Disabilities (RAPD) program; some 18 awards are
currently active. The major goal of the undergraduate design projects is to
provide devices or software that are typically too expensive, or nonexistent, to
aid specific individuals with disabilities, and to enhance the educational
opportunities for students. The proposed project is a continuation of work
directed b y the Principal Investigator under awards 9596084 and 9813338 and is
to be accomplished in cooperation with a Co-PI from the College of Health and
Human Services, Ohio University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
the annual review publication of NSF-funded projects to aid individuals with
disabilities has several components:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Serve as a handbook
for future design projects to aid persons with disabilities&lt;br/&gt;- Motivate
new universities to participate because of the potential benefits to the
student, school, and the community&lt;br/&gt;- Act as a reference for
individuals implementing the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated whole of the broad impacts of the
annual review serves two purposes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Inspire individuals to
work more actively in the field of rehabilitation so as to increase the
technology knowledge base and more effectively address the needs of persons with
disabilities&lt;br/&gt;- Enhance the educational outcomes achieved through RAPD
awards Six hundred copies of the book are printed for each edition using a soft
cover and heavy weight glossy paper. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distribution of the
600 copies per edition is as follows: five copies to the Director of each
Undergraduate Design Projects' award; one copy to each academic program with an
interest in biomedical engineering; one copy to state and federal agencies
involved with rehabilitation; and other individuals who have requested previous
editions of the book. All editions of the Annual Review publication are
available at http://nsf-pad.bme.uconn.edu.&lt;br/&gt;