* 0302905
* Marine Technology Education Center
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Jill Zande, Monterey Peninsula College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 10/31/2007
* USD 1,599,485.00

The Marine Advanced Technology Education (MATE) Center, headquartered at
Monterey Peninsula College in Monterey, California, is a national network of
community colleges, high schools, universities, research institutions, marine
industries, and working professionals. The mission of the MATE Center is to
improve marine technical education and in this way help to prepare America's
future workforce for ocean-related occupations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MATE
Center continues its mission now as an ATE-funded Resource Center. As a Resource
Center for marine technology education, the MATE Center is:&lt;br/&gt;(1)
Supporting institutions interested in developing or improving marine technology
programs;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Developing new curricula, particularly in the areas of
marine GIS, submersible technology, the collection of marine geospatial data
(hydrographic surveying), and career awareness;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Offering faculty
development institutes for high school, college, and university educators that
focus on marine technology (including submersible technology, ocean data
collection and analysis, marine career awareness, and the marine applications of
GIS);&lt;br/&gt;(4) Conducting regional and national ROV (remotely operated
vehicle) competitions to increase students' learning experiences and build
academic and employer partnerships;&lt;br/&gt;(5) Enhancing and expanding the
National MATE Internship Program that provides students from across the country
with shore-based and at-sea technical experiences; &lt;br/&gt;(6) Disseminating
MATE products, including curricula, textbooks, occupational guidelines,
competencies, and process guides (internship manuals, survey materials, etc.),
both in traditional formats and electronically though the Center's website;
and&lt;br/&gt;(7) Increasing diversity in the marine
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MATE Center seeks to be the nation's leading
organization for supporting, enhancing, and expanding marine technology
education at community colleges, high schools, and universities. The ocean
economy is large and diverse, accounting for twenty percent of our national
economy and supporting one in six jobs in this country. Marine technology is
vital to national security, transportation and commerce, energy and exploration
activities, telecommunications, recreation and tourism, fisheries and
aquaculture, search and recovery, environmental assessment and regulation, and
research. Although these economic sectors are diverse, the technology behind
them has many similarities. These include the collection and use of data from
remotely operated vehicles and acoustic instruments; the use of advanced
computing systems, such as GIS, for organizing and managing data; and the use of
electronics and microelectronics for power, controls, and miniaturization in a
remote, harsh environment. The need for highly qualified technical professionals
who can design, build, operate, and maintain this technology has never been
greater. A concerted effort is required to ensure that our workforce is prepared
for an economy currently and increasingly dependent on ocean activities and the
technologies that make these activities feasible. The MATE Center is prepared to
lead this effort. &lt;br/&gt;