* 0302195
* Travel Grant: AIChE Women's Initiative Committee Session for "Advancement and Retention of Female Chemical Engineers: Issues and Strategies"
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2002,01/31/2004
* Karen High, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/2004
* USD 1,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Karen A. High&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Oklahoma
State University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0302195&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Woman's Initiative Committee Session entitled "Advancement and Retention of
Female Chemical Engineers: Issues and Strategies" will be held at the annual
American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) meeting in Indianapolis,
Indiana. It will be a full morning session from 8:30 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. with
speakers including women from industry, academia government. Some of the
presentations include:&lt;br/&gt; Keynote presentation by Karen Gleason
discussing "Status of Women Faculty at MIT."&lt;br/&gt; Frankie Wood-Black from
Phillips Petroleum Company detailing "Removing Barriers - PROGRESSing toward the
Future."&lt;br/&gt; Kathleen Bartom from Pharmacia describing "Devine Secrets of
the ChE Sisterhood: My 20 Years in Chemical Engineering."&lt;br/&gt; Diane Wolf
from Kraft Foods will talk about "Networking Strategies."&lt;br/&gt; Catherine
Didion will describe "AWIS: Institution Assessment Tools and Model Academic
Policies."&lt;br/&gt; Regina Murphy from the University of Wisconsin will
outline information about "A National Women in Science and Engineering
Leadership Institute (WISELI)."&lt;br/&gt;The presentations will be followed by
a luncheon sponsored by corporate sponsor Kraft, hopefully to attract 50 to 75
chemical engineering professionals, faculty members and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The session is a part of a more comprehensive
program to help women at all stages of their careers - from graduate student to
tenured faculty as well as women in various industrial positions in the chemical
process industries - to advance in their careers. NSF funds will be used for
airfare, registration, hotel, and meal per diem for some of the
speakers.&lt;br/&gt;