* 0302542
* JABRWOC -- Java-based Animation: Building viRtual Worlds for Object-oriented programming in Community colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Wanda Dann, St Joseph's University
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Hanych
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,056,855.00

The approach used in this project takes advantage of high-level interest in
graphics, animation and storytelling. The Java-based Animation: Building viRtual
Worlds for Object-oriented programming in Community colleges (JABRWROC) project
uses simulation and visualization in a 3D, interactive, animation environment to
introduce fundamental, object oriented programming concepts to novice
programmers. The objectives are to 1) decrease attrition in introductory
programming courses in community colleges, where open enrollment is conductive
to high numbers of "at-risk" students, 2) attract students to computer and
technology-related majors, 3) improve computer literacy courses to meet computer
FITness guidelines defined by the NRC, by reintroducing programming /problem-
solving modules, and 4) provide professional development for community college
faculty in the use of innovative technology. Implementation occurs in three
phases: developing and modifying instructional materials including lab exercises
for traditional and returning learners; pilot testing in on-campus and distance
learning classes, and dissemination. The potential impact includes over 6000
community college students on three campuses over the 3 year period. Urban
students, specifically women and minorities, will be the primary audience for
these new course materials. The assessment and evaluation will include
persistence and attrition rates, student achievement, attitude surveys and
interviews with instructors and students.