* 0302619
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Expansion of Voting Rights for Women in the United States: Institutional Openness, State-building, and Gender
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Ann Orloff, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 04/30/2004
* USD 7,758.00

This study seeks to bring a new understanding to the history of the American
woman suffrage movement by examining the adoption of suffrage legislation
throughout the western states prior to World War I and documenting how western
suffrage successes influenced adoption nationally. In this project I address the
following questions. First, why were the western states so much more successful
in adopting woman suffrage at a much earlier time than other states with fewer
legislative attempts? Second, why did the northeastern and Midwestern states
have so much more difficulty passing woman suffrage legislation despite social
movement mobilization and continuous and increasing legislative activity? And
finally, why did most southern state legislatures fail to adopt woman suffrage
at all? I use data that includes all legislative activity for woman suffrage in
48 states and documents regional patterns of suffrage success and failure from
1848 to 1920, and I analyze these patterns in the context of changing voting
rights in the United States, variations in state governments and state
legislative processes, state party politics, social movement organization, and
changing gender expectations and arrangements in order to explain the variable
outcomes in state full suffrage adoption prior to the ratification of the
national suffrage amendment. I will use quantitative, 48-state event history
analysis to test the effects of independent variables on the timing of full
suffrage adoption of each state. To provide a rich contextual description of
social movement as well as state institutional and political processes affecting
variation of the timing of state suffrage adoption, I will conduct a
qualitative, comparative analysis of eight individual state cases in order to
explain patterns and outcomes that are inconsistent with the quantitative
analyses. This study contributes to social science in three areas: This study
contributes to understanding how historical change in the United States occurred
and how we can improve the methodology we use to explain these transformations
by using quantitative analysis alongside comparative case studies. This study
contributes to understanding the process of state-level legislative change in
the United States. The theoretical ideas and methodological approach can be
applied to other contemporary state-level policy change for which groups and
organizations have mobilized such as welfare reform, gay marriage legislation,
and adoption of Defense of Marriage Acts.