* 0302139
* Hybrid Molecular Simulation Studies of Nano-Scale Adhesion and Friction: Chemical Termination and Solvent Effects
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Shaoyi Jiang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 05/31/2006
* USD 286,439.00

Adhesion and friction are critical to the performance of micro- or
nanoelectromechanical systems (MEMS/NEMS). It is of great importance to consider
surface chemical terminations for applications in dry or liquid environment
(e.g., BioMEMS/NEMS). However, there is little understanding of the general laws
that govern adhesion and frictional properties at this scale. The dependence of
adhesion and friction on interfacial and solvent properties does not seem to
have general rules to follow based on several recent experimental results. Thus,
the first objective of this work is to study how interfacial and solvent
properties affect nano-scale adhesion and friction important for
bioMEMS/NEMS.&lt;br/&gt;Chemical force microscopy (CFM) provides a method of
probing molecular interactions with chemical sensitivity. By covalently
modifying atomic force microscopic (AFM) tips and substrates with self-assembled
monolayers (SAMs) that terminate in distinct functional groups, one is able to
apply this technique to measure adhesion and frictional forces between various
probe tips and substrates with specific surface chemistry. Due to the complexity
of the system, it is hard to interpret CFM results and to examine interfaces
buried in CFM experiments. Furthermore, the difference in time scale between
conventional molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and AFM (or CFM) experiments is
six orders of magnitude or larger. Thus, the second objective of this work is to
simulate CFM with various interfaces and solvents at the experimental time
scale. &lt;br/&gt;In this work, the PI will apply the temporally hybrid
molecular simulation technique that the PI's group developed recently to
simulate adhesion and friction at a wide range of time scales from fast (in
MEMS/NEMS devices) to slow (in CFM experiments) either between two surfaces or
between alkanethiol SAM-modified AFM tips and surfaces immerged in solvents.
Interfacial properties of nano-scale contacts will be hydrophobic/hydrophobic,
hydrophilic/hydrophilic, and hydrophobic/hydrophilic while various solvents from
polar to non-polar will be considered. For confined fluids between two surfaces,
simulations will be performed in a new ensemble, in which confined fluids are in
contact with the bulk. This ensemble is closer to bioMEMS/NEMS and surface force
apparatus (SFA) experiments. Simulations will then be extended to examine the
effect of SAM defects and surface asperities on adhesion and friction, and the
nanotribology of the technologically important alkyl monolayers on
silicon.&lt;br/&gt;The success of this work will provide a fundamental
understanding of how surface chemical terminations and solvent polarities affect
nano-scale adhesion and friction. Simulation results will be used to guide the
design of bioMEMS/NEMS and to interpret CFM and SFA experiments. It will have
significant impacts on BioMEMS/NEMS technology, CFM technique, biomolecular
recognition, and biomechanics. Graduate students and undergraduate students will
participate in this interdisciplinary research project. New simulation
capacities generated from this work will be beneficial to students in special
courses (e.g., ENG 100 for freshmen) and the course on computational
nanotechnology offered by the PI. With this support, the PI's group will
continue to serve many research groups on and off campus interested in molecular
simulation and modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;