* 0302466
* Development of a Robot-Aided Training with Sensory Enhancement to Restore Motor Function for Stroke Survivors
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Wen Liu, University of Kansas Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 06/30/2007
* USD 326,598.00

0302466 Liu Upper limb functional impairment is one of the major limiting
factors for independent daily living of stroke survivors. Sensory inputs during
motor training may be an important triggering signal that promotes the
reorganization of the central nervous system. The goal of this proposed study is
to develop a novel robot-aided motor training with sensory enhancement for
functional recovery of upper limb of stroke survivors. The investigators will
develop a sensory-enhanced robot-aided motor training program to facilitate
sensory inputs with motor training for stroke survivors. A newly developed
biomedical engineering technique that uses noise signal to improve detection
threshold of sensory system will be used to enhance cutaneous sensation of the
patient's hand during robot-aided motor training. This technique is based on a
concept of stochastic resonance (SR) that has been demonstrated experimentally
in a wide variety of neurophysiological and perceptual systems. Forty stroke
patients recruited for the proposed study will be randomly assigned to a study
and a control group. Subjects in the study group will participate in a robot-
aided motor training program with enhanced cutaneous sensory inputs. Subjects in
the control group will receive the same robot-aided training, but without
enhanced sensory inputs. Evaluation of training effect includes clinical
evaluation scale (Motor Status Score for shoulder and elbow), quantitative upper
limb sensory assessment, and quantitative upper limb motor function test.
Findings of the proposed study may help basic scientists to better understand
the mechanism of motor recovery through repeated exercises and sensory feedback.