* 0302483
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Beyond Developmentalism: State Institutions, Private Lives, and the Production of Singapore Citizens
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Peter Evans, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 05/31/2005
* USD 7,500.00

This project asks the question: how do states construct and maintain legitimacy?
The legitimacy of a nation-state depends upon its efficacy in producing citizens
who see their participation in the economy, politics and the community in
general, as in their best interests as individuals and as a collective national
body. The proposed dissertation takes up the case of Singapore to address these
issues. Singapore is a nation-state that is peculiar in several ways: it is not
strictly authoritarian but certainly not democratic; it has a seemingly docile
citizenry that nonetheless participates actively in the state's numerous
economic and social projects; and its orientation toward "modernity" does not
stop the state from formulating policies encouraging college-educated women to
have more babies. One is led to ask the following questions: up close, what does
Singapore's rule look like? How is rule organized if it is obviously not a
democracy, but also not an authoritarian regime? Under what conditions has this
rule been constructed and under what conditions has it been sustained? What does
the type of rule actually mean for those being ruled over, and how are they
participating in it? By analyzing three sets of institutions--housing,
reproduction, and marriage--this project aims to address these questions. The
research will be carried out along three lines: (1) a close textual analysis of
key social policies, (2) interviews with citizens who negotiate these policies,
and (3) by juxtaposing the cases of Singapore and Malaysia. This dissertation
aims to deepen and complicate existing understandings of how developing states
come to have stable rule and produce citizen subjects who find meaning in their
participation in the state's imagery of "development." The project's
contribution to sociology will be to gain more holistic views of state rule,
integrate understandings about what states do in the economic realm with what
they do in socio-politico-cultural realms, examine principles of social division
such as, gender and ethnicity and the roles they play in "producing citizens"
who understand and find meaningful their participation in the state's national
project of development.