* 0302737
* Consortia for Digital and Fieldbus Technological Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Chuck Carter, Lee College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 09/30/2007
* USD 900,002.00

Recently, Hedrick Smith told the National Education Goals Panel that American
education is leaving behind the mid-kids of the whole technician class. Seventy
percent of the jobs in the 21st century will not require a B.A. The country
needs to educate thinking people to fill these technical, yet highly skilled
jobs. This project proposes to do just that by focusing on the Instrumentation
and Controls technicians employed in the process and manufacturing industries.
Since October 2000, the Lee College Center (Consortia) for Fieldbus and Process
Control Systems Maintenance Education funded by NSF has provided a venue for
training and education to meet the needs of emerging instrumentation technology
technicians nationwide. The Center (Consortia) is recognized worldwide as a
leader in providing fieldbus education. Fieldbus, the emerging technology in the
field of instrumentation, is an all-digital communications system that
interconnects measurements and process control equipment in both process and
manufacturing automation applications. With its partners, Lee College is
expanding the current project to realize the following goals:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;1. Developing, teaching, and
disseminating core curricula and skill standards materials related to
instrumentation and controls technology. Specifically, the tasks being performed
are: (a) developing and disseminating a national skills standard; (b)
standardizing and updating the AAS degree plan at Lee College; and (c)
increasing SMET education components the in existing curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;2.
Developing, teaching and disseminating curricula related to emerging
technologies in the instrumentation and controls field. Specifically, the tasks
being performed are: (a) developing and teaching specialty course area in the
curriculum; (b) providing instructor education through appropriate workshops;
and (c) disseminating model for the development and delivery of course materials
for emerging technology. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;3.
Providing services as a center of applied research and development for use by
industry. Specifically, the tasks being performed are: (a) updating equipment so
that it meets the functionality required in industry; (b) encouraging
industries' use of the facility for system demonstrations, research support and
functional systems testing; and (c) support the publishing of research outcomes
and activities in appropriate journals. &lt;br/&gt;4. Recruiting and retaining
students in the instrumentation and controls programs. Specifically, the tasks
being performed are: (a) increasing the number of students pursuing the AAS
degree; (b) increasing number of female students enrolled in the program; (c)
adopting a 2+2+2 articulation program with appropriate institutions; and (d)
improving the student success rate in the AAS program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;