* 0302358
* International Workshop on Seismic Stability of Tailings Dams
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Xiangwu Zeng, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2004
* USD 70,310.00

This action is to provide partial support for an International Workshop on
Seismic Stability of Tailings Dams, being jointly organized and sponsored by the
National Science Foundation, the Office of Surface Mining (a bureau of the U.S.
Department of the Interior), and the Mine Safety and Health Administration (an
agency within the Department of Labor). Tailings dams are the residue of the
milling process used to extract materials of interest from mined ores. They are
characterized by hydraulically placed fills held in place by an embankment.
Failure of tailings dams due to earthquakes has occurred many times in the past
in several Pacific Rim earthquake-prone countries, causing significant loss of
property and human lives, as well as severe environmental problems. According to
the most current data supplied to the National Inventory of Dams, there are 860
coal-mining related dams in the United States. Of these, 232 are considered to
have a high hazard-potential by FEMA's hazard rating system, indicating that
failure would be reasonably likely to result in loss of life and significant
property damage. The vast majority of these high-hazard-potential dams are coal
refuse tailings dams located in the Appalachian Coal Field. A few are over 200 m
(600 feet) high. Failure of such a structure due to earthquake loading would be
catastrophic. Even though considerable progress has been made in seismic design
and analysis of earth dams, little research has been conducted on the seismic
stability of tailings dams. Past research has shown that coal waste materials
have mechanical properties quite different from that of most soils. The
structure and construction method of tailings dams are very different from
conventional earth dams. Therefore, there is an urgent need for research to
investigate the stability of tailings dams under earthquake loading, and to
develop seismic design procedures suitable for this unique type of structure.
This workshop will bring together US and international experts to discuss the
critical issues involved. The objectives are: 1) to summarize the current state-
of-the-art, and the state-of-the-practice in the design and seismic analyses of
tailings dams; 2) to identify research needs; 3) to facilitate communication and
collaboration between researchers, government regulatory agencies, and
practicing engineers. Within the limits of the required expertise, the
organizers will include underrepresented minorities. The workshop will be hosted
by the Department of Civil Engineering, Case Western Reserve University in
Cleveland, Ohio on 22-23 May 2003. The workshop proceedings will be posted
online on the workshop web site and the web sites of the government regulatory
agencies.