* 0302486
* Spectroscopic Instrumentation for San Diego State University Ecology Programs
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Matthew Edwards, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 04/30/2006
* USD 194,173.00

This award provides support for the acquisition of three analytical instruments:
an autoanalyzer for nutrient analysis, a stable isotope mass analyzer for
tracing the movement of nitrogen and carbon in organisms and the environment,
and an inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES) for
measuring alkali and heavy metals, which will be shared by faculty and students
studying a variety of research problems related to the environment. In addition
to researchers from several units within San Diego State University, researchers
and students at several other US, Mexican and Canadian institutions (University
of San Diego, University of California at Davis, University of British Columbia,
and El Centro de Investigaciones Biologicas del Noroeste (La Paz) will have use
of the instruments. The instruments will be used for a number of ongoing
projects in diverse areas of environmental research. These include global
change, freshwater and marine ecosystems, plant-insect and plant-microbe
interactions, and biogeochemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation
will be placed in a core analytical facility that supports research funded by
NSF and a number of other federal agencies, and will be used in concert with
modeling, remote sensing and GIS capabilities at SDSU. The research is expected
to improve understanding of the patterns and controls on ecosystem structure and
function and the interaction of ocean, atmospheric, land on ecosystem
metabolism. In addition to its role in research, the facility supports a number
of education and training programs, including an NSF sponsored program that
places science graduate students in K-6 classrooms, and an NSF sponsored project
intended to train undergraduate students in use of state-of-the-art
instrumentation and approaches in the environmental sciences.