* 0302851
* Collaborative research: A Linked Initiative for Developing Minority Doctoral Scholars in Ocean Sciences
* GEO,GEO
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2010
* Benjamin Cuker, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 04/30/2010
* USD 1,294,123.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: A Linked Initiative for
Developing Minority Doctoral Scholars in Ocean Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
recent years, several hundred minority students have earned undergraduate or
&lt;br/&gt;Masters degrees in the aquatic sciences. Additionally, several
thousand minority students graduate each year with degrees in the basic
sciences. Despite these growing numbers, very few of these students go on for
Ph.D.s in oceanography or marine science. In order to take advantage of this
growing pool of talent the collaborators will create a Program of Excellence for
educating minority doctoral students in ocean sciences. Hampton University, Old
Dominion University and the College of William and Mary's School of Marine
Science, Virginia Institute of Marine Science, will team together to produce
significant numbers of Ph.D. marine scientists and oceanographers from
underrepresented minority groups. The program will build upon an established
record of successful cooperation in training minority students in the ocean
sciences. The collaborators will develop cohorts of minority students who form a
community of scholars in the ocean sciences. The concept is that a highly
concentrated, interacting group of minority students will foster more individual
success than isolated individuals dispersed among a variety of institutions. The
structured program will support the students through coursework and dissertation
research. The support will include; a stipend, tuition, an extensive
orientation, some shared course work, regular group meetings, special seminars,
near-peer mentoring, and exposure to minority mentors. Additional professional
development will include participation in outreach activities and mentoring of
younger students, participation in national meetings, and guidance in
grantsmanship and the process leading to the first post-doctoral positions.
&lt;br/&gt;