* 0302693
* Sunshine Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* June Jones, College of Central Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 04/30/2007
* USD 288,553.00

Sunshine Scholars is a project focused on increasing the number, quality, and
diversity of prospective mathematics and science teachers through an
interdisciplinary program undertaken through teacher training and pre-training
activities. The primary audience includes community college students and high
school and middle school students. The program provides community college
students with enhanced proficiency in science and mathematics, as well as in
pedagogy. Middle and high school students are recruited into careers in science
and mathematics teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year a cohort of Collegiate
Scholars, including both Science/Mathematics/Technology majors and Education
majors, begins a two-year program leading to transfer to a teacher preparation
program at a four-year school. In addition to content knowledge, Collegiate
Scholars learn how to present that knowledge in the classroom. Regular contact
with industry representatives and sites reveals to students the connections
between industry and the instruction of K-12 students. After suitable training,
Collegiate Scholars become Teaching Scholars. At this stage, they enter middle
school classrooms in low-income schools to teach mathematics and science lessons
and to bring up-to-date subject matter and technology to the schools. Faculty
Subject Advisors from the college assist the scholars in lesson
preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pre-Collegiate Scholars, a group of high
school students formed each year, experience mathematics and science activities
and interact with the Collegiate Scholars, possibly becoming the next generation
of Collegiate Scholars. Summer mathematics-science-technology institutes for
rising ninth graders and run by graduates of the Sunshine Scholars program,
build interest in the
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;