* 0302502
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Latino (Im)migration to the Upper South
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Richard Schein, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2005
* USD 8,556.00

This research analyzes a new chapter in understandings of race and ethnicity in
the US South, through an examination of Hispanic migration to Nashville,
Tennessee, and Lexington, Kentucky. These are two mid-size southern cities that
have experienced rapid Hispanic population increases in the last decade and
dramatic changes in the local labor force's racial and ethnic composition.
Although many US regions are experiencing Hispanic migration, this growth has
particularly strong implications in the US South, where historically, a black-
white racial binary has organized social, economic, and political interactions
and large-scale voluntary in-migration has not been common. To investigate these
implications, this study proceeds through two phases that together provide a
broad overview of Hispanic migration to each city and more detailed case studies
of this migration. First, it examines how Hispanic migration to Lexington and
Nashville has developed and how Hispanics are entering local labor markets
through sectors such as construction and agriculture. These initial research
questions will be answered through content analyses of each city's major
newspapers and public documents on Hispanic communities, analyses of recent
census data, and interviews with spokespersons of local immigrant service
providers. Second, the research shifts scales to local worksites that have
recently become dependent on Hispanic labor. In case studies of these worksites,
it addresses how the growing number of Hispanics at Lexington and Nashville
worksites is affecting workplace practices and social relations. This research
question will be addressed through participant observation and interviews with
Hispanic workers and their non-Hispanic co-workers and supervisors concerning
daily workplace practices and social interactions. The project will use data
from these interviews to investigate how ethnicity and race differentiate
workplace experiences for workers and supervisors and what workplace changes the
increase in Hispanic labor has necessitated. Workplace comparisons will be made
both within and between Nashville and Lexington, to assess the impacts of
factors, such as worksite gender and ethnic integration and each city's broader
management of Hispanic migration, on social interactions between and among
workers and supervisors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will make three
theoretical contributions to geographical scholarship through these case
studies. First, in a national context, it will provide a point of comparison for
broader immigration research organized in a bi-coastal pattern that privileges
large gateway cities and, thus, will reflect the changing geographies of
Hispanic migration to and within the US. Second, the study will examine changes
in racial identities and race relations within the US South outside the racial
dualism that has long dominated such studies and at the very onset of Hispanic
migration to the region. Finally, through detailed case studies of racial and
ethnic interactions at Lexington and Nashville workplaces, the research will add
a qualitative richness to studies of immigration to the US upper South, a part
of the United States off the maps of most immigration studies but clearly
visible to more and more Hispanic men and women. In addition to these
theoretical contributions, this research will have broader societal impacts,
particularly within Kentucky and Tennessee. It has created opportunities for
collaborations, such as joint survey initiatives and database sharing, with
various immigrant-service organizations. These and other partnerships will allow
much broader dissemination of results, through avenues including public
presentations and progress reports within each city. In this way, the Hispanic
communities on which the research is based and the groups that work with them
will benefit from the research in which they participated. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;