* 0302768
* Planning Grant for the CANS Regional Center for IT Education, Training and Business Development
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Richard Della Valle, Diablo Valley College
* Standard Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 10/31/2005
* USD 70,000.00

This planning grant for an Information Technology (IT) Center is a collaborative
project of Community Colleges in the California Counties of Contra Costa,
Alameda, Napa and Solano (CANS Regional Consortium), in the San Francisco East
Bay Region. This project addresses an anticipated increase in an IT workforce.
The goal of this grant is the development of a comprehensive proposal for a
regional center for IT Education, Training and Business Development, based upon
Convergent Technologies (CT), that is, the interdisciplinary collaboration of
Telecommunications, Media, IT programs and entrepreneurship through
collaborative learning programs and internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
experience with a "Convergent Technology" grant at Diablo Valley College showed
that there is a connection between the growth of student enrollments in the
community colleges during an economic downturn and the growth in entrepreneurial
activity in the local economy, especially documented by the county's business
incubators. People often return to the community college to enhance or develop
their skills, and entrepreneurs fall back on their highly honed skills and
venture to "risk" a new idea or "start-up." They often have a clear idea of the
concept, but do not understand business issues. This is where the partnership of
the Community Colleges with their local business incubators or Small Business
Development Centers has proven so valuable. Student interns, when offered much
of the basic business information and skills, succeed. "Just-in-time" training
opportunities offered on site at the business incubators provided the life raft
needed for these businesses at critical times. Hence, challenges became
solutions and successful businesses emerged, which meant that new jobs were
created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IT advisory council concept has been broached
to stakeholders in the region and many have indicated a willingness to commit
technical expertise, software, hardware, facilities, student internships,
faculty development projects and participate in articulation agreements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The agenda for the first plenary session of the advisory
council includes presentations and discussions of: 1) Activities of established
IT Centers, 2) CANS IT programs, 3) Existing IT skills standards, 4)
Business/Industry/Government needs assessment, 5) Proposed new curricula, 6)
Faculty Development, 7) Student Internships, 8) Delivery Systems, 9)
Sustainability, and 10) Criteria for Center development. Task forces are being
formed to address the key issues identified for the preparation of the proposal
for a regional center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
proposed activity is based upon the qualifications and experience of the CANS
Consortium and previous grants in Economic Development for the CANS region. The
broader impacts focus on this regional collaboration of business, industry,
educational institutions, and government partners, providing opportunities for
under-represented groups, among others.&lt;br/&gt;