* 0302574
* A Distributed Hybrid Approach to Creating a Community of Practice Using NSF Funded Manufacturing Engineering Technology Curriculum Modules
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Paul Giguere, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Lance C. Perez
* 07/31/2008
* USD 299,947.00

The Society of Manufacturing Engineers has documented the need for qualified
technicians and manufacturing practitioners, at the same time the number of
TAC/ABET accredited associate degree programs has decreased. The impact of our
project is intended to be national in scope and could change the delivery of
educational content by adding another point on the continuum between pure face-
to-face and pure web-based. Our National Center of Excellence for Advanced
Manufacturing Education (NCE/AME) will lead the development and testing of a
distributed hybrid instructional delivery process as a method for increasing the
number of students in Technology Accreditation Commission of the Accrediting
Body for Engineering and Technology (TAC/ABET) accredited associate degree
programs by providing greater student geographic access. Our proposed
distributed-hybrid instructional delivery method uses face-to-face modular
instructional while at the same time provides the ability for the small groups
to function as part of a larger class even with temporal and geographical
shifts. The overall goal of this project is to develop, test, and evaluate the
effectiveness of new web-based primary instructional materials, leading to a
certificate in Continuous Process Improvement (CPI) that utilizes our
distributed-hybrid delivery model.&lt;br/&gt;