* 0302827
* Planning Grant for a National ATE Center in Micro-and Nanoscale Manufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2003,11/30/2004
* Gary Harris, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 11/30/2004
* USD 70,000.00

Over the past decade, microfabrication has been combined with nanofabrication,
and it is estimated that the United States will need between 800,000 and 1
million new nanofabrication workers in the next 10 years. Several industry
sectors are driving this workforce need. First are the established industries
that traditionally use micro- and nanotechnology, such as microelectronics,
information storage, optoelectronics, and others. Second are industries that
have been newly created by this technology, such the MEMS, NEMs,
nanobiotechnology, and nanoelectronics start-ups. A third driving sector is
composed of existing major industries that previously have never used micro- and
nanotechnology but are now actively embracing it. Among these are giants such as
the pharmaceutical and chemical industries, and even more traditional industries
like clay and glass. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Employees with skills in micro- and
nanofabrication are needed at all levels. At the more advanced levels (engineers
and above), workers are needed with specialized skills. At the technician level,
however, where the majority of new nanofabrication jobs will be, a generic skill
set is needed. The skill set needed at the technician level is identical for
companies using micro- and nanotechnology whether they are producing electronic,
electromechanical, biological, chemical, or any other kind of system. With this
single skill set approach, students are given a background that allows them to
move back and forth across industry sectors, as micro- and nanotechnology
evolves and new opportunities arise. By educating students across the broad
spectrum of nanofabrication applications, we develop a workforce that is more
versatile and less vulnerable to the business cycles of specific industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Curriculum addressing the generic skill set needed for
technician-level micro- and nanofabrication workers has already been developed
and is being continuously improved by the existing NSF Regional Center for
Manufacturing Education in Nanofabrication. This hands-on curriculum leverages
the Penn State site of the NSF NNUN to support the nation's first associate
degree programs in nanofabrication offered at community colleges and other
institutions across Pennsylvania, as well as professional development workshops
for educators and industry personnel, and summer chip camps for secondary
schools students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this planning project is
to explore the feasibility of leveraging the existing NSF Regional Center for
Manufacturing Education in Nanofabrication and other programs and resources to
establish a national ATE center for micro-and nanofabrication duration. The
project is identifying and engaging industry partners, educational institutions
and resources, and micro- and nanofabrication user facilities interested in such
a national effort, identifying best practice alternatives to the centralized
facility approach to nanofabrication technician education, and assessing the
feasibility of one, unifying national center addressing micro- and
nanofabrication skills.&lt;br/&gt;