* 0302063
* Conference:  Student Paper Competition at the 2003 IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium to be held in Philadelphia, PA, USA from June 8 to June 13, 2003
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2004
* James Hwang, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/29/2004
* USD 24,000.00

0302063&lt;br/&gt;Hwang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests travel
support for 16 students from U.S. universities in the Student Paper Competition
at the 2003 International Microwave Symposium (IMS). The IMS is the annual
meeting of the Microwave Theory and Techniques Society (MTT-S) of the Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. (IEEE). The IMS is also the major
international conference in the microwave field and a focus of research results
in wireless communications. In 2003, the IMS will be held in Philadelphia, PA,
USA from June 8 to June 13.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year, the MTT-S promotes
student education and research in microwave theory and techniques through a
number of mechanisms. One of the most important mechanisms is the Student Paper
Competition at the IMS. This selective program brings the world's best students
together in an integrated program in which they present their work not only to a
technical audience but also to a group of judges. The program helps develop the
students' technical acumen as well as their communication skills. It also helps
introduce them to the international technical community and helps to build a
community of students&lt;br/&gt;who will lead the next generation of microwave
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IMS provides financial support of
various forms but does not reimburse travel expenses. Travel support from NSF
will ensure that the program is open to the widest range of interested
applicants from U.S. universities.&lt;br/&gt;