* 0302060
* NSF-Europe: Joint FLCMRC/LICRYL Research on Advanced Liquid Crystalline Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Patrick Keller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,000,000.00

A joint program of research between the Liquid Crystal Laboratory (LICRYL) at
the University of Calabria, Italy's largest liquid crystal (LC) research center,
and the Ferroelectric Liquid Crystal Materials Research Center (FLCMRC) at the
University of Colorado in Boulder, an NSF-funded Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center (MRSEC), is proposed. The requested funding will enable
scientific collaboration on a broad range of forefront liquid crystal research,
combining the complementary capabilities of the two Centers into an entity
uniquely capable of advancing LC and soft matter science and technology. The
collective research expertise will be brought to bear on projects having liquid
crystal - light and liquid crystal - interface interactions as the principal
overall themes, addressing such key problems as the alignment and anchoring of
smectics on surfaces, an area of great technical importance, and the photo-
alignment of liquid crystals, a promising route to the development of photo-
addressed devices. The intellectual merit of the proposed activity derives from
the technological importance of the proposed research, the broad range of
fundamental scientific questions to be addressed, and the unique and
complementary areas of expertise brought to bear through the joint efforts of
the two Centers. The exchange of graduate students will expose young scientists
to different research cultures and provide them with technical training in
cutting-edge research techniques. The educational benefits of the program will
extend beyond the graduate researchers to K-12 students served through the
Centers' outreach programs. Given the wide variety of potential applications of
the proposed research, it is likely that this collaboration will engender
technology transfer to the private sector both in the U.S. and in
Italy.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The Ferroelectric Liquid Crystal Materials
Research Center (FLCMRC) at the University of Colorado in Boulder, an NSF-funded
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC), is proposing a joint
program of research with the Liquid Crystal Laboratory (LICRYL) at the
University of Calabria, Italy's largest liquid crystal (LC) research center. The
FLCMRC, which is one of the principal centers of liquid crystal expertise in the
US and a unique venue worldwide for research on polarity and chirality and their
interplay in condensed phases, will use this funding to further develop and
enhance a program of joint research and Ph.D. student support begun with
Calabria in 1997. The Centers will collaborate on a broad range of forefront
liquid crystal research, combining their complementary research capabilities
into an entity uniquely capable of advancing liquid crystal and soft matter
science and technology, with an emphasis on understanding liquid crystal -
substrate interactions and on developing novel optically addressed devices. The
broader impacts of the proposed activity in the areas of education and
industrial outreach and human resource development will be substantial,
augmenting and enhancing ongoing programs at the two Centers such as the CU/UC
International Ph.D. Program and the FLCMRC's highly successful Materials Science
from CU program of K-12 science enrichment classes. The planned exchange of
graduate students provides a unique opportunity for the professional development
and cultural enrichment of young researchers, both inside and outside the
laboratory. The Centers both have track records of substantive technology
transfer, including spin-off commercial ventures producing liquid crystal
display products and scientific equipment. Given the wide variety of potential
applications of the proposed research, it is likely that this collaboration will
engender technology transfer to the private sector both in the U.S. and in Italy
in novel LC applications areas of high interest such as ultranonlinear optics,
photorefractive effects, device structures created by photopolymerization, and
ultra-low power bistable nematic display cells.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;