* 0302215
* Topics in Algebraic Geometry, Non-commutative Geometry and Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,04/30/2005
* Alexander Polishchuk, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 04/30/2005
* USD 105,000.00

Principal Investigator: Alexander Polishchuk Proposal Number: 0302215
Institution: Boston University Title: Topics in algebraic geometry,
noncommutative geometry and representation theory

Abstract.

The investigator proposes a research program in algebraic geometry and
representation theory. The proposed projects are: 1) the study of higher Massey
products on derived categories of coherent sheaves on projective varieties; 2)
the determination of the rings of algebraic cycles on Jacobians of curves modulo
algebraic equivalence; 3) the study of intersection theory on the moduli spaces
of higher spin curves in connection with the generalized Witten's conjecture; 4)
the study of categories of holomorphic vector bundles on noncommutative tori; 5)
the study of minimal representations of p-adic groups and their relation with
the theory of automorphic forms.

A significant part of this proposal is motivated by mathematical conjectures
originating from physics. In particular, one of the five projects is motivated
by a conjecture of Kontsevich, the "homological mirror conjecture", which is an
attempt to give a mathematical foundation to mirror symmetry phenomena
discovered in string theory. Another of the projects is devoted to the study of
geometric objects relevant for a certain conjecture of Witten in connection with
the theory of gravity. From a mathematical point of view, this proposal belongs
to the fields of algebraic geometry and representation theory. Algebraic
geometry is the part of mathematics studying geometric objects defined by
polynomial equations. The richness of this area is due to the fact that it
combines algebraic techniques with geometric intuition. Representation theory is
essentially the study of symmetries given by linear transformations. Because of
the ubiquity of symmetries of this type, representation theory is relevant for
many other fields, including number theory and physics.

