* 0302235
* Grantees Meeting and General Workshop on Ultra-High Capacity Optical Communications and Networking:  Challenges in Broadband Optical Access, Materials Processing, and Manufacturing
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/01/2002,11/30/2003
* Alan Willner, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Venkata Mulpuri
* 11/30/2003
* USD 78,229.00

This NSF Workshop, being held on Oct. 21-22, 2002, will serve the dual purpose
of: (a) reviewing the research accomplishments of the first year of the NSF
01-65 Program, and (b) identifying future research needs and opportunities that
may serve as the basis for a follow-on Initiative on this topic in FY 2003. A
portion of the invited presentations will specifically draw in new communities
to the Workshop that may be represented in a subsequent new Program
Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first day of the Workshop will consist of:
(1) a plenary presentation that will set the tone of the developing research
area, (2) 19 grantee presentations (15 min. each) that will review the research
results of the first year of the program and will discuss broad issues that may
not relate to their own research interests, (3) approximately 5 invited
presentations (30 min. each) that come from NSF Directorates other than ECS and
that will deal with new challenges and opportunities in this important area, and
(4) a dinner speaker on industrial technology roadmaps. The second day will be
dedicated to approximately four breakout discussion sessions, details of writing
the final report, and issues related to a subsequent NSF Program Initiative that
will be a follow-on to NSF 01-65. The Workshop will allow time to address
important new research challenges and breakthrough technologies, especially
those not fully addressed in the first program
announcement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The location for the workshop will be the
Hyatt Regency Crystal City in Arlington, VA. We expect to have approximately 80
participants, with 65 coming from academia and industry and the remainder coming
from government. Specifically, this proposal addresses: (1) a description and
rationale for the workshop, (2) a list of potential speakers to be considered,
(3) a list of the NSF 01-65 grantees, (4) a tentative agenda, (5) a proposed
Workshop budget, (6) website material from the 2000 Workshop, and (6) the actual
NSF 01-65 Program Solicitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Workshop will explore
research opportunities in critical enabling technologies, with the goal of
assuring continued bandwidth and capacity growth in optical communication
systems and networks throughout the next 10 years. The Workshop will address
forward-looking and high-impact research. Moreover, the workshop will explore
how the NSF can play a strategic role in alleviating the workforce issues in a
troubled optical communications industry. The final report prepared by the
Workshop participants will detail important challenges, both fundamental and
technological, that are likely to be at the forefront of this field for many
years to come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;