* 0303326
* Positive and nonnegative curvature on bundles
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2003
* Kristopher Tapp, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 11/30/2003
* USD 72,850.00

Proposal DMS-0303326&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Kristopher Tapp (Bryn Mawr
College)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Positive and nonnegative curvature on
bundles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent research,
the PI developed tools for studying the following two &lt;br/&gt;general
problems in Riemannian geometry: (1) For which vector bundles does
&lt;br/&gt;the total space admit a complete Riemannian metric with nonnegative
sectional &lt;br/&gt;curvature? (2) For which sphere bundles does the total
space admit a &lt;br/&gt;Riemannian metric with positive curvature? The PI plans
to use these tools &lt;br/&gt;to find new examples, obstructions, and rigidity
theorems. In particular, &lt;br/&gt;the PI plans to construct metrics of
nonnegative curvature on holomorphic &lt;br/&gt;vector bundles over complex
projective space, and determine whether Einstein-&lt;br/&gt;Hermitian
connections can appear as the connections in the normal bundles of
&lt;br/&gt;their souls. Also, the PI intends to study nonnegatively curved
metrics on &lt;br/&gt;trivial vector bundles over spheres. This problem is
related to the Hopf &lt;br/&gt;conjecture, or more specifically to the question:
how large is the family of &lt;br/&gt;nonnegatively curved metrics on the
product of two spheres? The PI will work &lt;br/&gt;with undergraduate students
studying the metrics on such products obtained by &lt;br/&gt;re-scaling the
product metric by a compact Lie group which acts by &lt;br/&gt;isometries.
Finally, the PI proposes to find obstructions to metrics of
&lt;br/&gt;nonnegative curvature on vector bundles over spheres with prescribed
soul &lt;br/&gt;metrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The question of which manifolds
can have nonnegative curvature is central to &lt;br/&gt;Riemannian geometry.
Nonnegative curvature is a visually natural restriction &lt;br/&gt;on the way in
which an object curves about in space. All known examples come &lt;br/&gt;from
compact Lie groups with bi-invariant metrics, which are indispensable
&lt;br/&gt;tools in diverse fields of mathematics, physics, cosmology, and other
&lt;br/&gt;disciplines in which simplification is achieved through symmetry. The
search &lt;br/&gt;for new examples of manifolds with nonnegative (or positive)
curvature has a &lt;br/&gt;long history, yet very few constructions are known.
Since his tools &lt;br/&gt;represent a construction which is substantially
different form known methods, &lt;br/&gt;the PI believes they deserve further
study.&lt;br/&gt;