* 0303868
* NER:     Charge Writing for Nano-Assembly of Bio-Molecules on Artificial Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Eniko Enikov, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 06/30/2005
* USD 108,000.00

Scientific and commercial interest in the manipulation and identification of
size, shape, and composition of sub-micrometer molecular structures is
increasing. The need for nano-scale assembly and manufacturing is apparent in
areas such as medical diagnostics, chemical recognition, and surface catalysis.
The properties of man-made surfaces determine the biocompatibility of medical
implants, the kinetics of chemical reactions of bioreactors, and the molecular
recognition and specificity of the response of biosensors. Advances in the
development of instrumentation for surface studies, and especially the invention
of scanning-probe microscopy (SPM) techniques, have now made it possible to
gather not only morphological information but also thermodynamic data on
surface-protein or ligand-receptor binding reactions. At present the widespread
use of scanning-probe microscopy in biology seems to be hindered by the
difficulty of holding organic molecules onto a flat substrate during scanning.
Further, if molecular nano-assembly is to become widespread in the future, the
nano-mechanical equivalent of a clamp will be needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is aimed at exploring a combination of the top-down and bottom-up
approaches for the purpose of "proving a concept" for manufacturing nano-scale
molecular structures. First, target sites for molecular assembly will be defined
(top-down phase), followed by molecular self-assembly onto these sites (bottom-
up phase). The target sites will consist of a locally injected charge using a
technique known as "charge writing" with SPM probes. Since electrostatic forces
provide "docking sites" for many chemical and biological reactions, it is
reasonable to assume that simulation of this natural process could be used for
nano-assembly. The idea of 'writing' a charge pattern onto a substrate is an
obvious initial approach to nano-assembly, most easily accomplished via
scanning-probe microscopy. &lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this study will (1)
Demonstrate the feasibility of using surface (interfacial) charged templates for
nano-scale assembly and manufacturing. (2)Determine the effect of the surface
charge distribution on the binding and conformation of the target
macromolecules. (3) Quantify the ordering effects and correlate the experimental
data with theoretical models of the charge-macromolecule
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;(4)Investigate a scale-up of the assembly process based
on e-beam lithography. The outlined research will actively involve two graduate
students and will extend the existing micro-scale electrostatic assembly
research of the PI (NSF CAREER) to the nanometer scale. The results of the
research will be disseminated in the interdepartmental curriculum on bio-
sensors, currently under development by the PI and the Co-PI. This grant will
also provide research opportunities to under-represented minority engineering
students such as female, Native Americans or Hispanics, constituting 15.6% of
the total number of MS and PhD degrees awarded. The interdisciplinary nature of
the outlined research will provide educational opportunities for senior-year
undergraduate students through participation in sample preparation and data
analysis. Finally but not least commercialization opportunities will be explored
through the ongoing collaboration of the PI with a local high-tech materials
research company (www.mercorp.com). &lt;br/&gt;