* 0303237
* Properties of the Pseudo-Binary Wide Band Gap Semiconductor Silicon Carbide-Aluminum Nitride
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Ignatius Tsong, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 10/31/2006
* USD 407,133.00

The general aim of the proposed activities is to provide a basic understanding
of the properties of the new wide band gap semiconductor, (SiC)1-x(AlN)x,
reported recently by the PI, and to provide re-search experience in the
synthesis and characterization of semiconductor films for students. The ap-
proach is to utilize GSMBE (gas source molecular beam epitaxy) growth of the
pseudo-binary ma-terials, (SiC)1-x(AlN)x , with variable composition x to
explore the feasibility of band gap engineering in the range of 2.9 to 4.5 eV.
The project includes the study of the growth mode of these films using in situ
microscopic techniques. It is also proposed to investigate the fundamental
properties of the (SiC)1-x(AlN)x films in terms of microstructure, electronic
structure, defect density, and dopant spe-cies. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The
project addresses fundamental research issues associated with electronic
materials having technological relevance. An important feature of the project is
the strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research and education.
The proposed activities will include the involvement of under-represented
minority undergraduate students in basic semiconductor materials research. It is
hoped that the excitement generated in the research and discovery process will
succeed in encour-aging under-represented minority students upon graduation to
pursue master or doctoral programs in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;