* 0303027
* Development of a Bi-Axial Micro-Tensile Tester of MEMS Materials for Research and Student Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2002,07/31/2004
* Jaime Cardenas-Garcia, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 36,156.00

This is an instrument development award to University of Maryland at College
Park for Micro-Electro-Mechanical-System (MEMS) research. Micro-Electro-
Mechanical-System (MEMS) devices generally range from a few microns to a few
millimeters in size. This area of technological development that has gone from
generating curiosities such as wobble motors and micro-robots, to its current
phase in which practical devices of common usage, such as accelerometers and
pressure-sensing transducers, are being manufactured and used. This has created
a need for improved characterization of MEMS materials to better optimize the
MEMS design process. The objective of this research is to design and build a
tensile tester for MEMS materials. The tester will be used to determine the
elastic properties of MEMS material specimens. The tester will allow
simultaneous loading of specimens in two perpendicular directions. It will also
accommodate specimens of different sizes; allow alignment of the specimen; apply
and measure the load on the specimen; monitor specimen deformation; and permit
continuous data acquisition. Several projects related to MEMS materials
characterization benefit from the development of this micro-tensile tester.
Additionally, the proposed development of the micro-tensile tester will enhance
research facilities in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at University of
Maryland College Park. Also, it provides the required infrastructure for a
student, who previously worked on a related capstone senior design project, to
commence his graduate degree. Furthermore, the existence of this micro-tensile
tester will allow potential interaction with the MEMS research facility at
Sandia National Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Micro-Electro-Mechanical-System
(MEMS) devices generally range from a few microns to a few millimeters in size.
This area of technological development that has gone from generating curiosities
such as wobble motors and micro-robots, to its current phase in which practical
devices of common usage, such as accelerometers and pressure-sensing
transducers, are being manufactured and used. This has created a need for
improved characterization of MEMS materials to better optimize the MEMS design
process. The objective of this research is to design and build a tensile tester
for MEMS materials. The tester will be used to determine the elastic properties
of MEMS material specimens. The tester will allow simultaneous loading of
specimens in two perpendicular directions. It will also accommodate specimens of
different sizes; allow alignment of the specimen; apply and measure the load on
the specimen; monitor specimen deformation; and permit continuous data
acquisition. Several projects related to MEMS materials characterization benefit
from the development of this micro-tensile tester. Additionally, the proposed
development of the micro-tensile tester will enhance research facilities in the
Department of Department of Mechanical Engineering at University of Maryland
College Park. Also, it provides the required infrastructure for a student, who
previously worked on a related capstone senior design project, to commence his
graduate degree. Furthermore, the existence of this micro-tensile tester will
allow potential interaction with the MEMS research facility at Sandia National
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;