* 0303450
* Summer Program in Solid State Chemistry for Undergraduate Students and College Faculty
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2009
* Shiou-Jyh Hwu, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 04/30/2009
* USD 880,000.00

The summer research program in solid state chemistry for undergraduate students
and college faculty provides an interdisciplinary forum for learning about solid
state chemistry, including the impact of materials synthesis, development and
application on science, technology and society. It provides opportunities for
college students and faculty of U.S. institutions to learn about solid-state
chemistry research. Over forty participants attended the summer research program
in the last two years. It offered first-hand laboratory experiences to
individuals from institutions where an advanced research program in solid-state
or materials chemistry is unavailable. Of the forty-one attendees who
participated in the 2001 and 2002 programs, eighty percent were from four-year
colleges throughout the country. Research laboratories in nearly twenty states
jointly host the summer research participants. This education and outreach
program in solid state and materials chemistry is enthusiastically endorsed by
the solid state chemistry community. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;There is a
significant impact on both students and faculty participating in the program.
Undergraduate students doing research are exposed to a wide range of career
choices, and college faculty are provided the intellectual tools and experiences
needed to develop solid state and materials chemistry curricula at their home
institutions&lt;br/&gt;