* 0303758
* Phase Behaviors and Nucleation Kinetics of Protein Solutions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Xueyu Song, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 05/31/2007
* USD 315,000.00

Professor Xueyu Song, of Iowa State University, is supported by the Theoretical
and Computational Chemistry Program to study phase behaviors and nucleation
kinetics of protein solutions. Song develops computational models and machinery
that allow for the understanding of protein crystallization. Models are based on
parametrization of potentials which reproduce characteristics of twenty
naturally occurring and understood amino acids. The resulting potentials are of
greater complexity than many that in current use. These potentials are used in
concert with classical density-functional theory to study crystallization of
highly idealized models and then globular proteins. This theoretical work aids
experimentalists in understanding how protein crystallization proceeds. This
process is currently the bottleneck in obtaining complete structural information
about the proteins defined from the human genome project. Computational skills
gleaned by undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students aid in alleviating
the current predictive void in the size regime relevant to simulation-based
determination of the structure of biologically interesting
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;X-ray based structural determination of DNA and
other biological molecules is the most reliable means for obtaining structural
information. However such snapshots are only possible if researchers can create
highly ordered crystals of these molecules and this experimental task is proving
to be very difficult. Professor Song, of Iowa State University, uses knowledge
gleaned from twenty amino acids to develop a means for predicting short-range
interactions between neighboring molecules. These short-range interactions must
be understood to determine the environmental conditions for which highly ordered
crystals may be obtained. Success in the area of computationally informed
protein crystallization would significantly speed the process of structural
determination for the proteins associated with the human genome project.
Educational efforts associated with this research will prepare the next
generation of computational chemists for the challenges associated with
computational biology and molecular-based simulation of fluids.&lt;br/&gt;