* 0303833
* NER:       Combined UHV and Liquid Phase (CULP) Processing of Self-Assembled Nanostructures and Novel Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Raymond Tung, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,849.00

This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) proposal was submitted in response to
the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 02-148). The project
aims to advance fabrication technologies for self-assembled quantum dots and
novel interfaces, and to broaden the scientific knowledge of kinetic processes
involving nanoparticles. The approach utilizes an inert liquid as a medium to
form clusters of metals, semiconductors, and insulators, and subsequently, the
surface tension of the drying liquid for positioning self-assembled nano-
particles with respect to an existing pattern on the substrate surface. By
subjecting samples to pressures exceeding the triple-point pressure, in-situ in
a small chamber, without crossing the solid-gas boundary on the phase diagram,
the mixed solid film is expected to be converted to the liquid phase by
adjusting its temperature. It is anticipated that the large diffusivity of atoms
in the liquid phase will facilitate self-assembly of the dissolved species into
particles with physical dimensions on the nanometer scale. After processing in
the liquid phase, the thin films are either refrozen into the solid phase for
subsequent drying to avoid surface tension effects, or dried in vacuum to allow
the line tension of the liquid droplet to move, and possibly align the nano-
particles with existing patterns on the substrate. The dependencies of the
morphology and structure of self-assembled nanoparticles on the processing
parameters will be studied by microscopic techniques, including AFM and TEM, the
latter performed through collaboration with Lucent Technologies Bell Labs. The
transport properties at the interfaces between the nano-particles and the
substrate will also be characterized. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses basic exploratory research issues in a topical area of materials
science and engineering with high technological relevance; it is considered a
high risk/high pay-off activity. The project encompasses the NSE research and
education theme of Nanoscale Structures, Novel Phenomena, and Quantum Control.
An important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
through the training of students in a technologically significant area. The
basic concepts behind this project are fundamentally simple and may be readily
understood by graduate, or undergraduate, students, who can then contribute
significantly to the design of the experimental setup and procedures. A website
dealing with the basic concepts is set-up and linked to an undergraduate physics
course regularly accessed by students at Brooklyn College, which has a high
minority enrollment. Parts of the proposed research are conducted at an
industrial laboratory, giving students valuable exposure to an industrial
research environment and personnel, and also opportunities for industrial
scholars to share their experience and knowledge at Brooklyn College. Due to the
interdisciplinary nature of the experiments, students will be encouraged to
broaden their understanding by seeking guidance and help from experts in other
areas. In addition, the PI participates in the Minority Access to Research
Careers (MARC) program on campus, through which he is presently mentoring three
minority students. Access/exposure to research activities in highly competitive
areas such as nanotechnology will be very valuable for participants in this
program. The project is jointly supported by the MPS/DMR/EM and the ENG/CTS/CRP-
KCMP programs.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;