* 0303968
* NER:     Nanofabricated Photosensitive Polymers for Controlled Cell Manipulation in 2D & 3D
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Nan-Loh Yang, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 06/30/2007
* USD 100,000.00

The focus of this proposed program is on the design and assembly of unique
scaffold materials with a photosensitive cleavable element for the controlled
adhesion and release of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins and cells. The
approach offers versatility in generating cell and tissue scaffolds with planar
or 3D nanofeatures. The capability to produce planar/topological nano-and
microfeatures will be developed based on a photosensitive di-block copolymer
recently synthesized in our laboratory for selective remove / deposit cells from
/ into a cell network or to manipulate cell attachment sites. The response of
the affected cells or network regions will be studied through quantification of
cell-cell communication and cell function. Furthermore, in 3D the unique
characteristics of the new scaffold material will be used to design a strategy
for building a stratified functional (cardiac) tissue by stacking oriented cell
sheets to achieve in vivo-like anisotropy and even transmural fiber rotation.
The central focus of the proposed design is the controlled adhesion/release of
cell syncytia on/from the topographically modified polymer surfaces. Cell
responses will be quantified and interpreted based on structural and functional
data from fluorescence confocal, atomic force microscopy imaging, as well as
electromechanical fluorescence measurements.

The successful completion of the program aims will enable us to: 1) establish
new means for precise cell control at the micro- and nano-scale; 2) create a new
way of engineering functional tissue with defined architecture and anisotropy,
superior to techniques currently in use.

The eventual goal is to create an in vitro three-dimensional cardiac tissue
system capable of preserving the salient structural, mechanical and electrical
characteristics of the heart, yet minimizing ambiguity in interpreting systemic
effects.