* 0303593
* Conference on Ergodic Theory with Connections to Number Theory;  July 21-25, 2003;  Corvallis, OR
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Thomas Schmidt, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2004
* USD 14,000.00

Abstract: Conf on ergodic Theory: DMS0303593&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding
Proposal for a &lt;br/&gt;Conference on &lt;br/&gt;Ergodic Theory with
Connections to Number Theory &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal
funds a week-long &lt;br/&gt;conference on `Ergodic Theory with Connections to
Number &lt;br/&gt;Theory' to be held July 21-25, 2003 on the campus of Oregon
State &lt;br/&gt;University. We expect some 50 participants, with six principal
speakers. &lt;br/&gt; The conference will emphasize the areas of: diophantine
approximation; &lt;br/&gt;Z^d-actions; and billiards.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Confirmed principal speakers are:
&lt;br/&gt;P. Arnoux (Marseille); V. Bergelson (Ohio State Univ.); M. Keane
(Amsterdam); &lt;br/&gt;H. Masur (Univ. Illinios at Chicago); K. Schmidt
(Vienna); and W. Veech (Rice Univ.).&lt;br/&gt;Participants will have the
opportunity to give shorter talks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Number theory has long
provided motivation and tools for ergodic theory. &lt;br/&gt;Recent results,
many obtained by our principal speakers, include: the use of&lt;br/&gt;
diophantine approximation to give precise results on ergodic directions for
&lt;br/&gt;billiard flows; the use of ergodic Ramsey theory to clarify and
generalize &lt;br/&gt;classical results of diophantine approximation; and the
demonstration of the &lt;br/&gt;rigidity of the dynamics generated by commuting
automorphisms of compact &lt;br/&gt;groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;