* 0303981
* NIRT: Heterogeneous Integration of Nanowires for Chemical Sensor Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Steve Semancik, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yogesh B. Gianchandani
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,200,000.00

Intellectual merit:"Electronic nose"chemical sensor arrays are used to detect
trace analytes&lt;br/&gt;in complex mixtures,and are important for
environmental,biomedical,process control,and&lt;br/&gt;security-related
applications.Scaling chemical sensors to nanometer dimensions will
open&lt;br/&gt;unprecedented opportunities for implementation of electronic nose
arrays in and-held devices,&lt;br/&gt;remote monitoring,robotics,medical
diagnostics,sensor dust,and other novel applications.&lt;br/&gt;To do this,we
must create low cost,low power,massively parallel arrays of chemically
diverse&lt;br/&gt;nanosensors and integrate them with on-chip data
processing.The proposed project will bring&lt;br/&gt;together an
interdisciplinary team from three institutions to work on the fundamental
problems&lt;br/&gt;connected with this goal.The project combines the expertise
of chemists in nanosensor&lt;br/&gt;synthesis,physicists in materials and device
characterization,electrical engineers in&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneous integration and
test circuit design,and computer scientists in the
design,&lt;br/&gt;fabrication,and testing of novel low-power circuit
architectures.While this project focuses&lt;br/&gt;specifically on nanosensor
arrays,the problems it addresses are generic to the integration
of&lt;br/&gt;many different kinds of functional nanoscale objects into silicon-
based circuits.&lt;br/&gt;Our approach builds on an existing knowledge base of
chemical sensor array platforms and&lt;br/&gt;data analysis methods,to which our
team brings some unique new materials and techniques.&lt;br/&gt;Mallouk and
Semancik have developed a method for incorporating chemical sensor
"stripes"into&lt;br/&gt;template-grown metal nanowires.These nanowires connect
the lithographic length scale (micron&lt;br/&gt;nanowire length)with the
nanoscale (30-300 nm diameter and stripe length).The
synthetic&lt;br/&gt;technique allows the chemical nature of the sensory material
to be quite diverse.We will focus&lt;br/&gt;on three different sensor platforms
-chemoresistive metal oxides,intrinsically conducting&lt;br/&gt;polymers,and
conductive polymer composites -which should provide excellent orthogonality
in&lt;br/&gt;sensor arrays.The physical properties of the sensory materials and
of the nanowires will be&lt;br/&gt;studied using test structures devised by Evoy
and Semancik,focusing in particular on the thermal&lt;br/&gt;and temporal
signatures of the nanosensor response.The synthesis and
physical&lt;br/&gt;characterization of the nanosensors will be tightly coupled
so that a molecular-level&lt;br/&gt;understanding of signal transduction and
scaling effects can guide the optimization of the sensors.&lt;br/&gt;Mayer and
Evoy have developed an electrofluidic alignment technique for placing nanowires
in&lt;br/&gt;lithographically defined circuits.This will be a powerful tool for
parallel heterogeneous&lt;br/&gt;integration of the nanosensors into large
arrays.Issues of yield,device density,and testing/logic&lt;br/&gt;circuit
integration will be addressed through a combined approach of simulation and
experiment,&lt;br/&gt;in collaboration with Irwin and
Narayanan.Finally,Irwin,Narayanan,and Mayer will design&lt;br/&gt;and test a
CMOS sensor processing fabric that efficiently controls the duty cycle of
sensor&lt;br/&gt;operation and processes the array response locally.Feedback
between device/circuit testing and&lt;br/&gt;nanosensor synthesis and
characterization will tie the whole project together.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact:The NIRT team will apply its diverse scientific background in
education&lt;br/&gt;and outreach activities at the graduate,undergraduate,high
school,and K-8 levels.The research&lt;br/&gt;program has a strong element of
mentoring of women,minorities,undergraduates,and high
school&lt;br/&gt;students.It will also provide a cross-disciplinary experience
for graduate students through&lt;br/&gt;exchange with partner laboratories.In
each summer of the program,NIRT faculty and students&lt;br/&gt;will team with
Penn State Action Potential staff to develop a series of 5 th -8 th grade
science camps&lt;br/&gt;on different current topics.The unique aspect of these
camps is that they bring elementary and&lt;br/&gt;middle school teachers
together with students,so that teachers can use new curricular material
in&lt;br/&gt;a practical environment.NSF funds will be used to support the
participation of teachers from&lt;br/&gt;beyond our local area,to increase the
geographic and minority impact of the outreach program.