* 0303458
* New Magnetoresistant Oxides of Mixed 3d/4d/5d Transition Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* I-Wei Chen, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 540,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to investigate a new series of mixed oxides
containing primarily 4d and 5d transition metal cations, with additional
magnetic impurities from the 3d transition-metal series. Our recent work on
Fe3+-doped SrRuO3, CaRuO3, and Sr2RuO4 has revealed a very large
magnetoresistance that was not previously known to exist in any ruthenate. More
broadly, these results suggest that large local moments can arise in conducting
oxides, and such materials can be exploited to gain new functionality and new
understanding of ceramics. Our strategy is to use strongly magnetic 3d
impurities to polarize the narrow 4d/5d conduction bands of the host, so that
large electronic and magnetic responses are induced. The magnetic states and the
energies of the 3d impurities will be systematically varied, by distorting the
crystal structure and changing the composition, to match with those of the
conduction bands of the host 4d/5d metals. Cation ordering will also be used as
a tool to direct the crossover from spin-frustrated, intragrain
magnetoresistance behavior to ferrimagnetic, intergrain magnetoresistance
behavior. Single crystals, epitaxial thin films and polycrystals will be
compared to determine the role of the grain-boundary effect, while first-
principles calculations of model, ordered mixed-metal oxides will be made to
benchmark the electronic energy levels of disparate cation d-orbitals.
Meanwhile, synchrotron radiation will be utilized to determine the structures
and electronic states of these compounds. Our educational program will offer
training to undergraduates and high school teachers to provide them with
laboratory and research experience. Further outreach to industry will be made
through collaborative, synergistic, and exploratory research with a start-up
company.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ceramic magnets are typically insulators. This
project will explore new magnetic ceramics that become better conductors under a
magnetic field. These materials have not been studied in the past but are
becoming interesting because of the prospect of spintronic devices. Compared to
conventional electronic devices, spintronic devices process more information by
detecting and transmitting not only the charge but also the spin of electrons.