* 0303075
* Molecular, Cluster, and Solid State Lanthanide Compounds With Electropositive Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2007
* John Brennan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Clarke-Williams, Mark K.
* 03/31/2007
* USD 345,000.00

This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Dr. John G. Brennan, Department of Chemistry, Rutgers
University to undertake a comprehensive investigation into the synthesis and
characterization of lanthanide (Ln) molecules, clusters, and solid-state
materials with direct bonds to the more electropositive chalcogens ( E = S, Se,
Te). Relationships between the physical properties of molecules, clusters, and
solids will be determined, with an emphasis placed on understanding how
properties evolve as a function of system dimensionality. Synthetic methods
leading to facile interconversion of molecular, cluster, and solid-state
materials will be developed. These compounds are of interest as chemical
reagents because the Ln-Te(R) bond is so readily disrupted. A second area to be
developed is the synthesis of Ln compounds with particularly useful selenium-
containing leaving groups, which also impart toluene solubility that is useful
in cluster chemistry. Finally, volatile Ln compounds with selenium ligands are
also targeted. These studies are designed to provide an understanding of how the
chemical and physical properties of Ln compounds evolve as a function of
particle size. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary project will provide
undergraduate and graduate students with a broad exposure to materials synthesis
and characterization techniques and requires students to consider both practical
and intellectual contributions to experimental design. This research impacts on
organic chemistry by providing a totally new class of potential Lewis acid
catalysts, reducing agents, or polymerization initiators. The proposed compounds
are also useful sources for doping Ln ions into chalcogenido semiconductors or
glasses, which have important implications in the manufacture of flat panel
displays and optical fibers. The chemistry can also be developed as a low
temperature (and thus low cost) approach to environmentally acceptable red-
orange pigments that reduce the demand for Cd/Hg based materials. &lt;br/&gt;