* 0303614
* Three problems on Gromov-Witten invariants of algebraic varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Ionut Ciocan-Fontanine, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2008
* USD 121,059.00

DMS-0303614&lt;br/&gt;Ionut Ciocan-Fontanine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to pursue a program based on the&lt;br/&gt;theory of
derived moduli spaces towards calculating higher genus&lt;br/&gt;Gromov-Witten
invariants of certain Calabi-Yau threefolds, such as the&lt;br/&gt;quintic in
projective 4-space. While computations of the genus zero&lt;br/&gt;invariants
have been quite successful, leading to proofs of physicists'&lt;br/&gt;Mirror
Symmetry - based predictions in that case, there has been no&lt;br/&gt;progress
so far in higher genus. The main obstacle has been a lack of&lt;br/&gt;concrete
understanding of the virtual fundamental classes of the moduli&lt;br/&gt;spaces
of higher genus stable maps. In recent work, the PI and Kapranov&lt;br/&gt;have
developed an approach to virtual classes via differential-graded
(dg)&lt;br/&gt;manifolds. Dg-manifolds appear as derived versions of algebro-
geometric&lt;br/&gt;moduli spaces. The PI and Kapranov constructed such a
structure on the&lt;br/&gt;moduli spaces of stable maps. The greater flexibility
of the dg-point&lt;br/&gt;of view restores some of the features that facilitated
the genus zero&lt;br/&gt;computations. The ultimate goal is to prove the higher
genus ``mirror&lt;br/&gt;theorem'', as predicted by the physicists Bershadsky,
Cecotti, Ooguri,&lt;br/&gt;and Vafa. A crucial part of the program involves a
novel construction of&lt;br/&gt;a virtual class in situations outside the reach
of earlier approaches.&lt;br/&gt;This is of great independent interest in
algebraic geometry, as it allows&lt;br/&gt;to extend the theory of virtual
classes to all moduli spaces, as opposed&lt;br/&gt;to just the (rather small)
subset to which it currently applies.&lt;br/&gt;Ciocan-Fontanine also proposes
to establish a relationship between the&lt;br/&gt;genus zero Gromov-Witten
theory of a GIT quotient X//G by a reductive&lt;br/&gt;algebraic group G, and
that of the associated abelian quotient X//T,&lt;br/&gt;where T is a maximal
torus in G. Precise conjectures are made on what the&lt;br/&gt;relationship is,
inspired by results obtained recently by the PI and his&lt;br/&gt;collaborators
in the case when X is a complex vector space and G is the&lt;br/&gt;general
linear group. They are consistent with expectations on how
the&lt;br/&gt;physical theories associated to X//G and X//T are related and will
be of&lt;br/&gt;interest to physicists, as well as to algebraic
geometers.&lt;br/&gt;The third problem proposed by the PI is to give a proof of
a combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;formula for the three-point, genus zero Gromov-Witten
invariants of complex&lt;br/&gt;Grassmannians. This is the only outstanding
unsolved problem remaining in&lt;br/&gt;``Quantum Schubert
Calculus.''&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is research in the field of algebraic
geometry, which is one of the&lt;br/&gt;oldest branches of modern mathematics.
In recent years, the methods and&lt;br/&gt;ideas of algebraic geometry,
especially the study of moduli spaces, have&lt;br/&gt;been employed in string
theory, a very active part of theoretical physics.&lt;br/&gt;Developments in
string theory have sparked a fruitful interaction between&lt;br/&gt;the two
communities of researchers and have led to the discovery and study&lt;br/&gt;of
many unexpected new phenomena. The theory of Gromov-Witten
invariants&lt;br/&gt;and Mirror Symmetry are particularly striking
examples.&lt;br/&gt;