* 0303590
* RI:     Tera-Pixels:    Using High-Resolution Pervasive Displays to Transform Collaboration and Teaching
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Leonard McMillan, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 07/31/2008
* USD 962,902.00

This project seeks to outfit offices, classrooms, and public spaces in the
Computer Science Department at UNC with multi-projector displays that operate as
a single wide-area logical computer display replacing the traditional CRT-based
displays now found in these spaces. This infrastructure will enable fundamental
basic research in computer graphics, networking, multimedia networking,
collaborative systems, and human-computer interaction. The research will consist
of an integrated computer systems research effort into the display environment
of the future and a large-scale usage experiment to assess the impact of the
environments we will construct.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a computer systems
research project we seek to explore new technologies and system architectures
for supporting high-resolution distributed computer displays. This problem is
fundamental to the future growth and development of the computer industry and
the fields of computer science and engineering. Modern computer display
architecture is a direct result of 1940's vintage television standards, which
are outdated in today's digital world. The notion of a raster display that is
periodically refreshed from a block of shared processor memory at a constant
rate is a direct result of using Cathode Ray Tubes (CRTs) as early computer
monitors. Moreover, this "raster-scan" approach assumes a dumb device with
minimal state and a low-level interface. We believe providing local intelligence
within displays will decouple the notion of a display device from the specific
computer driving it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We envision treating displays as
shared resources that operate independently of the specific computing platforms
that present data to them. Our approach provides seamless and symmetric access
to the display from any host, and supports multiple simultaneous host
connections to a single display. We propose to achieve this via the efficient
transport of displayed information, and through the use of effective transport
and network-level mechanisms for quality-of-service. Developing higher-level
semantics for display interfaces will improve bandwidth utilization. The
combination of higher-level interfaces and local intelligence will also improve
interaction with the ability to adapt the presentation of a content stream to
the specific display platform. In other words, an intelligent display will
tailor its presentation according to whether the display is on a low-resolution
mobile device or a wall-sized boardroom display. It will, likewise, adapt its
display according to available communication bandwidth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this computer systems research we are proposing four new initiatives. We will
investigate and develop new intelligent display architectures capable of
overcoming the limitations of traditional frame-buffer architectures. We will
develop higher-level and more bandwidth-efficient protocols for communicating
data to visual displays. We will extend digital display interconnections so that
they are more akin to real-time networks, thus increasing their utility and
flexibility. Lastly, we will develop the synchronization and visual context-
switching capabilities necessary to virtualize displays so that they can be used
as distributed resources. Second, as a large-scale experiment into the use of
wide-area displays in offices and classrooms we seek to study the effect of our
proposed display architecture on personal work habits and productivity,
teaching, student mentoring, and group and peer collaboration. We will undertake
traditional user studies to assess the impact and efficacy of the environments
we propose to construct.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. Ubiquitous
displays, large and small, and decoupled from specific computers, will transform
the way we live, work, and learn. In the workplace, these displays will enhance
collaboration, and alleviate the need to synchronize and transfer files between
computers. At home, intelligent displays will provide unprecedented access to
information. For instance, displays, which normally show family photographs,
could be queried for weather forecasts. At school large projection displays have
the potential to revolutionize education and collaboration by enabling the
presentation of true multimedia (multiple, independent media streams and
windows) from arbitrary sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;