* 0303472
* Inter-American Materials Collaboration:  Magnetic Alloys Electrodeposited on Semiconductors:  Structure and Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Giovanni Zangari, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2007
* USD 298,000.00

This Inter-American Materials Collaboration brings together two groups led by
Giovanni Zangari at the University of Virginia and Wagner Figuereido at the
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Florianopolis, Brazil. The project
focuses on studies of the electrochemical growth, structural and functional
characterization of magnetic metals and selected alloys on semiconductors. The
electrochemical growth of single metals on Si and III-V semiconductors with
various orientations is first studied leveraging existing work by the two
groups. This is followed by studies of the growth and properties of
technologically relevant alloys. Electrochemical techniques and a wide array of
structural and physical characterization methods are utilized to tailor growth
conditions for the production of films with optimum properties.&lt;br/&gt;In
parallel, theoretical models of the electrochemical growth of these materials
are developed and theoretical parameters in the model are determined by
comparison with experimental results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program
includes two Ph.D. students at each institution working on their own material
system but interacting through the use of common methods and techniques and the
need to solve similar problems. Close collaboration between the research groups
is enhanced by the regular exchange of students between the two laboratories and
periodical visits of the senior investigators to the foreign institution. The
students are thus subject to different but integrated learning environments to
which they also actively contribute. From the technical standpoint, this project
provides a relevant contribution to the development of effective techniques for
the direct integration of magnetic films with semiconductors, by creating useful
knowledge, ready to be transferred to the industrial development and practice.
This award is supported by the Division of Materials Research, the Office of
International Science and Engineering, and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;