* 0303577
* RI:  The Brown Internet Computing Laboratory
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Steven Reiss, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 08/31/2006
* USD 640,000.00

This proposal involves the development of an innovative new laboratory for
undergraduate and graduate education and research into Internet-related
problems. The lab will ensure that our research and students address issues of
both immediate and long-term relevance as we move to an Internet-based world.
&lt;br/&gt;The Internet has changed the face of computer science. Concepts such
as e-commerce, grid computing, peer-to-peer programming, and file sharing
provide new directions. Old problems, such as security and authentication, have
become more complex and at the same time more important. Other problems, such as
cooperative work, databases, and distributed systems, have changed scale so
dramatically that one now talks of millions of concurrent users. &lt;br/&gt;It
is difficult to study or teach this new face of computer science using old tools
and environments. Many of the complexities and problems occur only when they are
tackled at "Internet scale", that is, when there are thousands of simultaneous
users, millions of potential users, widely distributed systems, multiple
servers, unreliable networks, strong security and privacy concerns, hackers, and
the like. Modern research must be driven by and shown to work in the real world
on tomorrow's problems. Moreover, students can encounter and appreciate the
difficulties inherent in modern Internet-based systems only by working with real
systems.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed laboratory for experimenting with Internet-scale
applications will be suitable for both state- of-the-art research and
instruction. For research, it will provide a framework in which ideas can be
tested at Internet scale. Such a laboratory will give researchers insights into
what the real problems are and how they might be addressed, and will also allow
them to validate new approaches. For teaching, the laboratory will show students
the problems that arise and techniques used when building applications at
Internet scales and.will let us offer courses that better prepare students for
real-world programming and research.&lt;br/&gt;The laboratory will be used in a
variety of research projects. Pervasive programming involves building a common
programming framework for dealing with web services, peer-to-peer computing, and
grid computing in an open-source environment. Aurora* tackles the problems of
large-scale network and stream- based data management. Language research
addresses the semantics of web applications. Covalent objects provide a means
for object sharing at Internet scales. Prooflets are a simple and efficient way
to authenticate large numbers of small data items across the web. In addition,
we will use the facility as a laboratory in both undergraduate and graduate
courses.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The laboratory will have an impact beyond the
immediate research and teaching needs of our department. We will use the
laboratory for attracting students to computer science by offering it as a
vehicle for both undergraduate and graduate research projects and by making it
the focal point of new entry-level courses. The laboratory will be used by a
variety of outreach projects at Brown including Artemis, a program for middle-
school girls, and TeachScheme!, a program for high-school teachers. The
laboratory will also serve as a bridge between academia and industry, providing
a framework whereby academics can study and work on industrial-scale Internet
problems. Finally, we hope the laboratory will serve as a model for future
computer science education and research and we will actively encourage its use
by outside researchers.&lt;br/&gt;