* 0304296
* NER:     Solvent Assisted Atomic Layer Deposition
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Gregory Parsons, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,754.00

Future nano-scale electronic device technologies (including advanced molecular,
biological, and magnetic devices) will utilize a much wider range of materials
than found in current devices. Advanced devices will also require exquisite
control over bond structure at interfaces between dissimilar materials, placing
stringent demands on processes and processing conditions. There is growing
interest in atomic layer deposition (ALD) techniques that enable atomic-level
control over depositing thin films, to achieve highly conformal and smooth
deposition of materials of interest in a variety of nano-scale and nano-
electronic devices. For this project, we propose to demonstrate the use of
solvation energy as a new possible reaction .driver. in an atomic layer
deposition process. This concept will be demonstrated using a supercritical
solvent (specifically CO2) to facilitate reduction of a metal-organic precursor
adsorbed on a deposition surface. The particular demonstration chosen for this
one-year effort does not constitute a completely integrated or scalable
deposition process. Rather, the demonstration is designed to show feasibility of
implementing and utilizing solvation force effects to achieve atomic level
control in deposition of atomically smooth, nano-scale conformal electronic thin
films. A successful demonstration will prompt more expanded work required to
achieve more mature and hardware- intensive deposition tools and methods that
are outside the scope of this short exploratory project. This work most closely
addresses the theme of Manufacturing Processes at the Nanoscale. It specifically
addresses issues related to .novel tools.for manufacturing at the nanoscale,
developing novel concepts for high-rate synthesis and processing of
nanostructures,.and scaleup of nanoscale synthesis and processing methods.. The
project will take advantage of, and build upon, the PI.s experience in
fundamental studies and practical demonstration of thin film deposition
processes. A new integrated vacuum deposition/characterization system with a
wide range of surface characterization tools, including surface electron
spectroscopy and infrared absorption spectroscopy, is available in the PI.s lab,
and will be used to demonstrate and understand the particular detailed
mechanisms associated with the proposed process. This work will have broader
impacts beyond the particular research results. In addition to the education
benefit received by the graduate student and post-doc that will work on this
project, the PI will use this effort to help expand his graduate/undergraduate
Chemical Engineering course .Chemical Processing of Electronic Materials. to
include discussion of possible applications of solvent-based processes in nano-
scale materials and device fabrication. An exploratory undergraduate lab will
also be developed that to supplement the course material.