* 0304528
* NER:  Novel Method of Producing Different Carbon Nanostructures in Oxy-Methane Flames Controlled by Electro-Magnetic Fields
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Lawrence Kennedy, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Blevins
* 07/31/2005
* USD 99,855.00

Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER): Novel Method of Producing Different
Carbon&lt;br/&gt;Nanostructures in Oxy- Methane Flames Controlled by Electro-
Magnetic Fields&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study investigates an adventitious discovery that may lead to an inexpensive
means for producing a variety of carbon nanostructures. As part of experiments
examining carbon structures in atmospheric oxy-fuel flames, the formation of
carbon nanotubes and carbon nanofibers was observed using a nickel-based
catalytic support positioned at the fuel side of an oxygen-enriched opposed-flow
flame formed by streams of fuel (4% acetylene in methane) and oxidizer (50%
oxygen and 50% nitrogen). For constant flame parameters and the same catalytic
material, a wide variety of carbon nanostructures were observed and harvested
from different positions in the opposed-flow flame. This is the first
observation of multiple forms of nanostructures being generated in a single
process and selectively harvested. Observed carbon structures include: carbon
nanotubes (CNTs) and multi-wall nanotubes (MWNT) bundles, nanofibers with
varying degrees of crystallinity, helical regularly coiled tubular carbon
nanofibers, ribbon-like coiled nanofibers with rectangular cross section, and,
finally, long (~0.2 mm) uniform-diameter (~100 nm) tubular nanofibers exhibiting
a regular internal structure of carbon layers. All these variations of carbon
nanostructures could be found and harvested in different regions of the fuel
side of the opposed-flow oxy-flame. Some of these structures have only recently
been synthesized in other laboratories in carefully designed chemical vapor
deposition experiments. A key objective of this study is to explore whether the
growth and type of nanostructures observed in the earlier studies on an oxy-
fuel, counter-flow burner can be controlled using electromagnetic fields, as
suggested by preliminary experiments. Potentially, this could result in a new
manufacturing process for high-rate production of different
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At
present, oxy-flames are the major industrial source of pyrolytic carbon (carbon
black). Flames are also widely used for large-scale production of nanoceramics
and other nanomaterials. The development of a high-rate synthesis method for
carbon nanotubes and carbon nanofibers with controlled structure and morphology
makes feasible numerous applications requiring large amounts of carbon
nanomaterials. This includes modern composites with unique mechanical and
electromagnetic properties, hydrogen storage elements, chemically active
materials, fuel additives, etc. Preliminary experimental results showing carbon
nanostructures are formed in a catalytic seeded fuel zone of an opposed-flow
oxygen-enriched flame and on the application of electromagnetic fields to
control the growth rates of carbon nanostructures suggest that manufacturing and
harvesting specific types of nanostructures from different regions of a simple
opposed-flow combustion facility is feasible and
controllable.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;