* 0304169
* NIRT: Nano-Composite Metal Oxides for Electronic Noses
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Fu-Pen Chiang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,157,998.00

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
Initiative, NSF 02-148, category NIRT. This project aims at exploiting the
synergy of expertise of the proposer team in nanostructured materials
fabrication, design, characterization, and testing with that in biochemical
engineering in order to produce the next generation of molecular chemical and
biological sensors (Nanostructured E-noses). Transition metal oxide nanowires
and nano-bio-composites will be the sensing elements of advanced detection
devices used to rapidly diagnose diseases and bio-warfare activities through the
detection of trace amounts of toxic chemicals. This is an interdisciplinary
effort to manufacture electronic "noses" from arrays of nanostructured metal
oxide sensors, each of which is specific to a given gas. Specificity in
nanostructured oxides is achieved by exploiting their structure sensitivity. The
proposed research focuses on the study of formation mechanisms of the
nanostructured sensing probes, on testing their structural and mechanical
stability, and on assessing their bio-detection capabilities. New tools for
measuring the properties of nanostructured materials will also be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of novel nanomaterials and
processes for use in fast, reliable gas detectors for the monitoring of the
human health and of the environment is the aim of this project. The proposed
research will be performed by a team of investigators from various disciplines,
having complimentary expertise in the processing, characterization and testing
of nanomaterials and in bioengineering. The integration of the research
activities with the proposed educational components (including offering new
courses on sensors and research experience for science and engineering
undergraduate students in a medical setting, etc.) will prepare students and
young professional for future challenges, ultimately improving the national
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is jointly supported through two
directorates at NSF: (i) Mathematical and Physical Sciences (Division of
Materials Research in the Ceramics program) and (ii) Engineering (Division of
Design, Manufacture and Industrial Innovation in the Nanomanufacturing program
and the Division of Bioengineering and Environmental Sciences).