* 0304781
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research Program:  Hydrodynamic Dispersion and Surface Roughness
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* German Drazer, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 05/31/2006
* USD 21,082.00

0304781&lt;br/&gt;Koplik&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Argentina award will
support Drs. Joel Koplik and German Drazer of CUNY City College in research
collaboration with Dr. Irene Ippolito at the University of Buenos Aires in
Argentina. The Pis will use numerical simulations and experiments to investigate
the transport properties of model fractures with controlled surface roughness.
The complex geometry of fractures in geological media, usually described in
terms of fractal surfaces, strongly affects the transport properties of the
system, such as its permeability or the hydrodynamic dispersion of solid
particles carried along by the flow. The effect that the statistical properties
of the fracture surface have on the transport properties of the systems will be
explored in detail, with special focus on the role played by the spatial
correlations between different regions of the same fracture. The objective is to
obtain a better understanding of the flow behavior in fractured media, and the
development of computational and experimental strategies to characterize, and/or
predict, the properties of porous underground formations. The results are
relevant to many processes that involve the flow of fluids in water or
hydrocarbon reservoirs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will forge a
collaboration of mutual benefit, combining the theoretical and computational
expertise of the U.S. Pis with the experimental expertise of the Argentine
collaborator. This opportunity will allow the researchers to exchange results
and accordingly design/re-design new experiments and simulations.&lt;br/&gt;