* 0304777
* Controlled Development and Prediction of Zero-flux Planes, Diffusion Paths and Diffusion Structures in Multicomponent and Multiphase Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Mysore Dayananda, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 07/31/2008
* USD 500,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This grant explores the phenomenon of isothermal diffusion at 775oC
in alpha (a, fcc) and beta (b, bcc) single phase and multiphase alloys in the
Cu-Ni-Zn system. A major objective is to reduce interdiffusion of a component
through development of a series of zero-flux planes (ZFP) adjacently spaced
within the diffusion zone. The study also investigates intrinsic and
interdiffusion, as well as development of zero-flux planes, diffusion paths and
diffusion structures, in diffusion couples characterized by controlled
thermodynamic forces for two of the components. Other goal of the proposed
investigations is to develop a user-friendly, multicomponent diffusion code
equipped with a library of diffusion data for several multicomponent systems,
and capable of analysis and prediction of diffusion paths and diffusion
structures in multicomponent assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The
experimental portions involve assembling infinite and finite diffusion couples
with a and b Cu-Ni-Zn alloys having compositions on an isoactivity line for Ni.
These couple pairs are so assembled that the activity differences for Zn and Ni
between the terminal alloys are identical in magnitude but different in sign.
All couples are analyzed by electron microbrobe techniques. Diffusion structure
development in multiphase couples is examined by scanning electron microscopy
and transmission electron microscopy. These controlled experiments contribute to
better understanding and insights into the intrinsic and interdiffusion
phenomena as well as ZFP development in multicomponent systems. The development
of the planned diffusion code is expected to serve as a teaching, research and
design tool for the analysis and prediction of diffusion paths in
multicomponent, multiphase systems and can reach a large audience in the fields
of education and industry.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;