* 0304933
* U.S.-Mexico Program: Holocene Ocean-Climate Variations, Gulf of California, Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2005
* Donn Gorsline, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/2005
* USD 24,200.00

0304933&lt;br/&gt;Douglas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Mexico award will
support Dr. Robert Douglas and Dr. Donn Gorsline of the University of Southern
California in a research collaboration with Dr. Jorge Ledesma-Vazquez of the
Universidad Autonoma de Baja California in Ensenada, Mexico and Dr. Adolfo
Molina-Cruz of the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico. The researchers
intend to work on aspects of Holocene paleoceanography and paleoclimatology in
the Gulf of California. Their collaboration seeks to document the ocean-climate
variability in the Gulf during the Holocene and will contribute to assessing
climate change in subtropical regions of the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically the researchers wish to understand the
factors that have controlled and paced the variations in the Mexican monsoon
over the past 9,000 years. They aim to test the idea that the major changes in
the Gulf of California for the past 8,000 years (possibly earlier) are the
result of an intensification of winter monsoon winds that produced an increase
in biological productivity, shifts in the oxygen minimum zone (OMZ), and an
increase in the evaporative production of the Gulf Water. For that purpose they
propose to study the geochemistry of faunal and flora and sediment records from
cores from the west and east side of the Gulf for signals indicative of water
mass changes and of shifts in the position of the OMZ in the southern Gulf. The
project will involve graduate students from both countries in the research. The
Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division of Ocean
Sciences of NSF are contributing funds for this
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;?????&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;