* 0304143
* NER:      A Novel Nanobiosensor Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Ian Suni, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2006
* USD 105,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 304143&lt;br/&gt;Title: NER: A Novel Nanobiosensor
Architecture&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; We propose to
develop a new nanobiosensor architecture based on chemical deposition of gold
nanowires into a commercially available polymer membrane, followed by chemical
mechanical planarization (CMP), a processing step widely employed in the
semiconductor industry for producing extremely smooth surfaces. A smooth surface
is necessary to allow the use of specific chemistries to attach enzymes and
other proteins to the biosensor surface. This surface can be patterned using the
tip of an atomic force microscope (AFM), allowing different proteins to be
attached in different areas. The ultimate goal is a nanowire array seamlessly
embedded into a polycarbonate membrane that can be patterned to allow parallel
detection of different molecules.&lt;br/&gt;This new nanobiosensor architecture
will be validated by immobilizing glucose oxidase onto the gold nanowires. The
detection limit of this glucose biosensor will then be determined by measuring
the electrochemical current in solutions of varying glucose concentration. In
addition, this biosensor will be tested using more advanced electrochemical
methods that can also measure the surface capacitance. This nanobiosensor
architecture has a number of advantages relative to other electrochemical
biosensors. These include the capability for single molecule detection and for
miniaturization, biocompatibility, and compatibility with many different
detection methods. &lt;br/&gt; The impact of this research is potentially quite
broad, with the possible development of a new generation of gold/polycarbonate
biosensors, including sensors for monitoring living organisms. This could lead
to significant advances in the fields of clinical diagnostics, medical implants,
environmental monitoring, homeland security, and the food industry. The results
of this research will be broadly disseminated, including the Internet, using the
PI's multimedia authoring expertise, which was developed through NSF-sponsored
curriculum development projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;