* 0304969
* Microwave Spectroscopy Measurements of Structures and Electronic Properties of Transition Metal Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Stephen Kukolich, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 04/30/2007
* USD 367,200.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, the PI will study the rotational spectra of transition metal
complexes and hydrogen-bonded complexes by microwave spectroscopy. Measurements
will be made with a pulsed-beam Fourier-transform spectrometer system
constructed at the University of Arizona. A new nozzle system with an electric
discharge region will be constructed to work on radicals. The data obtained will
be analyzed to determine three-dimensional, gas-phase structures, and other
interaction parameters. The overall objectives of this work include the
determination of the structures and quadrupole coupling coefficients for: a)
dinuclear transition metal complexes; b) weakly-bound complexes with transition
metal compounds (models for intermediates in catalyzed reactions); c) hydrogen-
bonded base pair analogs; d) structures of complexes involved in methyl
migration reactions, and e) structures of organometallic radicals and reaction
products. The measured gas-phase structures, which are free from crystal packing
distortions or solvent effects, can be directly compared with the theoretical
calculations for free molecules. Quantum mechanical (DFT) calculations will be
carried out to complement the experimental work done. Graduate and undergraduate
students will participate in this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this work will be of benefit to the chemical industry, which uses transition
metal catalysts in the production of chemical products, as well as for the study
of biological systems such as many enzymes and transport proteins in living
systems that involve transition metal complexes, while details of hydrogen-
bonded base pair interactions may be useful in DNA chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;