* 0304122
* NIRT- Molecular Assembly for Hybrid Electronics
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Philip Allen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 07/31/2007
* USD 1,012,350.00

NIRT: Molecular Assembly for Hybrid
Electronics&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received
in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 02-148,
category NIRT. The extension of integrated circuits into sub-10-nm range
promises enormous benefits for computing, networking, and signal processing.
However, fabrication of such devices using current paradigms based on CMOS and
current VLSI technology are not possible. We believe that this crisis may only
be resolved by a radical paradigm shift, which would simultaneously change the
approach to fabrication of electron devices and to VLSI circuit architecture.
Our approach is to use a biologically inspired approach called "Self-Evolving
Neuromorphic Networks". This approach is based on artificial models of the
neocortex and is structured to have a high degree of parallelism and intrinsic
redundancy. In this approach molecular circuit elements, "self-assembled" by
molecular chemistry, can be allowed to grow randomly, forming circuit elements
(molecular transistors), which connect lithographically patterned metal grids.
However, the random aspect of molecular self-assembly has to be carefully
understood and controlled. At present, there is no detailed understanding of
this process. It is this crucial gap that we address in this proposal. The
devices that we are proposing need molecular wires that can switch into and out
of a conductive state. The molecules bridge the metal wires with inherent
randomness. Our aims are to predict and control the bridging and switching,
through deterministic chemistry of the molecule-metal interaction, as well as
through a statistical analysis of the assembly process. To accomplish these
aims, we have a diverse team, which will interact strongly across the
engineering/chemistry/physics boundaries. As part of the outreach of this
project we plan to use the NIRT as a forum in which we will provide new types of
educational settings for students (undergraduate and graduate) and high school
teachers, and adopt a flexible program of research guided by feedback between
theory and experiment, chemistry and physics and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tremendous technological advances in miniaturization have
enabled more and more transistors to be packed onto a silicon chip. However, the
reduction of feature size on chips is limited not just by the resolution of the
fabrication process, but also by the problem of quantum and classical
fluctuations. Consequently, below a limiting dimension that we have nearly
reached, a new paradigm that goes beyond conventional solid state electronics
has to be developed for the next generation of electronics devices. In this
project, we propose a new paradigm that is based on an artificial model of the
neocortex: In which molecular circuits are assembled in a manner similar to the
synaptic connections present in the brain. Our paradigm if realized offers the
possibility of the design of the next generation of computational devices, with
speeds that, in theory, could be 10 orders of magnitude faster than the fastest
existing parallel supercomputer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;