* 0304678
* NIRT: Quantum-State Transfer Between Photons and Nanostructures
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Dirk Bouwmeester, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Dunford
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,620,910.00

Photons have proven to be most useful for encoding special quantum states and
for transmitting them through free space or optical fibers. For local quantum-
state operations photons are less favorable and well-localized quantum systems
are desirable. In this respect quantum dots, often referred to as artificial
atoms, are particularly attractive. This research aims at combining the
advantages of photons with those of artificial atoms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main objective is to transfer the polarization quantum state of a single photon
onto excitons in quantum dots and visa versa. The anticipated results are: a
novel positioning technique for a quantum dot in the center of an optical
waveguide, the demonstration of a single-photon absorption and reemission by a
single quantum dot inside a micro-pillar with intrinsic lensing, the
demonstration of the polarization quantum-state transfer between single photons
and single quantum dots, and creating entanglement between a quantum dot and a
photon and between two quantum dots. The first requirement to achieve the
objectives is that the coupling between photons and quantum dots has to be
resonant in order to preserve the quantum-phase coherences. For this optical-
cavities resonant both with the incoming photon and the quantum dot inside the
cavity will be used. Two novel ways of achieving a strong optical mode overlap
with the quantum dots will be explored. The first is to use quantum dots inside
micro pillars that containing optical lensing through the use of tapered
oxidation layer. The second is to develop a technique to position a single
quantum dot in the center of an optical micro cavity. The second requirement is
that the quantum dots have to be effectively symmetric in order to obtain
exciton spin degeneracy. For this magnetic fields and/or strain-induced effects
on the micro-pillars will be explored. The third requirement is that the
reemitted photon from the quantum dot should be distinguishable from photons
reflected from the sample surface. For this a Michelson interferometer will be
used where the two end mirrors are replaced by one micro-cavity containing a
quantum dot on resonance and one micro-pillar containing no quantum dots on
resonance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reaching the objectives will be a major step
forwards in quantum-state control and harnessing and understanding quantum
decoherence in nano-structures. The research is based on a close collaboration
between the Materials, Engineering and Physics Departments at the University of
California Santa Barbara. This collaboration provides an excellent opportunity
for young researchers to perform interdisciplinary research on important topics
in quantum (and classical) communication and information processing and in nano-
structure fabrication. Reaching the objectives will initiate future research in
storage of quantum information and in implementing the quantum repeater scheme
(enabling long-distance quantum cryptography), quantum error correction and
quantum networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;