* 0304662
* Collaborative Research:  Polar Amplification and High-Latitude Climate Sensitivity in Global Climate Models
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Cecilia Bitz, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/2007
* USD 292,739.00

Climate models generally exhibit a poleward amplification of the surface air
temperature increase that occurs in response to increased greenhouse gas levels.
However, observational evidence of polar amplification during the 20th century
is ambiguous, leading some to question the models' sensitivity. Furthermore, the
wide range of high latitude sensitivity among models suggests disagreements
remain regarding the physical processes responsible for poleward amplification.
By means of this collaborative research project, the PIs will conduct a study to
improve understanding of poleward amplication. A number of candidate feedback
processes, including ice-albedo feedback, might affect high latitude climate
sensitivity, and they will evaluate their relative impacts. Their approach is to
perform sensitivity studies with one climate model, and to compare model
sensitivity when the same sea ice component model is implemented in three
different climate models. They will also analyze polar climate variations in a
15-member ensemble of 20th century simulations to explore possible attribution
to internal variability or external forcing. They will also compare simulated
and observed polar amplification. They plan to use the Community Climate System
Model (CCSM) for much of the study, and compare the polar climate sensitivity of
CCSM to the sensitivities of two other models, one from the Geophysical Fluid
Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) and the other from the Hadley Centre for Climate
Prediction and Research. Together, these three models exhibit a wide range of
polar amplification and global climate sensitivity. With their collaborators at
these institutions, they plan to evaluate the role of sea ice physics in polar
climate sensitivity by implementing the sea ice component from CCSM into the
other two models. Then they will evaluate to what extent the range of
sensitivity among the models depends on sea ice
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing partnerships among modeling centers is
a necessary step towards better understanding and simulation of polar climate
sensitivity. This collaboration brings together scientists at the University of
Washington, the University of California at Los Angeles, the National Center for
Atmospheric Research, GFDL, and the Hadley Centre. The project will also support
graduate students, who will be encouraged to visit modeling centers and attend
conferences and workshops. In addition, results from this project will influence
courses taught by the PIs. Finally, the simulations will be available
immediately to all members of the CCSM Polar Climate Working Group, which is
open to anyone.