* 0304573
* Time-resolved nanoscale detection of complex amplitude in the near field of functional nanophotonic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,09/30/2006
* Yeshaiahu Fainman, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 09/30/2006
* USD 276,000.00

0304573&lt;br/&gt;Fainman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale science and technology
are playing an increasingly important role in development of future technologies
for information systems including computing, communications, display, lighting,
high-resolution imaging, and sensing. Optical and photonic technologies are
recognized as enablers in most of these applications. However, construction of
engineered nanostructured optical materials, resonant nanostructures such as
photonic crystals, and integrated nanophotonic active and passive devices and
systems is one of the most challenging tasks. It is evident that further
advances in nanophotonic technology will rely on our ability to develop (i)
efficient design and modeling tools, (ii) advanced nanofabrication techniques,
and (iii) visualization and imaging tools (for both structural and functional
tests). These challenges need to be investigated in an integrated program
enabling evaluation and comparison of the calculated predictions and the
experimental verifications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal
is to conduct basic research by investigating theoretically and verifying
experimentally the complex amplitude of the near-field on the nanoscale and with
femtosecond time resolution for various nanophotonic devices at operation
wavelength. The proposed research will focus on (i) construction of a near-field
optical microscope allowing measurement of the amplitude and phase of optical
near-fields with femtosecond resolution; (ii) experimental investigation of the
optical field and its localization in nanophotonic devices, and (iii) study of
near-fields in optical nanostructures operating in a nonlinear regime. The
proposed research will investigate near-field interactions in artificial
nanostructured materials, which provide a variety of functionalities useful for
optical systems integration. Furthermore, near-field optical devices facilitate
miniaturization and simultaneously enhance multifunctionality, greatly
increasing the functional complexity per unit volume of the photonic system.
Since the optical properties of near-field materials are controlled by the
geometry, there is flexibility in the choice of constituent materials,
facilitating the implementation of a wide range of devices using compatible
materials for ease of fabrication and integration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will significantly impact the development of advanced
nanophotonic devices and systems utilizing nanoscale architectures. Thereby, the
proposed research will not only bolster the area of near-field optical physics
and engineering, but will also extend to aid in the development of
nanoelectronics, nanomagnetics, nanomechanics, chemistry, and biology by
providing a fundamental characterization technology. Research and training of
graduate and undergraduate students in the new field of nanotechnology will have
a significant impact on the society as it will revolutionize numerous
technologies of critical importance for life science, advanced information
sciences, and national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;