* 0304019
* NIRT: Functionalizing Nanotubes for Novel Properties or Devices - An Integrated Theoretical and Experimental Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Steven Richardson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,030,000.00

This project aims to develop new forms of nanodevices based on functionalized
nanotubes. Novel functionalization strategies will be introduced to engineer the
electronic and structural properties of nanotubes, and also to enable their
effective integration into new nanoscale devices and in conventional
semiconductor electronics. These goals will be achieved by unique teamwork that
combines experimental efforts with theoretical modeling and screening.
Deliverables will include the development of 1) p-n junctions via chemical and
field doping, 2) nanotubes sensors for chemical and contaminant detection, and
3) functionalizations capable of controlling the electric and magnetic response
inside the tubes, for mass and information transport and storage. The team is
integrating research and educational activities with the development of novel
educational curricula - starting at the undergraduate level - that combine
modeling and simulation at the nanoscale with cutting-edge hands-on experimental
experience.

%%%

Novel devices based on modified carbon nanotubes that have organic molecules
covalently linked to their walls are being created by combining the exceptional
structural stability and electronic properties of microscopic wires with the
diversity and tunability of material properties that come from the molecular
attachments. These novel devices will represent a combination of advanced
microelectronics and of organic chemistry, and will open an untapped potential
in the creation of a new generation of electronics that is based on the
principles of self-assembly, recognition, and tunability, in close analogy with
organic and biological molecules. These goals are being pursued by directing and
screening cutting-edge experimental techniques with quantum-mechanical modeling,
in order to achieve the efficiency and the intuition that are needed in the
field of nanotechnology, where common-sense physical intuition is constantly
overruled by the fundamental laws of quantum-mechanics. This experience will be
brought into the classroom to train a new generation of scientists in the area
of nanoscale manipulation. This research will provide novel ways to create
electronic circuits that do not require multi-billion dollar fabrication
facilities, and that bring diffuse, embedded technologies to multiple uses that
benefit society.

