* 0304833
* Synthesis and Characterization of Fluorescent Porphyrinoid Bioconjugates for Imaging and Bioanalyses
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Robert Hammer, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 07/31/2006
* USD 750,000.00

Maria Graca Vicente, Robert P. Hammer and Steven Soper, Department of Chemistry,
Louisiana State University, are funded with an award from the Collaborative
Research in Chemistry Program with funds provided by the Division of Chemistry,
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities. This multifaceted team will investigate synthetic
routes to novel water-soluble unsymmetrically-substituted tetrabenzoporphyrins
and phthalocyanines, their chemical and photophysical characterization and
conjugation to biomolecules. The use of these new biomarkers should contribute
to an in-depth understanding of the structural factors controlling the
effectiveness of novel bioimaging and bioanalytical probes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tetrabenzoporphyrin and phthalocyanine These macrocycles
have unique chemical, photophysical and solubility properties, and offer unique
functionalization for conjugation to biomolecules such as proteins, nucleic
acids and peptides.,. This synergistic collaboration will involve synthesis,
characterization and application of unique porphyrinoid materials to develop
improved fluorescent biomarkers, or fluorophores. In addition, students,
including postdoctoral associates, graduate students and undergraduates will
receive interdisciplinary training in modern bioimaging and bioanalytical
science.&lt;br/&gt;