* 0304273
* NER:  Nanostructures from Magnetic Centers and Liquid Crystal Linkers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Sarah Stoll, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 99,436.00

This project seeks to synthesize nanoscale structures based on inorganic and
organic components likely to combine to give interesting magnetic properties,
and to identify assembly methods that confer nanostructural control. The
inorganic centers, nanoparticles of magnetic semiconductors, will be explored
for unusual magnetic properties, size dependent magnetic ordering and quantum
control. Lyotropic liquid crystals will be tested as organic linkers for their
utility in fabricating nanoscale frameworks. Adapting procedures developed for
nanoparticles of semiconductors such as CdS or CdSe, europium chalcogenide EuQ
(Q = O, S, Se, Te) nanoparticles will be synthesized. The europium chalcogenides
are of interest because they exhibit magnetic properties strongly dependent on
the electronic band gap. Given what is known about the effect of particle size
on the band gap of semiconductors, size selection of these nanoparticles should
determine the magnetic properties. The organic linkers, self-assembled
momnolayers ( SAMs), polyanions and lyotropic liquid crystals, are chosen for
their ability to self organize, and provide sites of attachment for inorganic
clusters. In particular, the lyotropic liquid crystals form a variety of
structures, lamellar films, hexagonally packed microtubules and micelles which
can be locked into place using polymerizable monomers . The test case cluster is
the manganese oxo cluster, known as Mn-12 ([Mn12O12HAc162HAc2H2O] where Ac =
acetate). This cluster has a core of metal-oxygen atoms surrounded by a coating
of acetate groups. By ligand exchanging acetate groups from the cluster with
carboxylates bound to a surface, the Mn-12 can be patterned onto substrates. The
advantage of the lyotropic liquid crystals is they contain a surface of
carboxylic acids, where Mn-12 may be attached. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The
study of magnetic semiconductor nanoparticles represents an original and
fundamentally new direction. In addition to expanding the knowledge of molecular
magnetic materials, the study of these nanoparticles will provide a unique
example of how magnetic phenomena evolves from molecules to bulk solid
materials. The use of novel organic linkers using lyotropic liquid crystals, may
provide an ideal framework for organizing magnetic clusters. Method for
organizing material on the nanometer length scale is crucial to the development
of nanoscale science that will directly impact technologically "hot" areas such
as magnetic information. Students trained in the areas of synthesis,
characterization, and applications of nanoscience and engineering, which are
prioroity areas of high interest to industry, are very competitive in the
industrial and academic job market. This project is co-funded by the Chemistry
Division and the Division of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;