* 0304515
* NIRT: A New Class of Oxidation Catalysts:The Role of Atomically Dispersed Metals in Nanostructured Oxides
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Terry Haas, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 07/31/2008
* USD 1,223,501.00

This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
initiative, NSF 02-148, category NIRT. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basis of modern
catalysis research at the nanoscale lies in the ability to design, control, and
fabricate relevant structures with an unprecedented degree of control and
precision. The overall goal of this project is to bring to bear an array of
techniques encompassing preparation and characterization within an
interdisciplinary team in order to advance catalyst design for selective
oxidation catalysts to a new level. A recent discovery by the investigators
focusing on the nanoscale interaction of gold and cerium oxide has led to a
fundamental identification of the active site for the water-gas shirt reaction,
which is key to the production of hydrogen from abundant natural resources such
as coal and natural gas. Now this advance in understanding promises to greatly
enhance the ability to produce more efficient catalysts that utilize reduced
levels of noble [costly] metals. New approaches that directly embed metal ions
or clusters within ceria and other oxides will be utilized. The potential impact
on enabling key technology for a hydrogen energy based economy is very high. The
catalysts are potentially key components of fuel cells and alternative fuel
reformers. Graduate and post-graduate students will be involved in high school
and other pre-college students, and a special nanotechnology seminary will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;