* 0304297
* NER: Nanostructured Multilayers as Sensing Materials for Long Period Gratings
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* James Cox, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,999.00

The program goal is to develop chemical sensors based on nanostructured
assemblies on surfaces. The change of refractive index of selective coatings on
long period gratings (LPGs) is the sensing mode. We hypothesize that
nanostructured composites fabricated by layer-by-layer (LBL) electrostatic
binding of polymers, supramolecules, and/or monolayer-protected, functionalized
metal nanoclusters will serve as elements that will impart selectivity and
sensitivity to LPGs. The LBL-fabricated nanocomposites will replace the cast
films or adsorbed layers traditionally used as the selectivity or
preconcentration material on these devices. Conventional coatings, e.g. polymers
cast films, require a compromise between providing enough reactive sites to
produce a useful signal and having too much bulk for facile transport of the
analyte. By using nanostructured multilayers comprised of alternating monolayers
of functional components and spacers, we optimized coatings can be fabricated.
Moreover, anchoring the functionality to monolayer-protected metal nanoclusters
and using these assemblies as components of the nanocomposites is proposed as a
route to improving, sensitivity, selectivity, and linear dynamic range of such
sensors.

The LBL method yields multilayer composites with controlled nanoscale
dimensions. Reactive centers within a given layer have a controlled spatial
distribution in accord with the properties of the polymers, supramolecules, or
nanoclusters that comprise that component of the assembly. The nature of the
layers influences mass transport within the assembly. The trade-off is that
selectivity must be achieved by control of the interaction between the cladding
and the analyte (partition constant and/or kinetics). We hypothesize that the
control of such interactions will be enhanced by the LBLs. The results of this
study, in particular the transport through nanostructured multilayers, also can
contribute to research in other fields such as surface acoustic wave sensors,
fabrication of biomimetic media, catalysis, electric energy production/storage,
quantum dots as reagents and nanoscale "bar coding".

Our graduate and undergraduate students will utilize the findings of their
research, thereby improving their knowledge of nanotechnology and materials
science.