* 0304211
* NIRT:  Single Nanoparticle Devices, A New Technique for Bottom-Up Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* C Carter, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 07/31/2009
* USD 1,100,000.00

This project will replace semiconductor wafers with crystalline semiconductor
nanoparticles. This would allow the construction of three-dimensional circuits
(more than one layer of transistors) and the integration of otherwise chemically
and structurally incompatible single-crystal materials on a single substrate.
Such substrates could include low loss ceramics or low cost, flexible plastics.
High-density silane plasmas will be used for forming these nanoparticles.
Electronic and optoelectronic systems are typically built from integrated
circuits, lasers, and other devices that are individually packaged and assembled
on a board. These devices are built on crystalline semiconductor wafers that are
mutually incompatible. The hybrid assembly approach required therefore greatly
limits overall system performance. The research group has already shown that
nearly cubic, single crystal silicon particles can be synthesized with
dimensions of 30 to 150 nm. Nanoparticles will be electrically charged and
electrostatic forces will be used to assemble them at predetermined sites on a
substrate. This will be accomplished using charge transfer from a flexible
stamp. High performance transistors using these nanoparticles will be built and
numerical models for them developed. Early results suggest that Schottky barrier
field effect devices are most suitable for this application. High resolution
electron microscopy will be used to support this work, in particular, the
development of the critical metal-semiconductor contacts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since nanoparticle devices is a new field of study, it is
expected that students graduating will become leaders in this field and will
help disseminate the technology. Outreach will be an important part of the NIRT
as it will integrate with existing MRSEC and IGERT outreach programs,
particularly drawing in Native American students and faculty into this new
research area. The group also anticipates supporting at least two US citizen
female graduate students in the program as they are currently working in this
area under IGERT and MRSEC sponsorship. In addition, the PIs will develop new
web-based resources to educate the broader community about nanoparticle devices,
including both charge storage devices and the nanoparticle/quantum dot
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;