* 0304254
* A Multiscale Diagnostic and Prognostic Investigation of Environmental Influences on Tropical Cyclone Life Cycles
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Lance Bosart, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 04/30/2007
* USD 626,661.00

The purpose of this research is to conduct detailed diagnostic and prognostic
analyses of tropical cyclones from genesis to extratropical transition (ET). The
research will be conducted in two stages. In stage one, a detailed diagnostic
analysis will be conducted for historical storms as well as all Atlantic
tropical cyclones over the course of one or two complete storm seasons. The life
history of each storm will be tracked and documented beginning several days
before tropical depression definition and ending when the storm has dissipated
or undergone extratropical transition. The goal of stage one is to identify the
variety of tropical and midlatitude disturbances responsible for the development
of tropical cyclones in the Atlantic basin. Further, the upscale impact of
significant cyclogenesis/transition events on the large-scale flow will also be
examined. In stage two, numerical simulations of representative storms will be
conducted to test physical hypotheses formulated from the diagnostic analyses
completed in stage one.

Tropical cyclogenesis, intensity changes, recurvature, and tropical transition
occur across a variety of large-scale tropical and subtropical environments.
Each event may result from the presence of a single feature in the large-scale
flow (e.g., easterly wave; midlatitude upper-level trough or potential vorticity
[PV] anomaly) or may involve the interaction of multiple features in the flow.
The contribution of single-feature and multiple-feature environmental forcings
in tropical cyclogenesis and extratropical transition remains unclear and needs
to be quantified. Diagnosing all storms within a storm season will address the
relative importance of one-time forcing and multiple forcings events.

The primary datasets used in this study will be operational gridded analyses
fields. Advantage will be taken of the abundant satellite-derived upper-
tropospheric water winds. The available datasets will allow for the detailed
analysis of tropical cyclogenesis and extratropical transition over the oceans.

The broader impacts of this proposal follow from the fact that tropical cyclones
at any stage of their life cycle can pose a serious threat to life and property
to mariners at sea, to coastal residents and to inland inhabitants. By examining
a spectrum of tropical cyclone life cycles in detail it is hoped that the basic
knowledge gained may have operational application in the area of tropical
cyclone track/intensity forecasting and quantitative precipitation estimation.
This project also presents the opportunity to work with various government and
civilian agencies and other educational institutions to help facilitate the
transfer of knowledge to operations and to students.