* 0304621
* NER:  Exploring Defect Controlled Ferromagnetism in Mn Doped ZnGeP2/GaP Heterojunction
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Lian Li, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2005
* USD 97,172.00

This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) proposal was submitted in response to
the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 02-148). This project
addresses primary challenges in spin injection and transport in semiconductors.
In this exploratory research, epitaxial thin films of Mn doped ZnGeP2 will be
grown on GaP substrates and resulting magnetic properties investigated. A
primary materials issue to be addressed is the role of local defects such as
nano clusters in inducing ferromagnetic ordering in ZnGeP2/GaP heterojunctions.
Materials will be synthesized by molecular beam epitaxy. The effects of growth
conditions on stoichiometry, defects and nano clustering, and doping will be
studied by x-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopy. Atomic
structures of the defects and nanoclusters will be examined by cross-sectional
scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy. Transport and magnetic
properties will be determined by Hall, magnetoresistance, and SQUID
measurements. Through a better understanding of the structure and electronic
structure of the defects in the epitaxial films, the origin of ferromagnetism in
II-IV-V2 chalcopyrite semiconductors is anticipated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project addresses basic exploratory research issues in a topical area of
materials science with high technological relevance; it is considered a high
risk/high pay-off activity. The project encompasses the NSE research and
education theme of Nanoscale Structures, Novel Phenomena, and Quantum Control.
An important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
significant area. The project is expected to have broad impact by providing
unique educational opportunities and basic knowledge critical to potential
development of semiconductor spintronic devices having advantages in computing
and information storage technologies. The project is jointly supported by the
MPS/DMR/EM and ENG/ECS/EPDT programs.&lt;br/&gt;