* 0304810
* Alternative Chemistries for Barrier Materials in Cu Metallization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Timothy Anderson, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,418,490.00

Lisa McElwee-White, Department of Chemistry, Timothy J. Anderson, Department of
Chemical Engineering, David P. Norton, Department of Materials Science and
Engineering, all of the University of Florida, in collaboration with Steven W.
Johnston, Intel Corporation, Sung Min Cho, Sungkyunkwan University, Korea, and
Karin Pruessner, Materials Science and Engineering, University of Florida are
funded with an award from the Collaborative Research in Chemistry Program with
funds provided by the Division of Chemistry, the Division of Physics, the
Division of Molecular, Cellular Biology and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities. This multifaceted team will investigate new&lt;br/&gt;diffusion
barrier materials that are more stable toward copper diffusion than titanium
nitride for future generations of integrated circuits. This collaborative
project involves preparation of single source precursors for metal-organic
chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) and atomic layer deposition (ALD) of WNx
followed by screening of the precursors, CVD and ALD growth studies, and
characterization of the deposited material. Comparative studies of
microstructure and Cu diffusion in MOCVD and physical vapor deposition (PVD) WNx
films will allow evaluation of their potential in barrier
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A critical problem in the electronics
industry, development of a suitable barrier material against Cu diffusion and a
method of depositing it in high aspect ratio vias, will be investigated using a
multidisciplinary approach This collaboration connects precursor chemistry
development, deposition process refinement, materials characterization,
computational modeling and device fabrication. The investigators will
investigate WNx in addition to new materials. Students and postdoctoral
associates will gain exposure to team-based training and problem solving skills
that reach outside their own disciplines of graduate study. In addition, the
interaction with Intel will broaden their perspectives beyond academic research.
This collaboration has a history of diversity that reflects the local
population. Activities such as educational module development and outreach to
grade 8-12 girls will encourage participation by others in related areas of
science.