* 0304569
* Nanoscale Arrays for Direct RNA Profiling in Single Cells and their Compartments
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2003,11/30/2008
* Steven Benner, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 11/30/2008
* USD 1,973,227.00

This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) award supports a group of
five faculty, including four at the University of Florida and one at Cornell
University, to develop tools capable of measuring the distribution and
concentration of specific messenger RNA molecules (mRNAs) in defined subcellular
regions of single nerve cells. Initial effort will use neurons from the model
organism, Aplysia. Use of the tools will then be extended to neurons from higher
organisms with the goal of understanding how neurons establish new connections
or synapses. Using electron beam technology, the team will fabricate one
dimensional (1-D) DNA nanoarrays for the capture and direct assay of the mRNAs.
Detection will employ molecular beacons to generate a fluorescent signal in the
presence of specific target mRNAs; the beacons are fluorescent nanoparticles
consisting of self-assembling branched DNA nanostructures designed using an
artificially expanded genetic alphabet (AEGIS). Nanofluidics and dip-pen
nanolithography will be tasked with delivery of the nanoparticles to specific
sites in the DNA array. Fluorescence will be detected by optical imaging.
Software specialized for analyzing biological molecules will archive and
interpret recovered mRNA sequences using interpretive proteomics tools developed
from evolutionary models. The project will benefit from a collaborative setting
where students at all levels engage multiple disciplines. If successful, this
will provide an educational paradigm for the training of the scientists of the
future, as well as demonstrating the utility of nanoscience and engineering in
the study of classical problems in biology.