* 0304606
* Instrumentation Systems for Microbial "Omics": Discovery and Quantitation of Biomolecules and Natural Substrates
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Patricia Sobecky, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2006
* USD 254,100.00

This award provides support for the purchase of: (1) real-time PCR
instrumentation, (2) a micro-array spotter and scanner system, (3) lab-scale
fermentation equipment, (4) capillary electrophoresis equipment and, (5) high-
pressure biomolecule separation equipment. The goals of the research programs
that will utilize the instrumentation are to characterize biomolecules
(proteins, plasmids), natural substrates (metal oxides), and microbial
populations from diverse aquatic and terrestrial environments. The researchers
will also investigate the role of chemical speciation on microbial processes by
detecting substrates (i.e., metal complexes, organic metabolites) that may
regulate the mechanisms of substrate utilization, biomolecule production, and
bacterial growth. The users of the instrumentation represent faculty from two
different Georgia Institute of Technology colleges (College of Science and the
College of Engineering) from the School of Biology, and Departments of Civil and
Environmental Engineering and Earth and Atmospheric Sciences. The anticipated
interactions between the various user groups will provide the basis for a new
generation of scientists with the ability to communicate effectively across
research disciplines. In addition, this award will allow the PIs to train and
mentor a diverse group of students and researchers including those traditionally
underrepresented in science.