* 0305930
* Variational Conditions: Structure and Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Stephen Robinson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 09/30/2006
* USD 177,372.00

This project is focused on investigating the mathematical structure of certain
classes of variational conditions, and designing and analyzing effective
computational algorithms to solve them. Success in the proposed work would
permit analysis to be done more simply, with better insight, and with greater
exploitation of problem structure, for a broad class of equilibrium problems
having substantial practical usefulness as well as intrinsic mathematical
interest. It would also produce better computational algorithms, and the means
for justifying them. Sub-topics in this research program include:

- Gaining better insight into degeneracy and its effects through analysis of
parameterized versions of variational conditions, with the aim of illuminating
the effect of special structure on the sensitivity and stability behavior of the
problem.

- Developing new computational methods using approximate derivatives, justifying
their convergence, and testing them computationally.

- Improving convergence analysis for methods of linearization type, and applying
that analysis to, e.g., the computational methods discussed just above.

- Analyzing specially structured variational conditions using methods of
composition duality combined with the new stability and sensitivity information
developed in this project.

- Applying knowledge gained in the above research to analysis of other promising
areas such as quasi-variational inequalities.

Variational conditions are mathematical models of equilibrium problems. They are
useful for a wide variety of problems from areas including economic policy
studies, agricultural economics, structural engineering, transportation,
materials science, game theory (that is, models of conflict), and others. One of
the reasons why these problems are especially hard is that they model situations
in which individuals or groups are not acting in concert, and indeed are often
acting at cross purposes. For example, in a road traffic equilibrium problem
each driver is trying to find a route that is best for him or her, but the
effects of many drivers' independent choices can make conditions bad for
everyone (e.g., by creating congestion on popular routes). The research that is
proposed will try to develop more knowledge about how mathematical models can
represent these problems, what the properties of those models are, and how to
use those properties to compute numerical solutions to the models. With such
knowledge the models could then be used to answer "what-if" questions and thus
to design better management methods. For example, civil engineers interested in
improving traffic flow might use such models to predict more accurately the
effect of improving existing roads or of building new roads, and thereby
determine how best to spend a limited budget to reduce traffic congestion.