* 0305216
* ITWF:  Girl Power 21st Century:  Growing Strong, Moving On
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* K. Wendy Tang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 08/31/2006
* USD 377,469.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID:
EIA-0305216&lt;br/&gt;Investigator: Janice Grackin, Joanne Daly and K. Wendy
Tang&lt;br/&gt;Institution: SUNY at Stonybrook&lt;br/&gt;Title: Girl Power 21st.
Century" Growing Strong, Moving On. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Girl Power 21st
Century is a three-year project that addresses the need for early educational
intervention to increase the number of women pursuing technical education and
careers. The project is designed as a model collaboration between a higher
education institution (Stony Brook University), a community organization
(Suffolk County Girl Scouts Council), and a local school district (Riverhead
School District) with a high proportion of minority and/or lower income
families. The current program builds on a successful four-year-old program, Girl
Power: Growing Strong with Technology, and includes three modules for girls in
grades 2 through 8. The current Beginner and Advanced Girl Power classes
function as Module 1 for second- and third-graders, covering basic computer
skills, web-building skills and technical vocabulary. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
bridge the technology education gap that currently exists between third grade
and high school for our target population, two new modules have been designed
for Girl Power 21st Century. Module 2 consists of a one-week Summer Technology
Day Camp for fourth grade girls who have completed both classes in Module 1.
This experience will provide more challenging technical and programming
activities and will bridge into Module 3, Project Options, for girls in grades
four through eight. The first phase of Project Options will be the development
of an interactive website as a place for girls aged 8-14 to explore career
options. In addition to the acquisition of technical skills related to web
design, Project Options will provide girls with the opportunity to develop and
enhance other skills, such as interviewing, online research, writing, filming,
and digital photography. In the second phase of Project Options multiple cohorts
of girls will maintain the website by creating new content and new formats, and
updating old information. Older girls will become involved in mentoring younger
girls and acting as mentors and teachers in the lab. &lt;br/&gt;