* 0305532
* ALGORITHMS: Collaborative Research: Parallel Reduced Order Modeling with In-Situ Error Mitigation and Performance Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* Philip Wilsey, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Xiaodong Zhang
* 06/30/2004
* USD 36,090.00

Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) has been employed in the simulation of a wide
variety of phenomenon in areas such as aerodynamics, meteorology, oceanography,
combustion and biomedical flows. However the usefulness of computational fluid
dynamics is limited by an inability to perform system simulations in a timely
fashion. This is due to the complexity and computational expense of performing
high fidelity unsteady CFD simulations. &lt;br/&gt;The fundamental goal of this
research is the development of a rapid, robust and efficient reduced order
simulation technique for accelerating CFD simulation. The reduced order
simulation environment must be&lt;br/&gt;applicable to the study of fluid flow
problems across a wide spectrum of applications domains. Existing techniques for
improving the performance of fluids simulations are: (a) parallelization of the
computations and (b) employment of reduced order modeling. Each of these
techniques alone have demonstrated reductions of ten-fold to a hundred-fold in
simulation time. However, the practical application of proper orthogonal
decomposition (POD) has not been realized due to theinability to quantify the
accuracy of the reduced order model without a comparison to a full simulation of
the same scenario. This work will investigate and demonstrate feasibility of POD
simulation methods and the ability to use residual tracking and related methods
to validate and correct reduced order simulations. In addition we will
demonstrate self-adaptive performance control of a 3D parallel CFD solver.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;