* 0305045
* Collaborative Research: DLESE Data Services--Facilitating the Development and Effective Use of Earth System Science Data in Education
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Ben Domenico, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2007
* USD 195,913.00

ABSTRACT

The project will facilitate the development and effective use educational
materials that make use of Earth system science datasets and tools that for the
most part have been developed for and by scientists. This project will organize
workshops that bring together a wide range of Earth science data providers,
developers of data access and analysis/exploration tools, and developers of
educational resources to guide the development of data access and analysis tools
to ensure they are effective and usable by the educational community, and to
begin to develop educational modules using available Earth science datasets and
data access and analysis tools. The outcomes of these workshops will be in the
form of two reports, developed from online report systems used during the
workshop. One of these reports will be aimed at the data providers and tools
developers to guide further data access and analysis tools development. The
other report will be aimed at the education community, and will include
information about available datasets and tools presented at the workshop and the
ideas discussed for using those datasets and tools in educational modules. DLESE
Data Services will also conduct synergistic activities aimed at identifying 1)
dataset and data access and analysis tool needs of the educational community at
all levels and 2) existing educational modules utilizing Earth science datasets
and data analysis tools that are used by the educational community. These
existing modules and those developed as a result of support activities will be
brought into the DLESE collection. In order to extend the impact of our efforts,
DLESE Data Services will interact with the other DLESE core services.
Educational modules identified by this project will be brought to the DLESE
Collections Services to be cataloged into DLESE. DLESE Data Services will
interact with DLESE Community Services by providing material for their
"exemplars" in using Earth science data in an educational context, and using
DLESE Community Services to support the continued interaction of the community.
DLESE Data Services will work with DLESE Evaluation Services in the development
of the comprehensive needs assessment for the use of data in educational modules
and the survey for the identification of existing educational modules that use
Earth science data. DLESE Data Services will also work with the DLESE Program
Center to bring the functionality that would bring access to real-time and
archived Earth science datasets and the ability to explore that data in
meaningful ways to DLESE.