* 0305939
* Symplectic Topology and Hamiltonian Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Dusa McDuff, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2006
* USD 313,335.00

Symplectic geometry is an intriguing generalization of Kahler geometry to
&lt;br/&gt;a wide, and as yet not completely understood, class of smooth
manifolds. &lt;br/&gt;Though it retains echoes of many of the structural
features of the &lt;br/&gt;Kahler world (for example Lefschetz pencils, and
complex curves),&lt;br/&gt;symplectic geometry is much more flexible than Kahler
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;In particular, every finite dimensional symplectic manifold
has an infinite &lt;br/&gt;dimensional group of structure-preserving
transformations (called &lt;br/&gt;symplectomorphisms), while the corresponding
group in the Kahler case is &lt;br/&gt;necessarily finite dimensional. McDuff
proposes to study the topological &lt;br/&gt;properties of the whole
symplectomorphism group, and in particular its &lt;br/&gt;relation to its finite
dimensional subgroups. One important question is &lt;br/&gt;to develop a
criterion for detecting if a given circle in the symplectomorphism
&lt;br/&gt;group is homotopially trivial. McDuff has been working with Sue
Tolman on &lt;br/&gt;this question and proposes to continue this collaboration,
making a special study &lt;br/&gt;of the case of symplectic toric manifolds. In
another separate project, she &lt;br/&gt;hopes to develop a fuller theory of
symplectic characteristic classes to &lt;br/&gt;provide homological tools for
understanding these questions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Both symplectic and Kahler
geometry are very important in modern theoretical &lt;br/&gt;physics; string
theories often study fields defined over a special kind of six
&lt;br/&gt;dimensional Kahler space called a Calabi--Yau manifold, while
instanton &lt;br/&gt;corrections to many equations and functions are often
defined in purely &lt;br/&gt;symplectic terms. In order to understand a geometry
it is essential to understand &lt;br/&gt;what kind of transformations preserve
it; for example in the standard Euclidean &lt;br/&gt;geometry studied in high
school the structure (distances and angle measurements) &lt;br/&gt;is preserved
by rotations and translations. This project studies the properties &lt;br/&gt;of
high dimensional families of these transformations (for example, the set of
&lt;br/&gt;all rotations of the plane) rather than of individual
transformations. There &lt;br/&gt;is a well understood theory (the theory of Lie
groups) that works for rigid &lt;br/&gt;geometries such as Euclidean or Kahler
geometry. One main aim of this project &lt;br/&gt;is to see how much of the
structure remains in the more flabby and flexible &lt;br/&gt;symplectic world,
where are infinitely many intrinsically different ways of &lt;br/&gt;perturbing
space.&lt;br/&gt;