* 0305854
* Collaborative and Autonomic Buffer Cache Management Library
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Yuanyuan Zhou, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* David Du
* 05/31/2007
* USD 350,000.00

As the performance gap between processor and disk increases, buffer caches are
playing a more and more important role in computer system performance. Many
applications including web browsers, web servers, file servers, database
servers, storage servers etc need to implement buffer cache modules. Many of
these codes can potentially be shared to save development efforts and decrease
the opportunity for software bugs. In addition, buffer cache management has
become increasingly complex due to (i) ever so many different workloads with
dynamic access patterns, (ii) many recently proposed cache managed schemes each
tailored for specific access pattern, and (iii) the multi-level buffer cache
hierarchy distributed among multiple heterogeneous software components on
different machines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the above
problems by investigating a unified, autonomic and collaborated buffer cache
library called CacheLib. CacheLib will implement most existing cache replacement
and prefetching algorithms. Software can use CacheLib to create and manage a
buffer cache, relieving developers from implementing their own buffer cache
modules. This research will also explore autonomic and collaborative caching
schemes. With autonomic caching, the system can automatically select caching
schemes to dynamically adapt to access patterns. With collaborating caching,
multiple buffer caches residing in heterogeneous software are managed
collaboratively to deliver the expected performance commensurate to the
aggregate cache size.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;