* 0305729
* Introducing hardware and software design exercises into the national networking curriculum
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Nick McKeown, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 06/30/2007
* USD 460,000.00

EIA-0305729&lt;br/&gt;Nick McKeown&lt;br/&gt;Department Electrical
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;"Introducing hardware and
software design exercises into the national networking
curriculum&lt;br/&gt;$460,000&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the
prototyping and deploying of a National Internet Infrastructure Teaching
Facility to allow students at educational institutions across the nation to
perform challenging new design exercises as part of their networking curriculum.
The unique infrastructure developed by this project will permit students to
design, deploy and test fully functioning packet switches (in software or
hardware) that process real traffic in a real network. The infrastructure is
based upon research done at this institution that produced test versions of two
tools - the Virtual Router (permits implementation of software on a local
computer that processes packets traversing a remote network), and NetFPGA
(permits implementation of a packet switch in programmable hardware using an
industry-standard design flow). The Virtual Router makes it possible to
implement a software program in the user-space of any computer that processes
packets traversing a remote network. This will permit students across the nation
to implement an Internet router in user-space on their own computer that routes
real traffic traversing a network inside the remote National Teaching Facility.
In a similar way, the NetFPGA allows students to implement a packet switch in
programmable hardware using an industry-standard hardware design flow. With this
infrastructure at their disposal, students can investigate different design
tradeoffs in packet switching by using realistic tools directly on real network
flows. The project involves the development of fully functioning components of
the Virtual Router and NetFPGA, their deployment and local testing in networking
courses at Stanford, the distribution of the products for broader use, and,
eventually, the creation of a National Teaching Facility that is accessible by
all educational institutions.&lt;br/&gt;