* 0305825
* Computations and Applications of Periodic Floer Homology and Contact Homology in Symplectic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Michael Sullivan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 10/31/2004
* USD 84,128.00

DMS-0305825&lt;br/&gt;Michael G. Sullivan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much progress has
been made in symplectic geometry, and more &lt;br/&gt;recently contact geometry,
since the discovery&lt;br/&gt;of holomorphic curves in symplectic
manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;Sullivan plans to continue calculating and applying
&lt;br/&gt;two sets of invariants based on these curves:&lt;br/&gt;the contact
homology of Legendrian submanifolds&lt;br/&gt;in contact manifolds and the
periodic Floer homology of&lt;br/&gt;Riemann surface
diffeomorphisms.&lt;br/&gt;The former is a special case of symplectic field
theory.&lt;br/&gt;Although symplectic field theory is still not
rigorously&lt;br/&gt;well-defined, Sullivan and others have&lt;br/&gt;completed
the foundational analysis for their&lt;br/&gt;version of contact
homology.&lt;br/&gt;Sullivan will extend this alternative version of
contact&lt;br/&gt;homology to other manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal is to
develop a complete obstruction&lt;br/&gt;of Legendrian isotopy
classes.&lt;br/&gt;The latter invariant is conjectured to agree with Seiberg-
Witten-Floer &lt;br/&gt;homology. This project will develop the
foundations&lt;br/&gt;of this theory, as well as broaden the existing set of
computations.&lt;br/&gt;The investigator also hopes to work on applications of
the periodic Floer&lt;br/&gt;homology computations, addressing the problems of
existence&lt;br/&gt;and classification of symplectic structures on
4-manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symplectic and contact geometry
explain the&lt;br/&gt;physics of certain dynamical systems, such
as&lt;br/&gt;the orbits of planets around the sun, the spin of a top, or
&lt;br/&gt;the motion of a charged particle in a magnetic field.&lt;br/&gt;Such
systems obey the least action principal, which&lt;br/&gt;among other things can
mean that their total energy&lt;br/&gt;or momentum must be
conserved.&lt;br/&gt;Many symplectic geometers study holomorphic
curves,&lt;br/&gt;a reinterpretation of the least action
principal,&lt;br/&gt;which has linked together several independently well-
developed&lt;br/&gt;mathematical fields such as complex analysis and
differential topology.&lt;br/&gt;The study of holomorphic curves has led to
other&lt;br/&gt;``physical" results, such as a generalization of
&lt;br/&gt;Heisenberg's uncertainty principal.&lt;br/&gt;More recently, these
curves are thought to appear in&lt;br/&gt;other areas of theoretical physics,
like string theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;