* 0305399
* Collaborative Research in Computer Graphics:      Real-Time Visualization and Rendering of Complex Scenes
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2006
* Henrik Jensen, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 11/30/2006
* USD 210,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Real-time rendering with complex illumination,
realistic materials, and an&lt;br/&gt;accurate simulation of light scattering,
with the ability to manipulate&lt;br/&gt;parameters interactively, is the
challenge addressed in this project.&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental questions about the
representation of appearance are explored,&lt;br/&gt;resulting in the
development of a new class of real-time algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
focus is on three main directions: (i) Mathematical and&lt;br/&gt;Empirical
Analysis of the complexity of appearance representations and&lt;br/&gt;light
transport; (ii) Computational Techniques such as fine-to coarse
and&lt;br/&gt;coarse-to-fine algorithms, function dictionaries, and
hierarchical&lt;br/&gt;principal component analysis; and (iii) Algorithms and
Systems supporting&lt;br/&gt;interactive manipulation of illumination,
materials, and viewpoint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer graphics and scientific
visualization is increasingly used in&lt;br/&gt;areas such as simulation and
training, automobile design, architectural&lt;br/&gt;renderings, defense,
electronic commerce, and entertainment. With today's&lt;br/&gt;technology, it is
possible to create strikingly realistic images using&lt;br/&gt;sophisticated,
but also slow rendering algorithms. These algorithms&lt;br/&gt;cannot address
the growing need for effective methods to manipulate and&lt;br/&gt;interact with
3D environments. Modern PCs can render scenes with&lt;br/&gt;millions of
polygons at interactive rates, but this performance comes&lt;br/&gt;at the cost
of a considerable loss in quality and realism. This project&lt;br/&gt;seeks to
overcome these limitations: producing highly realistic images&lt;br/&gt;at
interactive rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last thirty years
computer graphics research has created technology that improves both the realism
and generation speed of computer-generated images. However, there is no widely
used method for creating realistic images, and it remains difficult in practice
to create realistic images. This project aims to develop a practical method for
realistic image creation that addresses the visual effects believed to be
salient by the graphics and perception communities. The method is intended to be
robust, relatively simple, and to have the potential to be interactive in the
next decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to rapidly generate realistic
images is useful in many applications. For example, flight and driving
simulators rely on realistic imagery, but the interactive nature of these
systems limits the realism that is feasible. The proposed work should extend
these limits. The proposed method would also be useful for generating images for
planning and education; images could be created to help visualize the results of
reconstruction efforts, habitat change, and urban planning. Finally the method
should be useful for generating synthetic images for input to automated
vehicles, where many different scenes and atmospheric conditions could be
generated rapidly and at low expense.&lt;br/&gt;