* 0305864
* Strong Electron Correlations and Quantum Critical Phenomena
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Philip Phillips, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2006
* USD 269,400.00

This award supports fundamental theoretical research and education that aims to
elucidate two problems at the forefront of research in condensed matter theory:
1) the destruction of superconductivity in disordered than films, and 2.) the
origins of pseudogaps arising from doped Mott insulators observed in strongly
correlated materials like the high temperature superconductors. The PI will
continue to explore whether disorder can destroy the superconducting state
leaving a glassy metallic state in thin films. The PI will use computational
methods involving an extension of the dynamical mean field theory to investigate
the origins of the pseudogap that occurs in doped Mott insulators. The PI also
aims to develop a self-consistent method for calculating the spectral functions
based on eigenoperators of finite-sized clusters. The charge transport process
in dilute 2D electron gasses will be investigated. The PI will explore the
nature of the state that occurs when a clean Wigner crystal melts and the effect
of disorder. This work will involve, in part, the use of Monte Carlo simulation
methods.&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports graduate education in theoretical
solid state physics. In addition to training graduate students, the PI plans to
work on a new edition of his graduate level textbook "Advanced Solid State
Physics." The new edition will include new material on strongly correlated
systems and incorporate forefront research into an educational text. The PI also
plans to develop a new course on Quantum Phase Transitions. The PI will continue
to be involved in science outreach to middle school students and will expand
this work to include local schools.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
fundamental theoretical research and education that seeks to advance our
understanding of strongly interacting electrons. The PI aims to elucidate the
nature of the states of matter that arise because of strong interactions among
electrons and how these states emerge. These remain important problems at the
forefront of solid state physics. This project focuses on developing theoretical
tools to investigate key experimental systems in which large electron
interactions play a dominant role in developing novel low-energy electronic
states and experimental systems near quantum critical points. The presence of
disorder leads to the possibility of new phases, such as glasses. A focus of
this work is on understanding how metallic phases evolve in electrons restricted
to two dimensions, as occurs in high temperature superconductors among other
materials.&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports graduate education in theoretical
solid state physics. In addition to training graduate students, the PI plans to
work on a new edition of his graduate level textbook "Advanced Solid State
Physics." The new edition will include new material on strongly correlated
systems and incorporate forefront research into an educational text. The PI also
plans to develop a new course on Quantum Phase Transitions. The PI will continue
to be involved in science outreach to middle school students and will expand
this work to include local schools.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;