* 0305475
* RUI: VLBA Observations of Quasar Jets: A Large Survey and Detailed Study of Extreme Sources
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Glenn Piner, Whittier College
* Standard Grant
* Linda S. Sparke
* 05/31/2008
* USD 104,468.00

AST-0305475 Piner This project will study the energetics of quasar jets, using
high-resolution data from the Very Long Baseline Array (VLBA). These data are
already in hand in a U.S. Naval Observatory (USNO) archive, or will be added to
that archive during 2003. As the most energetic objects in the universe, the
kinetic energies of quasar jets are of fundamental importance to astrophysics.

Analysis of several thousand VLBA snapshot images at 8 and 2 GHz will produce
statistical information on apparent jet speeds, bending, and opening angles, and
on spectral indices. This will be of particular use when combined with the 15GHz
(2cm) survey results. Analysis of more detailed VLBA observations of several
sources known to exhibit extreme properties will help to pin down the fastest
apparent jet speeds, thus setting a lower limit to the intrinsic jet speed, of
crucial importance for studies of the jet acceleration mechanism.

This work is part of the Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) program.
Whittier College is a predominantly female, Hispanic Serving Institution, and
undergraduate students will be heavily involved in the research. Integrating
research into the undergraduate culture will promote teaching and learning, and
broader participation, amongst two groups traditionally underrepresented in
astronomy.