* 0305711
* GOALI:     Balanced Surfactants for Self-Assembly of Highly Immiscible Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Nitash Balsara, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/2006
* USD 235,794.00

Nitash Balsara - University of California - Berkeley David Lohse - ExxonMobil

GOALI: Balanced Surfactants for Self-Assembly of Highly Immiscible Polymers

Intellectual Merit of Proposed Activity

The objective of the proposed work is to build a library of surfactants for
controlling the self-assembly in mixtures of highly immiscible polymers. This
will enable the creation of newnanostructured polymer materials. It may also
enable reusing commingled polymeric waste. The approach represents a departure
from the large body of previous experimental and theoretical work in this field
which relied on the surfactancy of A-B copolymers for organizing mixtures of A
and B homopolymers. It is now recognized that these types of copolymers can only
organize interfaces if the homopolymers are weakly immiscible. The surfactant
that will be used in the research is a balanced A-C block copolymer. The notion
of balance is adapted from the literature on surfactancy in aqueous systems.
Nonionic surfactants with balanced hydrophobic and hydrophilic character have
been successful in creating nanoscale organization in oil/water mixture in spite
of their high degree of incompatibility. The reseserch deals with the
application of this principle to polymers. Experiments will be conducted on
mixtures of highly immiscible polyolefins, polybutene (PB) and polyisobutylene
(PIB). Polybutene-block-ethylenebutene copolymer (PB-EB) copolymer will serve as
the surfactant. This system was chosen on the basis of the temperature
dependence of the PB/EB and PIB/EB Flory-Huggins interaction parameters. It is
expected that the balancing of PIB-philic and PIB-phobic tendencies of the
surfactant will lead to the rich varieties of phase behaviors that have, thus
far, only been identified in aqueous mixtures. The principle of balance that is
being developed is, however, perfectly general, and can be applied to a wide
variety of polymer blends. Model polymers required for this study will be
synthesized by anionic and cationic polymerization. Self-assembly will be
studied by small angle neutron scattering at the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST), light scattering, and electron microscopy.

Broader Impact of Proposed Activity and GOALI mechanism

The student working on this project will be jointly advised by the PI (at UC
Berkeley) and co-PI (at ExxonMobil). The student will spend about 6 weeks every
year, working at the ExxonMobil Corporate Research Labs in Annandale, NJ. All of
the expenses associated with the visit (lodging, travel, lab supplies, etc.)
will be paid by ExxonMobil. The framework for this collaboration has already
been established: the PhD student spent 2 weeks this past summer at ExxonMobil,
learning about polymer synthesis, and obtaining safety training and clearances
to work in the ExxonMobil Labs. Exposure to an industrial research lab will add
a new dimension to the student's education. Since the project will involve
several visits to the NIST, the student will learn about the functioning of
government laboratories. The materials and samples that will be synthesized and
characterized will be used in teaching courses on both thermodynamics and
polymer science at Berkeley, and at other institutions such as NIST.