* 0305709
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Kiona Ogle, Ogle, Kiona
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 09/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others) who seek to conduct research on biological questions
using informatics tools and methods. It is expected that the Fellows trained
through these fellowships will play an important role in training the future
workforce. Postdoctoral training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields. The research and training plan is
entitled "Bayesian melding of ecological models and data: linking plant
physiology and population processes." A framework is being established for
linking plant physiology and population processes and uses the stochastic
PHYSPOP model and Bayesian melding as a model system. A database from the NSF
LTER network is being compiled, and Bayesian melding, PHYSPOP and the database
combined to quantify key linkages between physiological and population
quantities for a variety of species and habitats.