* 0305203
* Theory and Computer Simulations of Polyampholyte-Polyelectrolyte Complexes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Andrey Dobrynin, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2006
* USD 240,000.00

This award supports theoretical and computational research and education with an
aim to develop molecular level models of solutions containing polyampholyte-
polyelectrolyte complexes. When a polyelectrolyte is mixed with a polyampholyte
(protein) of the same net charge, a soluble complex is formed. The binding
occurs in such a way that the oppositely charged amino acids on the protein are
close to the polyelectrolyte, causing an electrostatic attraction between the
two. With a large excess of polyampholyte, each polyelectrolyte chain is
saturated with polyampholytes and the solution is a liquid. As more
polyelectrolyte is added, the viscosity steadily increases. Once, enough
polyelectrolyte is added, a reversible gel is formed with some polyampholyte
molecules acting as temporary crosslinks between polyelectrolyte chains. The
research aims to develop molecular models describing the formation of
polyampholyte-polyelectrolyte complexes in a wide range of polymer and salt
concentrations, solution pH and various properties of polymers like their
molecular weight and charge distribution. In dilute solutions the resulting
model will provide details of the internal structure of polyampholyte-
polyelectrolyte complexes and of the effects of counterion release and
condensation on the complex formation. The formation of intercomplex
associations and reversible gelation will be studied in semidilute solutions.
This will allow prediction of polymer conformations, and solution properties
such as viscosity, diffusion coefficient, and relaxation time. The assumptions
of the theoretical models will be tested by computer simulation. The results for
osmotic coefficient, diffusion coefficient, linear viscoelasticity and steady
shear viscosity will be compared with experiments. The molecular models of
polyampholyte-polyelectrolyte complexes that will be developed may have far-
reaching consequences in the bio-medical area, and in areas utilizing charged
macromolecules as rheology modifiers. For example, protein-polyelectrolyte
complexes control the rheology and lubrication properties of synovial fluid. A
pragmatic industrial use of protein-polyelectrolyte complexes is to use
polyelectrolytes to boost the viscosity of protein solution for coating
photographic film and paper. In both cases, the associations between the protein
and the polyelectrolyte directly control rheology of the complex. &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project is well suited for training undergraduate and graduate students
in modern analytical and numerical techniques and mentoring is integrated into
every aspect of the proposed research. Graduate students will work with
undergraduate physics, chemistry or chemical engineering students who will be
involved either through independent research for credit or through Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) programs. The results of the proposed
research will be incorporated into a course sequence on Polymer Physics, Polymer
Physical Chemistry, as well as into new special topics course, Charged
Macromolecules. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education with an aim to develop molecular level
models of solutions containing charged polymers, polyampholyte-polyelectrolyte
complexes. When a polyelectrolyte (e.g. polyacrylic acid) is mixed with a
polyampholyte (e.g. a protein) of the same net charge, a soluble complex is
formed. The oppositely charged amino acids on the protein are bound close to the
polyelectrolyte, causing an electrostatic attraction between the two. With a
large excess of polyampholyte, the solution is a liquid. As more polyelectrolyte
is added, the viscosity steadily increases. Once, enough polyelectrolyte is
added, a reversible gel is formed. The research aims to develop molecular models
describing the formation of polyampholyte-polyelectrolyte complexes under a wide
range of conditions. In dilute solutions the resulting model will enable the
prediction of polymer conformations, and various solution properties such as
viscosity, diffusion coefficient, and relaxation time. The assumptions of the
theoretical models will be tested by computer simulation and predictions for
various properties will be compared with experiments. The molecular models of
polyampholyte-polyelectrolyte complexes that will be developed may have far-
reaching consequences in the bio-medical area, and in areas utilizing charged
macromolecules as rheology modifiers. For example, protein-polyelectrolyte
complexes control the rheology and lubrication properties of synovial fluid. A
pragmatic industrial use of protein-polyelectrolyte complexes is to use
polyelectrolytes to boost the viscosity of protein solution for coating
photographic film and paper. In both cases, the associations between the protein
and the polyelectrolyte directly control the rheology of the complex.
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is well suited for training undergraduate and
graduate students in modern analytical and numerical techniques and mentoring is
integrated into every aspect of the proposed research. Graduate students will
work with undergraduate physics, chemistry or chemical engineering students who
will be involved either through independent research for credit or through
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) programs. The results of the
proposed research will be incorporated into a course sequence on Polymer
Physics, Polymer Physical Chemistry, as well as into new special topics course,
Charged Macromolecules. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;