* 0305799
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Christina Weaver, Weaver, Christina M
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others). It is expected that the Fellows trained through these
fellowships will play an important role in training the future workforce.
Postdoctoral research and training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields.

The research and training plan is entitled "Incorporating structural data into a
computational model of goldfish neurons." Automated morphometry of goldfish
velocity storage neural integrator neurons will be performed, and
morphologically faithful compartmental cable equation models developed using
existing software packages. Using such models, an active membrane, coarsely
compartmented model for this neuron will be built. Coupling the coarsely-
compartmented models will allow a multiple neuron network model.