* 0305035
* Theory of Novel Nanostructures: Symmetry and Surface Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Vincent Crespi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2006
* USD 270,000.00

This award supports theoretical research that seeks to understand and advance
the manipulation of the structural and electronic properties of nanoscale
materials, particularly those based on carbon, silicon and germanium, since
these elements have a wide range of tunable semiconducting and metallic
behaviors within robust covalently bonded packages at high symmetry. This
research is designed to advance fundamental knowledge on nanostructures and also
to contribute towards the body of understanding necessary to use these
structures in future devices. The research will explore the role of surface
energetics in designing a new forms of surface doping for semiconducting
nanowires, modeling the transduction of translational to rotational motion in
multiwalled nanotubes, exploring unusual commensuration effects in tube/graphite
interactions (which may allow separation of nanotubes by helical angle), and
establishing the relation between bending and transverse collapse in carbon
nanotubes. A second theme of many nanoscale materials is the ability to exploit
high symmetry and phase coherence to tune electronic and mechanical properties;
research here will study the fascinating interplay of topology and electronic
structure in graphene cones and focus mechanical distortions of graphene-based
nanostructures into lower-dimensional loci to electronically cleaved nanotubes
and create inverted cones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will have a immediate
broader impact on society as well. Previous NSF funding has supported
underrepresented students. The principal investigator continues to be involved
with outreach activities such as helping design a materials demonstration show
for twenty-two science museums nationwide, giving presentations at a Harry
Potter summer science camp for fifth to eighth graders, presenting topics on
fullerenes and superconductivity to visiting high school classes, etc. The
research conducted in the current award will be incorporated into similar
outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research that seeks to understand and advance the manipulation of the structural
and electronic properties of nanoscale materials, particularly those based on
carbon, silicon and germanium, since these elements have a wide range of tunable
semiconducting and metallic behaviors within robust covalently bonded packages
at high symmetry. This research is designed to advance fundamental knowledge on
nanostructures and also to contribute towards the body of understanding
necessary to use these structures in future devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work will have a immediate broader impact on society as well. Previous NSF
funding has supported underrepresented students. The principal investigator
continues to be involved with outreach activities such as helping design a
materials demonstration show for twenty-two science museums nationwide, giving
presentations at a Harry Potter summer science camp for fifth to eighth graders,
presenting topics on fullerenes and superconductivity to visiting high school
classes, etc. The research conducted in the current award will be incorporated
into similar outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;