* 0305126
* UMEB: Inter-Disciplinary Approaches to Mentoring of Undergraduates in Aquatic Ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Laura Leff, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2008
* USD 393,600.00

NSF funding will establish an Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental Biology
(UMEB) program in the Department of Biological Sciences at Kent State
University. The central goal of this program is to educate/train undergraduates
for research careers using a synergistic approach that incorporates diverse,
interdisciplinary perspectives into ecological investigations of aquatic
habitats. The program will foster interactions among faculty from different
disciplines (both within and outside of biology) and students; it will also
illustrate the role that interdisciplinary collaboration can play in
understanding complex environmental issues facing the world today. Program goals
will be accomplished by creating a mentorship team composed of an undergraduate
student, a faculty member in aquatic ecology, and a faculty member from an
outside discipline (such as cell biology, physiology, geography, geology, etc.).
The faculty members will co-mentor the student, working together to design and
implement a research project that is truly inter-disciplinary. The benefits and
practical aspects of interdisciplinary, team-based research will be communicated
using multiple approaches. During spring semester (the beginning of the
program), students will take a course providing a guide to the practical and
theoretical aspects of science as an integrative process. This first semester
will also allow students to get to know the research areas/approaches of their
faculty mentors. During summer semester, students have multiple objectives: 1)
to learn the benefits of collaboration, 2) to conduct research projects designed
with their mentors, and 3) to explore other research areas by assisting in data
collection for other students' projects. During fall semester, students will
take part in a seminar that provides tools needed for scientific writing, data
analysis and statistics, and presentation of findings. The program will
culminate with the presentation of each student's research projects to the
university community. Beyond the university community, this program has
relevance to the general public, particularly with respect to freshwater
resources. Lakes, streams, and wetlands are vital natural resources and
interdisciplinary training will prove to be an asset for addressing
environmental problems. For example, research regarding wetland conservation,
effects of invasive species, and the presence of microorganisms (e.g., E. coli)
in lakes/rivers that serve as sources of drinking water will benefit from the
diversity of perspectives provided by interdisciplinary collaboration