* 0305086
* Mechanistic Investigation of the Formation and Reactivity of Metal-Halide Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2007
* James Martin, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 12/31/2007
* USD 420,000.00

This research project focuses on the directed design of metal-halide framework
solids and on investigating the reaction mechanisms of solid-state reactions.
The mechanistic studies employ a variety of in situ diffraction, spectroscopic,
thermal, microscopic and barometric techniques to provide an unprecedented
atomistic picture of how templated networks form and how small molecules react
with crystalline solids. These fundamental studies will have broad academic and
industrial impact in the areas of catalysis, separations, and crystal growth.
This research is specifically tailored for the effective training of a new
generation of scientists in the design of advanced materials. Students will gain
balanced disciplinary expertise and interdisciplinary experience including
collaborations with university and national laboratory scientists and hands on
experience with national synchrotron and/or neutron source user
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The ability to design and tailor materials
for specific technologies is advanced by working to understand mechanisms of
crystal formation and mechanisms by which crystals react with small molecules.
Advances in understanding the mechanism of crystal growth will directly impact
the design and fabrication of optical and electronic devices, the fundamental
components of information technology. Understanding the mechanisms by which
small molecules react with crystalline solids will advance our ability to design
catalysts, membranes for gas separations, and batteries, to critically address
national energy needs. This proposed research is specifically tailored for the
effective training of a new generation of scientists in the design of advanced
materials. Students will gain balanced disciplinary expertise and
interdisciplinary experience including collaborations with university and
national Laboratory scientists and hands on experience with national synchrotron
and/or neutron source user facilities.&lt;br/&gt;***