* 0306688
* Atomic Level In Situ and Modeling Studies of Redox Processes in Ceria and Ceria Zirconia
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Renu Sharma, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 09/30/2007
* USD 265,987.00

Clear air is vital for our health, and milestone achievements have been made in
reducing pollution by using catalytic converters in automobile exhaust systems
which incorporate ceria-zirconia materials. The catalysts are composed of
nanometer-sized particles, and this research will investigate the structural and
chemical changes that occur when these materials are in use. Recent advances in
environmental transmission electron microscopy have made it possible to make
atomic level observations of the structural and chemical changes under in situ
[close to reactor or application] conditions. Unique capabilities exist at the
Center for High Resolution Electron Microscopy which allow the chemistry of
individual particles that are no larger than 5-50 nanometers to be examined. A
complementary combination of computational techniques will be used to understand
how temperature and oxidizing/reducing conditions affect the particles,
including the effect on crystal structure, surface energy, surface segregations,
surface diffusion, and sintering behavior. Experiments will be performed in
various environments to identify the reasons for enhanced low temperature
reduction and oxygen storage capacity for ceria-zirconia systems. &lt;br/&gt;The
information obtained from this research will be used to develop improved
catalysts leading to potential reductions in automobile pollution. Several
excellent educational programs are in place, including an Industrial Associates
Program. Educational modules on pollution abatement will be developed and
targeted to elementary and high school students from less advantaged schools.
Summer internships will be available.&lt;br/&gt;