* 0306227
* Accounting for Measurement Error in the Analysis of Time Series / Longitudinal Data
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* John Staudenmayer, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* grace yang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 211,033.00

This project assesses the effects of measurement error and develops new methods
to account for measurement error in the analysis of single or multiple time
series. Specifically, the investigators address these problems in the context
of: i) fitting a single time series with linear and non-linear dynamic models,
ii) assessing the relationship between two variables measured over time on one
or more "units", with measurement error in one or both variables and serial
correlation and/or contemporaneous (among unit) correlation; iii) assessing
synchrony correlation among series in different locations. Throughout, this
project accommodates a rich class of measurement error models allowing some
combination of heteroscedasticity, possible dependence of the measurement error
on the true value, correlated measurement errors and a separate estimate of the
measurement error variance for each unit. These features arise in many typical
applications. A variety of techniques are employed including moment approaches,
likelihood methods, and the use of estimating equations.

A wide variety of important problems in ecology, environmental sciences,
economics, public health and many other disciplines involve the statistical
modeling of one or more variables collected over time and, perhaps, in different
locations. Examples include the modeling of population densities, economic
indicators, disease rates, pollution levels, temperatures, etc. over time and
assessing the relationship among variables (e.g. pollution levels and disease
rates or food abundance and population densities) with data collected over time
and space. A common problem is that the variable(s) cannot be observed exactly
and need to be estimated. In simpler settings it is known that ignoring the
estimation step and its accompanying measurement error causes two serious
problems. First, the amount of noise in the system is underestimated, and
second, the true nature of underlying systematic relationships can be obscured
or misinterpreted. In more complicated situations where the data are measured
over time or are spatially related, little or nothing is known about the effects
of measurement error. Utilizing theoretical developments and computer
simulations, this project will provide results to guide investigators as to the
impact of the use of error-prone measures, develop methods to correct for the
problems caused by measurement error and ensure that our methods are applied to
important real world problems.