* 0306747
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Microbial Arsenic and Selenium Transformation in the Nile Delta
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* John Stolz, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 14,500.00

0306747&lt;br/&gt;Stolz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project between Dr. John Stolz, Department of Biological
Sciences, Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania and Dr. Samy El-Aassar
and Dr. Mahmoud Berekaa, both of the Department of Biology, Alexandria
University, Alexandria, Egypt. The objective of this proposal is to assess
microbial reduction of arsenic and selenium oxyanions in sediments from the Nile
Delta from the Mediterranean to Beni-Suef in Upper Egypt. It will involve
sediment enrichments using different electron donors and either arsenate or
selenate as electron acceptors. Oxyanions of arsenic and selenium can be used in
microbial anaerobic respiration as terminal electron acceptors, and therefore,
isolation of such anaerobic bacteria will be sought. Different pristine and
contaminated soils (including those impacted by industrial wastes) will be used
as sources for enrichment of selenate and arsenate respiring bacteria. The
development of biochemical (antibodies raised against specific subunits of the
terminal reductase) and molecular probes (designed from the major conserved
regions of the genes encoding the major subunit of reductase) for arsenate and
selenate respiring bacteria will provide diagnostic tools for use in assessing
the role of bacteria in the mobilization of selenate and arsenate in the natural
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: Arsenic and selenium have become
increasingly significant as environmental toxins in agricultural soils and
drinking water. Their transformation (e.g., reduction and oxidation) and
mobilization can be strongly influenced by microbial activities. The reduction
of arsenate and selenate-respiring bacteria in numerous pristine and
contaminated environments and their rapid appearance in enrichment culture
suggest that these organisms are widespread in nature. This project is being
supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
activities.&lt;br/&gt;