* 0306269
* Collaborative Research: Robust Interactive Web Services
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Matthias Felleisen, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2006
* USD 136,911.00

0305949/0306269 Matthias Felleisen (Northeastern University) Shriram
Krishnamurthi (Brown University)

Over the past few years, the Web has evolved from a static medium into a dynamic
one. Many Web sites now enter into interactive dialogs with consumers.
Unfortunately, the existing technology for building interactive Web services is
inherently flawed. As a result, many Web programs are broken and cannot keep up
with consumers' actions in Web browsers.

The investigators propose to investigate the foundations of Web services.
Specifically, they will develop models of interactions on the Web; they will use
the models to study common errors in interactive Web programs; and they intend
to develop protection mechanisms against such errors.

The proposers also intend to translate their theoretical designs into working
prototypes. They intend to use their existing server and Web programming
infrastructure to implement type systems and run-time checks for CGI scripting
(`a la Perl) and servlet programming (`a la Java). They will port some existing
Web applications (including conference management, workshop registration) to
this new software infrastructure and will thus test the practical validity of
their efforts. Consequently, they expect to improve the quality of an
increasingly critical medium of communication and commerce.