* 0306235
* Likelihood ratio inference in nonparametric monotone function estimation problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Moulinath Banerjee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 05/31/2007
* USD 105,009.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: M. Banerjee,
DMS-0306235&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Likelihood ratio inference in
nonparametric monotone function estimation problems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research program primarily concerns statistical inference using likelihood based
methods and especially, likelihood ratios in nonparametric monotone function
estimation problems. A distinguishing feature of the monotone function models is
a slower (cube root of n) pointwise rate of convergence of maximum likelihood
estimators of the monotone function of interest, with a non-Gaussian limit
distribution; this property is referred to as ``non-regularity''. While some
progress in likelihood based inference for these problems has been
achieved&lt;br/&gt;over the past few decades, the behavior of likelihood ratios
is by and&lt;br/&gt;large unknown. In this project, the P.I. seeks to develop a
theory of&lt;br/&gt;likelihood ratio inference for these ``non-regular''
monotone function&lt;br/&gt;models. This is motivated by the wide applicability
of likelihood ratio based inference in regular parametric, semiparametric and
nonparametric problems. The emergence of a chi-squared distribution as the limit
of log-likelihood ratios allows the construction of test procedures and
confidence regions for the parameters of interest, based on the known chi-
squared distributions and circumvents the need to estimate
nuisance&lt;br/&gt;parameters. It is thus natural to ask whether the advantages
of the likelihood ratio paradigm carry over to the domain of shape-restricted
(and more particularly, monotone) function estimation. The current research
program investigates this for various models and applications of interest. More
specifically, the main components of the proposed research program are: (i)
Investigation of the universality of the limit, D (ii) Studying monotone
function models with measured covariates on the individuals, which is typically
the case in applications, from both nonparametric and semiparametric
angles&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Developing methods of constructing pointwise confidence
sets and confidence bands for monotone functions of interest using likelihood
based methods and comparison of these procedures to currently existing methods.
Also on the agenda are related research issues, like the study of competing
likelihood ratio statistics and the computational and analytical
characterization of the associated limit distributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study of shape--restricted functions arises in a wide variety of problems. In
particular, monotonicity, which is a very natural shape-constraint appears in
many different areas of application, such as reliability, renewal theory,
survival analysis, epidemiology, biomedical studies and astronomy. Through its
use of attractive statistical concepts like likelihood and likelihood ratios,
for estimating monotone functions, this project is expected to have a broad
impact on the theory and practice of nonparametric statistics. It will lead to
significantly improved methods for analyzing data using likelihood ratio based
methods in medicine, public health, reliability and numerous other application
areas and will trigger the development of analogous methods of statistical
inference in related fields. The ideas and results of this project will also be
fruitful in the training and development of future statisticians through
inclusion in the curriculum of advanced courses.&lt;br/&gt;