* 0306429
* Algebraic Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2007
* Matthew Ando, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 04/30/2007
* USD 346,222.00

DMS-0306429 Matthew Ando and Randy McCarthy

Ando and McCarthy will study the relationship between stable homotopy theory
and mathematical physics and number theory mediated by elliptic cohomology, and
the relationship between stable homotopy theory and algebra mediated by
K-theory. Ando will use elliptic cohomology to investigate what string theory
and the theory of elliptic curves have to say about the topology of compact
manifolds. He is particularly interested in bringing recent work on open string
theories and D-branes to bear on problems in elliptic cohomology. McCarthy will
develop a theory of Witt structures for bimodules and a theory of smoothness and
De Rham cohomology for commutative ring spectra. The former offers new insight
and substantial generalizations of calculations of Hesselholt and Madsen, while
the latter offers the possibility of developing a crystalline Chern character
and so extending to commutative ring spectra the work of Bloch.

The last few years have seen an astonishing proliferation of unexpected new
structure in topology, involving new interactions with other areas of
mathematics and physics. Ando and McCarthy are particularly interested in
articulating these new connections. Ando's research seeks to give explicit form
to the deep and surprising relationship between topology, high energy physics,
and number theory signaled by elliptic cohomology. The traditional paradigm of
algebraic topology is the use of algebra to model phenomena in topology.
McCarthy's research turns this paradigm upside down, using the deep structure of
topological spaces to tackle hard problems in algebra.

