* 0306393
* Algebraic and Geometric Methods in Algorithmic Number Theory and Algorithmic Self-Assembly
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Ming-Deh Huang, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 08/31/2007
* USD 345,000.00

Modern cryptography has brought several number theoretic problems to the
spotlight, most notably integer factoring and the discrete logarithm problem.
The significance of these problems grows as the scope of application for public
key cryptography is broadened. Algorithmic self-assembly is an emerging research
area where interesting number theoretic and algebraic connections, though
unexpected at first, have recently been discovered. It has been suggested that
self-assembly will ultimately be useful for circuit fabrication, nano-robotics,
DNA computation, and amorphous computing. In accordance with its practical
importance, self-assembly has received increased theoretical attention over the
last few years. This research addresses complexity theoretic issues in
algorithmic number theory and algorithmic self-assembly. The objective is to
develop efficient algebraic and geometric methods of computation in algorithmic
number theory, cryptography, and algorithmic self-
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary focus of this research is the discrete
logarithm problem over various groups, including the multiplicative groups of
finite fields and groups associated with elliptic curves. A novel approach is
taken which explores global pairings and local dualities in number fields and
elliptic curves. The primary goal is to obtain results that address the
computational complexity of these fundamental problems and clarify the
foundational security of discrete-log based cryptosystems including elliptic
curve cryptosystems. Constructive issues important to curve based cryptography
will also be investigated. This research also addresses several fundamental
issues concerning reversible self-assembly including, characterization and
determination of equilibrium of a self-assembly system, determination of initial
concentrations of different types of molecular units for achieving a targeted
equilibrium behavior, and rate of convergence to equilibrium. Though these
problems seem naturally require analytic tools to study, they turn out to have
an interesting algebraic perspective as well. The primary goal is to obtain
results that advance the mathematical and algorithmic theory of self-assembly,
which is much needed for establishing guiding principles for experimental works
in this area.&lt;br/&gt;