* 0306495
* Non-linear Analysis in Riemannian Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Robert Strichartz, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 320,397.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0306495 Principal Investigator: Jose F. Escobar

Professor Escobar plans to continue his research in linear and non-linear
partial differential equations and its applications to Riemmannian Geometry. He
will continue his study of solutions to Yamabe equations on compact Riemannian
manifolds. These are semilinear elliptic equations and in the case that the
manifold has a boundary they satisfy a non-linear boundary condition.
Applications of the existence theory for these equations are proposed to solve
other problems in differential geometry and relativity. He also proposes to
study Hamilton's Ricci flow on two and three dimensional manifols with boundary.
In the two dimensional case this is a scalar non-linear evolution equation
satisfying a non-linear boundary condition, while in the three dimensional case
is a system of nonlinear equations with nonlinear boundary conditions. He will
continue the study of the relation between the geometry of the manifold and the
eigenvalues for the Steklov problem, which is the study of harmonic functions
whose normal derivative is proportional to the function.

The geometric objects that will be studied are the so-called Riemannian
manifolds. These are spaces endowed with analytical structures, like the metric
which provide us with a way to measure lengths and angles. It is natural to
study deformations of these structures to realize what properties in the space
remain stable under such perturbations. The description of all these
deformations is usually governed by differential equations. The curvature tensor
of a Riemmannian manifold ( a measure for the "non-euclideanness" of a
Riemannian space) usually makes such equations non-linear, although as in
physics, most of them are of variational nature. From the earliest days,
conformal changes of metric ( multiplication of the metric by a positive
function) have played an importntant role in surface theory. The equations
proposed appear in the problem of conformal deformation of a Riemannian metric
and in relativity. The Steklov problem appears in mathematical physics,
conformal geometry, spinor geometry, minimal surfaces, partial differential
equations and harmonic analysis. Geometry as well as topology involves the study
of properties of the space. But whereas geometry focuses on properties of space
that involves size, shape and measurement, topology concerns itself with the
less tangible properties of relative position and connectedness. In recent years
Hamilton's Ricci flow has become a fundamental tool in the study of geometry and
toplogy of manifolds.