* 0306838
* DG:  Secure Agency Interoperation for Effective Data Mining in Border Control and Homeland Security Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Robert Grossman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaoyang Wang
* 09/30/2009
* USD 1,125,997.00

The objective of this grant is to address research issues related to semantic
interoperability, data mining and security and authorization in the multi-agency
domain of border control. Partners are the Immigration and Naturalization
Agency, the Customs Service, and the Coast Guard. In addition to the research
issues that will be addressed in this proposed work, the development of a proof
of concept in the form of a prototype will be undertaken. Specifically, in the
area of semantic interoperability, the team focuses on providing expressive
common language among information sources, automatic mapping, and the ability to
dynamically adapt to changing environments. Furthermore, automatic text analysis
and text mining techniques will be developed to automatically, rather than
manually, build the knowledge base. The team addresses some of the challenges
encountered when sharing information in a secure manner, including reconciling
the heterogeneity among multiple security policies, resolving semantic
heterogeneity among security policies, translation of coalition level policies
to implementation level and vice versa, and support of delegation in coalition
based systems. Also addressed will be issues related to data mining to build an
alert system. This includes developing classification/segmentation models and
merging of different local models to a global model for outlier analysis, real
time data mining, and providing iterative and interactive visualization. The
multidisciplinary research team, which comes from multi-institutions is
augmented by a set of domain experts in several related areas, including
homeland security, border control, global logistics, transportation security,
foreign terrorist tracking, as well as domestic and multinational
investigations. These domain experts provide guidance on the functional
requirements of the system and feedback on the prototype system as it progresses
through its development.