* 0306298
* Wavelet Based Nonlinear Companding Method for Analog Circuit Behavioral Modeling
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Dian Zhou, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2007
* USD 267,420.00

As analog ICs have rapidly evolved from the relatively low complexity
of&lt;br/&gt;the early days to the high sophistication of today, the need for
more advanced behavioral modeling techniques has become increasingly urgent. The
objective of this project &lt;br/&gt;is to investigate a wavelet based nonlinear
companding method for the behavioral modeling of analog circuits, and further
develops a simulator based on the obtained behavioral models for the analysis
and design of PLL circuit, which is one of the most important circuits in
today's RF and high-speed VLSI systems. A nonlinear companding method is
proposed to regulate the singularity of the wavelets such that a "smooth"
fitting can be achieved between the wavelets and the concerned circuit
functions. Such an approach will even the model error distribution and
significantly improves the simulation efficiency at the system level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project opens a new research direction for the
wavelet theory and application. The investigated nonlinear companding approach
will make wavelet a more effective basis function for engineering application.
It will lead to new method for analog circuit behavioral modeling and greatly
improve the efficiency of today's CAD tools for the analysis of mixed-signal
systems. Particularly, it will improve the efficiency of the design and analysis
of PLL circuit which is one of the most challenge and timing consuming tasks in
high performance RF and analog system design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;