* 0306711
* Nanoscale Magnetism and Spintronics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Gang Xiao, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2006
* USD 330,000.00

We propose to investigate nanoscale magnetism and spintronics, in particular,
systems of controlled self-assembled nanostructures. The objective is to
investigate and solve outstanding physics problems that are both basic and
essential to applications. We will develop a reliable fabrication process
leading to excellent self-assembled nanostructures. We will explore
magnetotransport in embedded nanocrystals lattices, in particular, the
properties of magnetoresistance (MR) and extraordinary Hall effect (EHE). These
systems may offer enhanced magnetotransport properties. The subject of magnetic
interactions will be studied with the purposes of engineering magnetic switching
fields and achieving large MR and EHE at low magnetic fields. These projects
will lead to a more comprehensive understanding of properties of nanoscale
magnetic systems. Nanoscale spintronics is important to the future
competitiveness of the semiconductor industry in the United States. Our project
will support graduate students. We will continue to recruit undergraduates and
high school students to experience the wonder of the small world. %%% We propose
to investigate magnets and quantum spin dependent phenemena in nanometer sized
magnets assembled in arrays through self-assembly processes and embedded in
metals. In these new systems, many physical properties defy interpretations
using traditional theoritical understanding. Our research is designed to foster
better understanding of the physics involved and to develop a reliable
fabrication process leading to excellent self-assembled nanostructures. The
electrical properties of these embedded nanocrystals such as magnetoresistance
(MR) and extraordinary Hall effect (EHE) will be measured. These systems are
likely to offer enhanced magnetotransport properties. The research will benefit
the high-tech industries to overcome roadblocks, which impede the advancement
toward smaller, thinner, faster, and cost-effective devices. Our project will
support graduate students. We will continue to recruit undergraduates and high
school students to experience the wonder of the small world. ***

