* 0306899
* Automating the Integration of EPA Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Eduard Hovy, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 07/31/2007
* USD 900,000.00

Due to the wide range of geographic scales and complex tasks the Government must
administer, its data is split in many different ways and is collected at
different times by different agencies. The resulting massive data heterogeneity
means one cannot effectively locate, share, or compare data across sources, let
alone achieve computational data interoperability. To date, all approaches to
wrap data collections, or even to create mappings across comparable datasets,
require manual effort. Despite some promising work, the automated creation of
such mappings is still in its infancy, since equivalences and differences
manifest themselves at all levels, from individual data values through metadata
to the explanatory text surrounding the data collection as a whole. More general
methods are required to effectively address this problem. Viewing the data
mapping problem as a variant of the cross-language mapping problem of Machine
Translation (MT), this project will employ the new statistical algorithms
developed since 1990 in the MT community to discover correspondences across
comparable datasets at all levels. In MT, the techniques align words and word
sequences across languages. This research will adapt and extend the techniques
to consider not only data values (the analogue of words) but also data
format/orthography, metadata information, and associated textual information
(metadata descriptions, footnotes, etc.) in the alignment process, and to
perform alignment learning at three levels: individual data cell level, set of
cells (column) level, and multi-column level. Multi-level alignment has not been
attempted in MT before. These powerful learning techniques have never been
applied to metadata schema integration and/or database alignment or wrapping. If
these automatically learned mappings are effective, the amount of manual labor
required in database wrapping should be significantly reduced.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two sets of domain data will be used. Air quality data
will be provided by EPA staff at the California Air Resources Board in
Sacramento, who periodically integrate data from some 35 regional Air Quality
Management Districts throughout California into a single California-wide
database, and pass this along to the Federal EPA in North Carolina. Fire
emissions data will be provided by a different set of EPA offices, the
USDA/Forest Service, and the Department of Interior.&lt;br/&gt;