* 0306588
* Parameterized Model Reduction Techniques for Simulation and Optimization of Mixed-Signal Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Jacob White, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2006
* USD 300,000.00

The notion of prototyping is pervasive in engineering design; one investigates
the viability of a new idea by constructing a single implementation, a
prototype. Whether the problem is designing an integrated circuit transceiver, a
micromachining-based thumbnail-sized chemical agent detector, or an aircraft,
the cost and time required to&lt;br/&gt;construct prototypes is high enough to
discourage comprehensive design exploration. It is possible to dramatically
reduce the need for physical prototypes by substituting computer models, a
process referred to as computational prototyping. The promise of using
computational prototyping is that the ease of testing alternative designs will
allow designers to examine more radical, and possibility much more efficient,
design alternatives. The challenge of computational prototyping is in developing
accurate modeling algorithms and techniques which are both flexible and fast
enough to allow designers to examine a wide range of design
alternatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For complicated systems, which may have
millions of interacting components, computational prototyping using direct
numerical simulation is too slow for designers to use in design exploration.
Instead, it is necessary to exploit hierarchy in the computational prototype,
and most hierarchical computer verification and optimization tools rely on
manually generated high-level models for function blocks in the design. This
``by-hand'' process is time-consuming and error-prone, and interferes with rapid
deployment of new technology. For this reason, there is strong interest in
developing techniques which automatically generate accurate high-level models
from more detailed numerical simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past
decade, substantial effort has been devoted to finding automatic strategies for
extracting high-level models from linear interconnect and packaging. This effort
was successful in a very practical sense, commercial computer-aided companies
now provide users with a wide range of very sophisticated techniques for
extracting&lt;br/&gt;high-level models of interconnect. Chip designers are no
longer required to be signal integrity experts. In addition, the research also
substantially deepened the understanding of the general problem of model
reduction. And it is from this only recently achieved&lt;br/&gt;vantage point
that we now think we can start to tackle the next two problems: generating {\it
parameterized} reduced-order models for use in hierarchical optimization, and
automatically reducing the nonlinear systems associated with micromachined
devices or analog subsystems. &lt;br/&gt;We originally proposed to investigate
both the problems of nonlinear model&lt;br/&gt;reduction and parameterized model
reduction. With the reduced budget,&lt;br/&gt;we will investigate only the
nonlinear model reduction problem, to &lt;br/&gt;automatically generate low-
order models of micromachined devices and&lt;br/&gt;analog subsystems. We will
be examining strategies involving nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;generalizations of
balanced realizations, and combining such strategies&lt;br/&gt;with trajectory
piecewise linearizations to generate accurate subsystem&lt;br/&gt;models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;