* 0306007
* High Speed System Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Mani Mina, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2007
* USD 512,096.00

0306007&lt;br/&gt;Mani Mina&lt;br/&gt;Iowa State University&lt;br/&gt;High Speed
System Engineering&lt;br/&gt;$500,096&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
building a cumulative, integrated set of four classes to train engineering
students at the junior and senior level to work in the field of high-speed
systems engineering. Contemporary engineering practitioners require an
integrated understanding of high-speed system engineering that may surpass the
traditional focus developed in undergraduate curricula. Typical engineering
students focus on well-established subjects such as power, VLSI, materials,
electronic devices, opto-electronics, networking, communication, embedded
systems and programming. This project proposes that a set of courses (presented
in a track called High-Speed System Engineering) be offered as a part of
engineering students' curriculum to train them in essentials needed in the
workforce. The curriculum track offers undergraduate students an opportunity to
understand the issues of networking and high-speed interconnections by exposing
them to design and practical issues and by infusing the results of research into
their classes. Research transfer is done using case studies that both shed light
on basic principles and also provide students with exciting applications to
learn from. This project builds on the successes of two related activities at
this institution: a high-speed electronics and VLSI laboratory (Carver Lab) and
the dependable computing and networking laboratory (DCNL). The classes developed
for this project teach the fundamentals and relationships between the related
topics, and also integrate research findings to motivate students' understanding
of the fundamentals and emphasize the importance of the subject. In addition,
students are trained in measurement techniques and are required to conduct
typical measurements themselves. The program has a strong laboratory component
to enhance students' understanding of current measurement technology. The
courses in the High Speed System Engineering track include: 1) Fundamentals of
Measurements and Instrumentation: Electronics, digital, RF, microwave, and
optical measurement and instrumentation laboratory covering the basics of
measurement, the known measurement methodologies for digital and analog systems,
and the details of the requirements needed to measure in the microwave to the
optical domain, 2) Advanced Robust: Issues, techniques and tools used in design
of future systems in the terahertz range and beyond and current and future
system considerations relying on robustness, fault tolerance, and secure
systems. 3) High-speed Hybrid Systems: Optical/electronics hybrid-interconnect
systems including compatibility problems associated with optical and electronic
based systems and EM compatibility and immunity. 4) High-speed System
Characterization: Concepts applied in high-speed system integration and
measurement. The design and characterization criteria for high-speed systems are
different from those of DC and low frequencies systems. The goal of this class
is to get students familiar with high-speed issues. This project has the
potential to serve as a national prototype for curricula in the area of high-
speed system engineering at the undergraduate level.&lt;br/&gt;