* 0306691
* Effects of Surface Roughness on Turbulent Pipe Flow
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Alexander Smits, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 08/31/2006
* USD 391,539.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.:
CTS-0306691&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: ALEXANDER J.
SMITS&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: PRINCETON
UNIVERSITY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;THE EFFECTS OF SURFACE ROUGHNESS ON
TURBULENT PIPE FLOW&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the research program is
to use the Princeton University Superpipe, a unique experimental facility
capable of generating Reynolds numbers from 31,000 to 35 million, to study the
effects of surface roughness on fully developed turbulent pipe flow and resolve
questions about the validity of the law of the wall and the behavior of flows
over rough surfaces. Given the capabilities of the Superpipe facility, it will
be possible, to study the effects of roughness from the hydraulically smooth
regime to the fully rough regime. Detailed mean and turbulence measurements will
be taken. The intellectual merit of the proposed activity will lead to: (a) A
clearer understanding of the law of the wall, which is of fundamental importance
to the field of fluid mechanics; (b) an improved understanding of flows over
surfaces with small relative roughness; (c) a possible similarity relationship
between high Reynolds number turbulence and rough-wall turbulence; and (d) a
better description of roughness that correlates the effects of roughness with
characteristic features of the roughness itself (rather than, for example, using
"equivalent sand-grain roughness "approaches). The broader impacts resulting
from the proposed are as follows. There are two primary technological impacts.
First, the re-evaluation of the Moody chart, a set of universally accepted
engineering curves widely used in design of piping systems and calculation of
pumping power requirements since 1944. This chart is the basis for many
engineering design calculations. The research will result in a revised version
of the Moody chart based on new data. The impact on the design of piping systems
is expected to be important, and of lasting value. Secondly, improved turbulence
models for fully rough flows, and for high Reynolds number flows. Furthermore
the PI has demonstrated a commitment to educating members underrepresented
groups and widely disseminating data via an extensive
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;