* 0306334
* Distance-k Graph Coloring Algorithms for Numerical Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Alex Pothen, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Eun K. Park
* 07/31/2006
* USD 376,651.00

Algorithms for large-scale numerical optimization that rely on derivative
information require the repeated estimation of Jacobian and Hessian matrices.
Since this is an expensive part of the computation, efficient methods for
estimating these matrices via finite differences or automatic differentiation
are needed. The problem of minimizing the number of function computations can be
formulated as variants of distance-k graph coloring problems. In this research
project, graph coloring algorithms to aid the solution of large-scale
optimization problems are designed, analyzed, and implemented on serial and
parallel computers. The specific coloring problem depends on the optimization
context: whether the Jacobian or the Hessian is evaluated; whether all the
nonzeros or only a subset need to be estimated; whether a direct method or
substitution method is employed; and whether elements are estimated by
partitions of columns alone, or partitions of both columns and rows. These
variations lead to ten different matrix estimation problems and their graph
coloring formulations. By unifying graph-theoretic formulations for estimating
Jacobians and Hessians, a few general coloring problems that can be adapted to
the different cases are identified. The focus is on developing new graph
coloring algorithms and software for partial matrix estimation to precondition
optimization problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optimization involves choosing the
best option among many possible scenarios from a computational model of a
physical situation, such as a manufacturing process involving chemically
reacting fluid flows, or the simulation of electronic devices and circuits. In
many such large-scale applications of optimization, computing the derivatives is
a tedious, error-prone, and expensive task. Automatic differentiation methods
and finite difference techniques have been devised in recent years to make this
task less demanding and more reliable. This research project provides software
infrastructure to reduce the computational time and storage needed to compute
the derivatives using automatic differentiation or finite differences in large-
scale optimization. One postdoctoral research associate and a graduate student,
the former from an under-represented group in computer science, are being
trained in combinatorial scientific computing. A module on graph coloring for
estimating Jacobians via finite differences is being incorporated into an
undergraduate scientific computing course, and undergraduate students are
involved in developing and testing components of the software. With the
involvement of colleagues at the Department of Energy's Argonne National
Laboratory and Sandia National Laboratories, the software from this research is
being applied to simulate chemically reacting flows and circuit
models.&lt;br/&gt;