* 0306180
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Steven Andrews, Andrews                 Steven         S
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others). It is expected that the Fellows trained through these
fellowships will play an important role in training the future workforce.
Postdoctoral research and training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields.

The research and training plan is entitled "Standard functional motifs in
biochemical networks." Biochemical data have revealed complex networks of
biochemical reactions for many cell functions. These networks can be interpreted
with a modular framework. The goal of this project is to (1) identify standard
functional motifs in the E. coli metabolic network, (2) analyze motifs
identified, and (3) develop a theory for combining two or more motifs into a
larger unit while clarifying the value of a modular description of biochemical
networks.