* 0306285
* Numerical Methods for Multiple Scale Problems in Wave Propagation: Efficient Approximation of Integral Operators in the Time Domain
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2006
* Thomas Hagstrom, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2006
* USD 128,190.00

Many of the main obstacles to the development of efficient and reliable
computational tools for simulating waves are rooted in the multiple spatial
scales which are universally present. The focus of this project is the detailed
study of select questions which are relevant for overcoming these obstacles. A
unifying feature of the questions addressed is that all involve the efficient
approximate evaluation of integral operators in space and time. Although the
work, if successful, has the potential to impact numerous scientific and
engineering disciplines, the efforts will be directed towards problems in
aeroacoustics and electromagnetics. Precisely, the following will be developed:
(i) Accurate, efficient and reliable computational domain truncation methods,
allowing the direct simulations to take place only in regions where the medium
is complex or where nonlinear effects are important; (ii) Efficient time-
stepping methods allowing the simple treatment of concentrated regions of high
resolution or geometric detail.

Wave propagation problems are of fundamental importance in many areas of applied
science and technology. They encompass a wide range of physics
(electromagnetics, fluid and solid mechanics), but share essential mathematical
properties. The defining characteristic of a wave is its ability to travel long
distances relative to its basic dimension, the wavelength, carrying detailed
information about the medium through which it has traveled. For this reason,
waves are the primary method by which we probe nature and communicate. A
consequence of this fundamental characteristic is that wave propagation problems
typically involve disparate spatial scales - from the geometrical details of
scatterers through a range of wavelengths to the propagation distances. These
multiple scales, in turn, lead to difficulties in computational analysis. In
particular, their uniform resolution would lead to a prohibitive number of
degrees of freedom. Thus methods must be developed which can concentrate
computational resources only where they are needed, providing the primary
motivation for the problems we consider. In addition to this analysis, the plan
is to collaborate with researchers who are building software for simulating jet
noise, electromagnetic scattering in complex structures, as well as general-
purpose wave propagation problems. Thus any positive developments from the
research can come into use as rapidly as possible.