* 0306106
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Robert Diehl, Diehl, Robert H
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 07/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary
Informatics for fiscal year 2003. The fellowship supports research and training
at the postdoctoral level at the intersection of biology and the informational,
computational, mathematical, and statistical sciences. The goal of the
fellowship is to provide training to a young scientist in preparation for a
career in biological informatics in which research and education will be
integrated. These fellowships provide opportunities for interdisciplinary
research and educational activities in biology and informatics to a wide range
of recent doctoral recipients. There is an increasing need for training in
biological informatics at all occupational levels, and it is expected that
Fellows trained through these fellowships will play important roles in training
the future workforce.

The research and training plan is entitled "Predicting patterns of avian habitat
use and flight behavior during migration using radar and land use databases."
This project taps existing weather radar and land cover databases and applies
computer-intensive, spatially explicit, individual-based modeling to
statistically converge on landbird migratory behaviors that reveal fine scale
habitat use patterns important to avian conservation. The model iteratively
hunts through a multi-dimensional parameter space seeking to minimize
differences between expected (model) and observed (radar) migratory patterns.