* 0306047
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Interdisciplinary Informatics for FY 2003
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Mark Holder, Holder, Mark T
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Interdisciplinary Informatics are sponsored
jointly by the Directorates for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and
Biological Sciences (BIO) to encourage research and training that cross the
traditional disciplinary boundaries between them. These fellowships provide
opportunities for interdisciplinary research and educational activities in
biology and informatics to a wide range of recent doctoral recipients
(biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, statisticians, computer
scientists, and others) who seek to conduct research on biological questions
using informatics tools and methods. It is expected that the Fellows trained
through these fellowships will play an important role in training the future
workforce. Postdoctoral training in informatics will permit junior scientists
trained in biology, mathematical, chemical, and physical sciences to play key
roles in developing new quantitative tools and methods that will advance
informatics in biology and other fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research and
training plan for this fellowship is entitled "Estimating evolutionary
relationships from unaligned DNA sequences using Bayesian statistical methods."
Aligning DNA sequences to determine which sites are comparable is a crucial step
in almost all of the sequence analyses that underlie molecular bioinformatics.
Estimates of the evolutionary relationships between sequences can help guide
alignment, and more accurate alignments can assist phylogenetic inference.
Statistical methods for simultaneously aligning sequences and inferring
evolutionary trees are being investigated, compared, and implemented in free
software. &lt;br/&gt;