* 0307011
* Multiscale theory for paraxial waves with applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Knut Solna, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2007
* USD 150,811.00

Award Abstract: DMS-0307011, Knut Solna, University of California-
Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Multiscale theory for paraxial waves with
applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; When a laser beam propagates&lt;br/&gt;
through the atmosphere it is affected by bad whether and&lt;br/&gt; turbulence.
Similarly wireless communication systems,&lt;br/&gt; remote sensing systems and
imaging algorithms are affected&lt;br/&gt; by medium fluctuations.&lt;br/&gt;
This proposal aims at developing a theory for waves propagating in&lt;br/&gt;
random and multiscale media that is needed to describe&lt;br/&gt; and analyze
such phenomena and at applying this theory&lt;br/&gt; for optimal design of
systems involving waves&lt;br/&gt; in complicated and multiscale
media.&lt;br/&gt; The medium heterogeneity is modeled&lt;br/&gt; by a random
field and one aims at&lt;br/&gt; analyzing the statistical character of
&lt;br/&gt; the waves that have propagated through the medium.&lt;br/&gt; Two
regimes are considered. First, a regime with a clear&lt;br/&gt; ``scale
separation'' where the medium variations&lt;br/&gt; take place on a
microscale,&lt;br/&gt; a scale that is much smaller than the wave length for
instance.&lt;br/&gt; Second, the case with variations on a continuum
of&lt;br/&gt; scales, like in turbulence, is being considered.&lt;br/&gt;
Despite the importance of this regime there is no&lt;br/&gt; general theory that
describes how the medium&lt;br/&gt; affects the wave pulse in this
case.&lt;br/&gt; In the novel approach set forth here one aims to
analyze&lt;br/&gt; these regimes in a unified&lt;br/&gt; framework in which the
medium fluctuations are described&lt;br/&gt; by a Brownian field and then one
aims to develop a general&lt;br/&gt; scaling theory for such a white noise
model. That is, a description&lt;br/&gt; of moments of the wave field and how
these&lt;br/&gt; depend on for instance the relative propagation
distance.&lt;br/&gt; The analysis involves stochastic differential
equations&lt;br/&gt; driven by the Brownian field and how the moments of
the&lt;br/&gt; solution can be described in various regimes using
martingale&lt;br/&gt; theory, this is a topic of general interest in stochastic
analysis.&lt;br/&gt; In the analysis the parabolic or forward scattering
approximation&lt;br/&gt; that leads to a random Schr\"odinger equation as
well&lt;br/&gt; as acoustic and electromagnetic waves will be
considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In the atmosphere &lt;br/&gt; small scale
fluctuations of&lt;br/&gt; temperature, pressure and humidity caused&lt;br/&gt;
by the turbulence of air velocities &lt;br/&gt; lead to complicated and
multiscale spatial and temporal variations&lt;br/&gt; in the wave-
speed.&lt;br/&gt; The turbulence results therefore in &lt;br/&gt; phenomena like
wave beam wander, beam broadening&lt;br/&gt; and intensity fluctuation
(scintillation).&lt;br/&gt; The proposed work that will characterize such
effects&lt;br/&gt; is important for the design of imaging and&lt;br/&gt;
communication algorithms and several applications&lt;br/&gt; will be
considered.&lt;br/&gt; The work regarding propagation and communication
&lt;br/&gt; in the turbulent atmosphere is particularly important&lt;br/&gt; due
to the significance of associated applications&lt;br/&gt; like laser
communication and tracking and since so far&lt;br/&gt; little theory is
available.&lt;br/&gt; The theory is needed for design&lt;br/&gt; of for instance
optimal communication protocols, multiple-input-multiple-output&lt;br/&gt;
antenna systems for wireless communication, for design of secure&lt;br/&gt;
communication algorithms and robust tracking algorithms&lt;br/&gt; through the
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt; As a part of this work the development&lt;br/&gt; of
Speclab a general purpose software package for&lt;br/&gt; analysis of multiscale
and turbulent data has been initiated&lt;br/&gt; and it will be further
developed. &lt;br/&gt; It has so far been used for analysis of atmospheric
turbulence&lt;br/&gt; data (Kirtland Air Force Base) and also for analysis of
biomedical data (Harvard University).&lt;br/&gt; This work is important to guide
the modeling of the wave phenomena&lt;br/&gt; and ensure the relevance of our
work. &lt;br/&gt; The work on waves in multiscale media will also be important
for understanding wave-fields&lt;br/&gt; propagating in the heterogeneous earth,
the fluctuating and&lt;br/&gt; stratified ocean and through biological
tissue.&lt;br/&gt; In these contexts some important applications that
will&lt;br/&gt; be considered relates to medical imaging, imaging
through&lt;br/&gt; foliage and mine
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;