* 0307929
* Robotic and Adaptive Optics Monitoring of Clouds on Titan
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Michael Brown, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 12/31/2006
* USD 234,083.00

AST 0307929&lt;br/&gt;Brown&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Michael Brown's research
program with this award will provide a unique window into the time-variable
structure and dynamics of the poorly understood atmosphere of Titan. This window
will come at a critical time, when imminent arrival of the Cassini spacecraft
will soon focus intense scientific scrutiny on the satellite. The projects take
advantage of the Dr. Brown's recent detection of small clouds near the south
pole of Titan and of two unique observational capabilities available to Dr.
Brown to vastly expand our currently minuscule knowledge of clouds and weather
on Titan. The first unique capability will be the ability to provide the first
ever daily monitoring &lt;br/&gt;of global-averaged cloud formation and
dissipation on Titan using a proven method on a new dedicated robotic
observatory run by Dr. Brown. The robotic observatory will be able to detect the
existence of even relatively small clouds on Titan on an ~hourly basis
throughout the observing season. With five total years of observations acquired
by the end of the award period, fundamental questions about cloud activity will
be able to be addressed for the first time, such as: What are the timescales for
formation and dissipation of clouds of the smallest to the largest sizes seen?
Is the current period of frequent cloudiness related to the recent southern
summer solstice? Are clouds preferentially present at particular Titan
longitudes? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second unique capability will be the
ability to obtain high spatial-resolution adaptive optics images and spectra
frequently throughout each observing season using a newly implemented target-of-
opportunity interrupt mode at the Keck and Palomar observatories. Rather than
obtaining infrequent observations at pre-determined times, as would be typical
with standard astronomical scheduling, the target-of-opportunity interrupt mode
allows observations to be obtained at times dictated by the cloud activity level
on Titan (which we will know from the robotic monitoring) and allows for a large
number of short blocks of time. With these frequent targeted observations, a
full range of cloud conditions on Titan will be able to be observed that would
otherwise take many years of continuous pre-scheduled observations to obtain.
These data will allow the first ever understanding of the latitude of cloud
formation and dissipation, seasonal changes in these latitudes, wind speeds on
Titan, the growth and decay lifetimes of individual clouds, and the dynamics of
infrequent hurricane-scale storms. Together these projects will provide the
first long term quantitative data on the formation, evolution, and dissipation
of the poorly understood clouds on Titan. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These
activities will have a major impact on the education and training of all of the
&lt;br/&gt;students and post-doctoral scholars involved. In particular, this
project will form the basis of the &lt;br/&gt;Ph.D. thesis of a Caltech graduate
student. Dr. Brown has a strong commitment to the education and training of
women and underrepresented minorities, as is demonstrated by the students
currently in his research group. A major aspect of the proposed work will be
commissioning and gaining experience using a robotic telescope soon to be
installed at Palomar Observatory. Once commissioned, this telescope will be
available for all of the research and teaching activities of Dr. Brown,
including, in particular, undergraduate students joining the group for the
summer through Caltech's Summer Undergraduate Research Foundation (SURF)
program. Moreover, Dr. Brown is working with Scitech, the manufacturer of the
robotic telescope, to help define and refine priorities for astronomical usage
of automated telescopes in the hopes that astronomers will finally be able to
have access to off-the-shelf turnkey robotic telescope facilities for a wide
variety of usages. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;