* 0307119
* Analytical and computational studies of direct and inverse boundary value problems for PDEs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Michael Vogelius, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2007
* USD 224,691.00

Abstract, Award DMS-0307119&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Michael Vogelius, Rutgers
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Analytical and computational studies of
direct and inverse boundary value problems for PDEs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A main object of this project is to delvelop very
detailed information &lt;br/&gt;about the response of a system (a PDE boundary
value problem) to the presence &lt;br/&gt;of internal inhomogeneities (defects),
the spacing of these inhomogeneities, &lt;br/&gt;or changes in the boundary
conditions. One important set of tools to obtain&lt;br/&gt;this information are
rigorously verfied asymptotic expansions. In the case &lt;br/&gt;of changing,
nonlinear boundary conditions another crucial component is &lt;br/&gt;the study
of mechanisms that govern the development of (near-)singularities.
&lt;br/&gt;The second main theme is then the application of this information to
&lt;br/&gt;effectively obtain knowledge about (reconstruct) the parameters of
the system &lt;br/&gt;(e.g., the location, and the character of the
inhomogeneities) from data &lt;br/&gt;measured on an accessible part of
boundary, or in the ``farfield''. Initially &lt;br/&gt;the focus will be on
steady state and time harmonic situations, with consideration &lt;br/&gt;of
scalar equations as well as systems (in particular Maxwell's Equations).
&lt;br/&gt;Later on fully time-dependent cases will also be studied. The work
has an &lt;br/&gt;essential computational component.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The particular applications that will be
investigated concern 1) anti-personnel &lt;br/&gt;mine detection, using Ground
Penetrating Radar(GPR) data, and 2) corrosion/oxidation &lt;br/&gt;imaging (and
control) using partial voltage and current data. But many other
&lt;br/&gt;applications of significant interest come to mind, for instance in
the field of &lt;br/&gt;medical tomography. It is expected that the combination
of analysis, asymptotic &lt;br/&gt;analysis and computational work contained in
this project will allow for the &lt;br/&gt;design of detection (and location)
algorithms that are more precise (less sensitive &lt;br/&gt;to noise), and much
faster than those of a general purpose nature. For &lt;br/&gt;reconstructions it
is envisaged to work on experimental as well as synthetic data.&lt;br/&gt;I
intend to organize two small workshops in the second and third year (of the
&lt;br/&gt;period covered by this grant). The first will be devoted to
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;and computational aspects of corrosion/oxidation
modeling. The second will be &lt;br/&gt;devoted to GPR mine-detection. The
participants will be mathematicians and &lt;br/&gt;engineers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;