* 0307492
* White Dwarfs in Open Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Michael Bolte, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Donald M. Terndrup
* 09/30/2008
* USD 194,824.00

AST 0307492 Bolte, Michael J.

The investigators in this project are carrying out an extensive search for
white dwarf stars in young open clusters with the primary goal to identify the
main sequence stellar mass above which stars explode as core collapse supernovae
and below which stars end their lives as white dwarfs. The value for this
critical mass is important in a wide range of areas. The number of core-collapse
supernovae in a stellar population has important implications for chemical
enrichment and energy balance in galaxies. Supernovae kinetic energy feedback
may be the dominant process in the early evolution of dwarf galaxies and is an
important mechanism for regulating star formation in young galaxies of all
masses. The current uncertainty in the value of the critical mass is large with
values in the recent literature ranging from 5 to 8 solar masses. Identifying
the critical mass for the formation of white dwarfs is also important for
providing constraints on physical processes in giant stars that lead to the
formation and growth of the core that eventually becomes the white dwarf
remnant. A valuable side benefit of this program is improved estimates of the
ages, distances and initial mass functions of a number of young and
intermediate-age open clusters.

Broader Impact. The researchers are making their data and analysis tools
available freely at a WWW site during the course of the work. Astronomy and
physics graduate and undergraduate students are involved in the research.

