* 0307223
* SGER (small grant for exploratory research): Sequencing a Pelagibacter (SAR11) genome
* BIO,EF
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2005
* Stephen Giovannoni, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 02/28/2005
* USD 99,598.00

The goal of this project is to complete sequencing and annotation of the genome
of the marine bacterium candidatus Pelagibacter ubique, a member of the SAR11
clade. The SAR11 clade is the most abundant bacterial clade found in rRNA gene
clone libraries made from seawater. They account for one quarter of the
bacterial 16S rRNA genes recovered and have been found in nearly every seawater
sample surveyed. In situ hybridization data demonstrate that on average 35% of
the cells in the ocean surface layer are SAR11, and in some samples they reach
densities of 450,000 cells/ml. Their physiology and ecological role are
uncertain, although they are presumed to be heterotrophs. SAR11 was recently
isolated for the first time at Oregon State University from Oregon coastal
seawater. Strain HTCC1062 (Pelagibacter ubique) was obtained by the application
of newly developed high throughput cultivation procedures which employed novel
methods for screening cell arrays by in situ hybridization to search for
isolates of this organism. The medium used for cultivation of HTCC1062 is
autoclaved seawater, in which it grows exponentially with a doubling time of 30
hours to reach densities of ca. 105 - 106 cells ml-1. The genome size of
HTCC1062 is estimated to be 1.54 megabases. Diversa Corporation sequenced the
genome to 2.0-3.0x coverage, without federal support. This proposal would
support the completion of this genome sequence to closure, and its annotation
and publication. The genome sequence of this microorganism will help reveal the
adaptive mechanisms that make the SAR11 clade one of the most successful
microbial groups on the planet. We anticipate that HTCC1062 will rapidly become
an important experimental model for studying the role of bacteria in the oceanic
carbon cycle. Therefore, completion of this genome sequence will be an important
contribution to basic marine science. This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing
Award funded through a collaborative activity between the National Science
Foundation and the Department of Agriculture.