* 0307845
* Rotational Dynamics: New Problems and Theories
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Ferenc Varadi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 05/31/2007
* USD 137,934.00

AST 0307845&lt;br/&gt;Varadi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rotation has a central place
in the understanding of planets and satellites. It causes
deformation&lt;br/&gt;(flattening) which is a key to unlocking the internal
structure of a body. Rotational dynamics&lt;br/&gt;profoundly affects the
atmosphere and climate, as well as the internal dynamics through
tidal&lt;br/&gt;deformation and dissipation. Tides couple rotational and orbital
motions, resulting in certain&lt;br/&gt;special resonant configurations (e.g.,
the synchronous rotation of the Moon) that shed light on&lt;br/&gt;the evolution
of the orbit and spin state over billions of years. Multiple satellite systems,
such as&lt;br/&gt;the Galilean satellites of Jupiter, show even more complex
interactions. The goal of this project of Dr. Ferenc Varadi is to advance the
understanding of rotational dynamics by developing new analytical theories which
will be extensively tested through comparisons with the results of direct
numerical simulations. As opposed to specific theories for ephemeris
computations, the goal of the project is to find physical explanations for
phenomena using a general framework that is not tailored to a specific planet or
satellite.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also provide the theoretical
basis for generalizing the notion of Cassini states in which free motions are
completely damped due to tides. The main motivation comes from recent results on
large-amplitude physical librations, which are contrary to the prevailing view
of rotational dynamics. The approach will also make it possible to determine
generalized Cassini states without restrictive assumptions on orbital motions.
While a large part of the work is related to synchronous rotation, physical
librations and their long-term effects will also be investigated for fast
rotators. The new theories will provide self-consistent dynamical equations
based on perturbation computations and averaging. New, more accurate equations
will be derived for spin axis evolution. Applications for the terrestrial
planets, asteroids and the Jovian planets will be developed. An important
component of the project will be the development of differential
equations&lt;br/&gt;for the rotational and tidal deformations that are coupled
to orbital and rotational dynamics. Rather than using a Love number formalism,
which requires a spectral decomposition in time to accommodate viscoelastic
behavior, the equations for the deformation of the body in time and space are
recast into a system of ordinary differential equations in time. This system can
then be analyzed via the same techniques of perturbation theory and averaging to
develop a self consistent model for deformable bodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
advances made through this project will significantly contribute to several
problems and&lt;br/&gt;projects in planetary astronomy. In particular, this
project may make it possible to infer the interior&lt;br/&gt;properties of outer
planet satellites from precise astrometric measurements, such as
eclipse&lt;br/&gt;and occultation timings. In addition, the project is expected
to provide theoretical basis for the&lt;br/&gt;analysis of data from ongoing and
planned US space missions, such as the Messenger mission to&lt;br/&gt;Mercury
and the Cassini mission to Saturn.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;