* 0307386
* Demographics of Star Forming Galaxies in the Local Universe
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2008
* Robert Kennicutt, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Linda S. Sparke
* 04/30/2008
* USD 338,475.00

AST-0307386&lt;br/&gt;Kennicutt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will fully
characterize the star formation properties of the local population of galaxies
around the Milky Way, using four new emission-line imaging and
spectrophotometric surveys of nearby galaxies. These surveys will provide the
first truly complete census of star-forming galaxies in the local universe,
including a sample of several hundred galaxies in 8 nearby galaxy clusters, a
volume-limited survey of 385 galaxies within 11 Mpc of the Milky Way, and an
NOAO survey of 500 HI-selected galaxies in the local volume. A companion survey
of integrated spectra of 360 galaxies will provide improved corrections for the
effects of extinction on the emission-line maps, and improved diagnostics of
star formation rates and chemical abundances in
galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will be important for a
large number of broader problems in astrophysics, including star formation, the
physical nature of the Hubble sequence, and the formation and evolution of
galaxies. Special efforts will be made to obtain observations that complement
other major surveys, including the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, the SIRTF Nearby
Galaxies Survey, and the many surveys of high-redshift galaxies currently under
way. The project will also produce four public web-accessible atlases of galaxy
images and spectra, to support archival investigations by other
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve the
training of scientists and the participation of underrepresented groups, the
dissemination of scientific understanding to the public, and the provision of
publicly available databases. The project will support the Ph.D. dissertations
of two outstanding graduate students (including an Asian-American woman). Four
junior women scientists in the research group will be major participants. Group
members are also involved in various outreach activities, including
undergraduate observing runs, a nationally renowned astronomy camps program for
high-school students and teachers, public lectures, and interviews with the
print and broadcast media.&lt;br/&gt;