* 0307260
* RUI:     Solvent Effects on Organic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Steven Bachrach, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 07/31/2007
* USD 265,300.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Steven M. Bachrach at Trinity University will explore computational
approaches towards incorporating the effects of solvents within quantum
mechanical calculations of organic reactions. Modern computational techniques
have become quite reliable in predicting gas phase properties; however, much of
chemistry and all of biochemistry occurs within a solvent. In this proposal,
Professor Bachrach will examine a number of different approaches towards
accounting for solvation, including continuum fields and explicit consideration
of a small number of solvent molecules. These techniques will be applied to a
number of important chemical problems. Nucleophilic substitution at sulfur and
selenium is critical for the activation of some novel anti-tumor and antibiotic
agents. Gas phase studies suggest an addition-elimination mechanism, so these
studies will be extended to determine the mechanism in the more biologically
relevant aqueous environment. In particular, the activation step for the
powerful anti-tumor agent calichaemicin and the antibiotic leinamycin will be
examined with the hope that mechanistic insight may help to create more
effective analogues with better pharmacokinetic properties. Hydrogen bonding
solvents that will activate carbonyl species used in the Diels-Alder reaction
will be examined. And, finally, solution NMR experiments will be used as an
alternate approach to addressing the strength of aromaticity, which remains one
of the cornerstone principles of organic chemistry. The principal broader aim of
the proposal is to train undergraduate students in the science of computational
chemistry and to motivate these students towards a career in the sciences.

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division
supports Professor Steven M. Bachrach who will undertake the project at Trinity
University, which has a long history of attracting undergraduate students to the
research program, including many women and students of Hispanic origin, groups
that have been underrepresented in the sciences. Professor Bachrach will expose
these students to the challenges, excitement and opportunities for careers in
chemistry. Another societal benefit that may develop from the proposed research
is added insight toward the activation of some novel antitumor and antibiotic
agents. Greater understanding of how these compounds are "turned on" can provide
guidance towards developing analogues that may serve as new drug treatments.