* 0307998
* Seeking Optimal Representations, Classifiers, and Generalizations for Image Based Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Anuj Srivastava, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel F. DeMenthon
* 08/31/2007
* USD 342,329.00

Robotics and Human Augmentation
Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
#: 0307998&lt;br/&gt;Title: Seeking Optimal Representations, Classifiers, and
Generalizations for Image Based Recognition&lt;br/&gt;PI: Liu,
Xiuwen&lt;br/&gt;Florida State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linear
representations are ubiquitous in all areas of computational sciences. Many
applications in image analysis and computer vision involve analysis of large-
dimensional data by projecting them linearly to low-dimensional subspaces. In
view of their computational efficiency such linear projections have become
standard in certain applications. However, for recognizing objects from their
images, there is seldom a discussion on finding "optimal" linear
representations. Many societal, commercial, and scientific operations, such as
homeland security and biometrics, rely heavily on image-based recognition and
the recognition performance becomes a vital factor. This project aims to provide
efficient algorithms for finding linear and non-linear representations that
perform optimally in the context of object recognition. We propose to achieve
this goal by: (i) formulating the search for optimal linear representations as
that of optimization on Grassmann manifolds, (ii) using the geometry of
Grassmannians to develop algorithms for finding optimal linear representations,
(iii) analyzing the convergence properties and the theoretical limits of the
proposed optimization techniques, and (iv) demonstrating the potential
significant performance improvement on problems wherever linear representations
are applicable. Since there are numerous applications utilizing dimension
reduction using linear projections, including object recognition, image and text
retrieval, subspace tracking, and nonlinear filtering, the potential benefits of
the proposed research are tremendous. This research will be built on tools for
stochastic optimization and statistical inferences on nonlinear manifolds, tools
that will prove beneficial in many other applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will also enhance significantly the learning and research environment
on computer vision at the Florida State University. Utilization of geometric and
statistical approaches to applications in computer vision makes this a
multidisciplinary effort to the benefit of all participants, including both
graduate and undergraduate students. Outcomes of this research will be
incorporated in recently designed courses on Computer Vision and Computational
Statistics.&lt;br/&gt;