* 0307118
* Damped Lyman Alpha Systems as Probes of Nitrogen Synthesis in the Early Universe
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Richard Henry, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2008
* USD 91,373.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AST-0307118&lt;br/&gt;Henry&lt;br/&gt;This project will
study the origin of Nitrogen using damped Lyman-alpha systems (DLAs) as probes
of chemical evolution in the early Universe. The basic uncertainty is whether
the principal contribution comes from slower-evolving stars which eject material
via planetary nebulae and end as white dwarfs, or more massive stars which
evolve rapidly and spread elements heavier than hydrogen and helium by ending
with a supernova explosion. The difference in speed of these two processes is
the key to the investigation: the time it takes a lower-mass star to distribute
elements is a significant fraction of the age of DLAs, which are absorption-line
systems of low metallicity and high redshift. The researcher will numerically
calculate detailed chemical evolution models and compare them to observations
provided by colleagues. Some especially well-observed DLAs will be used to
constrain star formation histories. This study will also test ideas relating the
distribution of DLA properties either to characteristics of the initial stellar
mass function, or to the effects of Population III
nucleosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant contribution to astronomy
will continue to be the critical evaluation of published stellar yields based on
their predictive success, an activity for which this investigator is
particularly noted. This work will affect our understanding of an abundant and
biologically important element. The research will result in one doctoral
dissertation and will enhance collaborations both in the US and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;