* 0307842
* Collaborative Research - Structure and Evolution of M31's Stellar Halo from a Large Scale Spectroscopic Survey
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Steven Majewski, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2007
* USD 113,583.00

PROPOSAL NO: AST-0307842&lt;br/&gt;PI: Steven Majewski&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION:
University of Virginia&lt;br/&gt;===============================================
=================&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project is led by
Puragra Guhathakurta of UCSC (AST-0307966), and includes Michael Rich of UCLA
(AST-0307931), Steven Majewski of University of Virginia (AST-0307842) and
Kathryn Johnston of Wesleyan University (AST-0307846).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
team of collaborators will improve our understanding of the nature and origin of
the halo of M31 by carrying out a large-scale spectroscopic survey that will
yield both stellar radial velocities and metallicities. The larger sample will
allow them to explore the halo/outer disk stellar population over a wide range
of galactocentric distances by determining the mean metallicity distribution
function, the outer rotation curve, and the velocity dispersion of the halo.
Their study will focus on results for stars in the discrete streams of material
in the halo that have been discovered recently from wide field imaging surveys.
Ultimately, their sample should allow them to assess the extent to which the
disruption of satellite galaxies accreted by M31 has contributed to the
formation of the halo population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of the collaborators
involve undergraduate and graduate students in their research efforts. They
expect to give public lectures and to speak in K-12 classrooms about their
research and to make the results of their work accessible to the public. They
also plan to purchase a narrow band filter for work on the Ca infrared triplet,
which will be made available to all users of the Keck telescopes. &lt;br/&gt;