* 0307058
* Developing Integrated Datasets from Field Experiments to Interface with Models
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2008
* Minghua Zhang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 04/30/2008
* USD 419,213.00

This project will continue past work to integrate data collected from multiple
measurement platforms during field programs such as the Department of Energy's
Atmospheric Radiation Measurement (ARM) program and the Tropical Ocean Global
Atmosphere - Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere Response Experiment (TOGA-COARE), merging
them into physically-consistent data sets and rendering them suitable for model
applications. Refinements will be made to an existing variational analysis
algorithm used to align the variables such as flow velocities, water vapor and
energy fluxes, constraining them so that they conform to known physical
relationships (e.g., conservation of column-integrated budgets of energy, and
momentum). The primary foci in the current project are the re-processing of
TOGA-COARE data, the International H2O Project (IHOP) data using corrected
sounding data while adding surface and top-of-the-atmosphere flux data, as well
as data from the Large-scale Biosphere-Atmosphere (LBA) field campaign conducted
in 1999. Subsets of these data will be selected and used to address specific
global climate model parameterization issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will facilitate a synergistic use of observational data sets and models,
improving parameterizations for a number of such models employed by the weather
prediction/climate communities.