* 0307072
* Efficient View-Design Algorithms to Achieve Near-Optimal Performance of Sets of Relational Queries
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Rada Chirkova, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2007
* USD 253,180.00

The goal of this proposal is to develop new effective methods to improve the
performance of sets of frequent and important queries on large relational
databases, which could improve the efficiency of user interactions with data-
management systems. Solving the problem will have the most effect in query
optimization, data warehousing, and information integration. The project focuses
on the methodology of evaluating queries using views; views are relations that
are defined by auxiliary queries and can be used to rewrite and answer user
queries. One way to improve query performance is precompute and store (i.e.,
"materialize") views. To truly optimize query performance, it is critical to
materialize the "right" views. The project will demonstrate that, by designing
and materializing views, it is possible to ensure optimal or near-optimal
performance of frequent and important queries, for common and important query
types. The focus of this effort is on developing efficient and scalable
heuristic algorithms that design (near-) optimal sets of views for the given
queries. The project has two parts: (1) theoretical analysis and design of
algorithms and heuristics for view design, and (2) implementation and
experiments on large databases, to evaluate the performance improvements caused
by using the views. The techniques resulting from this project could have
application in commercial and experimental database systems, where they will
provide new ways to lower query-processing costs. The research results will be
accessible via a project web site http://research.csc.ncsu.edu/selftune/,
publications, and freely disseminated software. The project will provide
educational and research experience opportunities for graduate and undegraduate
students.