* 0307953
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Rise of an Insider Trading Network, 1979-1986: A Network Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Robert Hanneman, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 04/30/2004
* USD 3,840.00

Focusing on the phenomenon of insider trading in the U.S. during the period from
1979-1986, this project examines the utility of theories of criminology and
social networks to develop a model of how the dynamics of a legitimate business
network might differ from an illegitimate network embedded within it. Learning
theories (differential association, differential opportunity) tend to forget
that subcultures can and do develop within upper class elites. The solution lies
in theory building that includes formation of social networks within an elite
class, in this case financial bankers, and the effects of environmental
opportunities (deregulation) on the network characteristics of trust and
embeddedness. The dependent variable of this study is the changing structure of
the deviant network based on the degree of embeddedness and trust, under the
conditions of the independent variables of micro and macro environmental
factors, including SEC deregulation. Hypotheses include embeddedness, a network
concept based on the degree of redundancy of ties; trust which is defined by the
reciprocity of trust as well as clique formation and opportunity based on the
rate of tie formation dependent on deregulation. The expectation is that there
will be more tie formation activity within the illegal network as compared to
the larger, legitimate network. N is approximated to be 125 actors in the
legitimate network, 15 in the illegitimate network. Research methods include
profiling the network actors for religion and educational background, network
interview of SEC elites employed in the 1980s, secondary content analysis of SEC
investigations (1979-1986) and secondary content analysis of Stewart's (1992)
chronology of the illegal trading activities in the 1980s triangulated with
other journalistic sources such as The Wall Street Journal. Additional
procedures include the creation of matrices of legitimate and illegitimate
networks to test the variability of the networks as well as to conduct network
regression (QAP) to determine if there is any relationship between embeddedness,
trust, and opportunity from year to year. It is anticipated that this
dissertation will offer several benefits to the scientific community and policy
makers by including the understanding of how deviance is not a solitary
occupation but takes place within networks and overtime. Additional benefits to
the scientific community are 1) introduction of network analysis to criminology
and 2) further understanding of how networks do not operate within a structural
void, rather are regulated by internal and external characteristics. Finally,
there is optimism that with the completion of this study, there is the potential
to contribute to policy making in the form of preventative and predictive
capacity to aid in the control of insider trading.