* 0307145
* Workshop: 3rd International Summer School on Biocomplexity; August 16 - 23,  2003, Hanover, New Hampshire
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Metin Akay, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 06/30/2006
* USD 52,700.00

The integration and application of mathematics, engineering, physics and
computer science have been recently used to better understand complex biological
systems by examining the structure and dynamics of cellular and organism
function. This emerging field called "Systems Biology" has gained tremendous
interest among molecular and cellular researchers since it provides a continuous
spectrum of knowledge.

The main objective of this summer school is to expose undergraduate, graduate,
and postdoctoral biological science and bioengineering students to the
relatively new approaches of mathematical and computational challenges in
Systems Biology to facilitate rapid diffusion of these mathematical and
computational tools in the biological sciences. These methods will be helpful,
also, to both students and post-doctoral fellows in computer science and
mathematics who are interested in pursuing research in biology and
bioengineering, since the summer school provides exceptional insights into the
fundamental challenges in biological sciences.

The summer school uses lectures, oriented toward biological science students, by
expert faculty and will focus on biological data mining and knowledge discovery
that can be used to understand highly interconnected and complex biological
systems. In addition to these lectures, the summer school will employ two 2-hour
panel discussions, with active participation of undergraduate, graduate and
post-doctoral fellows, focused on future developments in systems biology,
computational biology, bioinformatics and molecular biology and engineering. In
addition, students will present the results of their projects in a culminating
poster session, which will facilitate discussion of both the biology and
computational approaches.

The summer school will stimulate further interdisciplinary research and
collaborations among biologists, engineers, mathematicians, computer scientists,
and medical researchers, and will help in identifying new, challenging
directions in complex biological science and bioengineering research.