* 0307028
* Electrooptic Materials Based on Molecular Compasses and Gyroscopes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Miguel Garcia-Garibay, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/2006
* USD 398,000.00

Photonics technologies demand materials capable of manipulating the
polarization, refraction, and transmission of light. This project comprises a
search for photonic materials with electrooptic and dielectric functions based
on the rotational dynamics of internal dipoles. Toward that end, the preparation
of solids built with molecules having structures and functions that are
analogous to those of macroscopic compasses and gyroscopes are viewed as a
priority. While these solids have been shown to display the expected behavior,
challenges remain in their preparation and on the optimization of their
functions. Current goals include the preparation of structures capable of
responding to alternating current fields in the mega- and terra-Hertz regimes,
and their implementation in a wide range of polymeric materials, and electro-
optical testing. Graduate students engaged in this research receive a thoroughly
interdisciplinary training that includes complex organic synthesis and
techniques for the structural and dynamic characterization of solid materials.
The latter include solid state nuclear magnetic resonance, electronic
spectroscopy, thermal analysis and dielectric spectroscopy. Students benefit
from interactions with collaborators in the Physics, Chemical, and Electric
Engineering Departments at the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA)
and elsewhere, and from a large number of academic activities within the UCLA
IGERT "Materials Creation and Training Program". Three Hispanic Ph.D. students
involved in this project, who are on track to receive their PhD's within the
next two to four years, have an excellent record mentoring undergraduate
students and will continue to do so. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Compasses and
gyroscopes are navigational instruments found in Navy ships and communication
satellites. Molecular versions of these devices are thought to provide new uses
in future technologies. While compasses consist of a rigid box with a magnetized
needle that points towards the field created by the Earth's magnetic north,
gyroscopes possess a rapidly rotating wheel capable of reporting otherwise
unsuspected changes in direction (by virtue of its angular momentum). The
molecular versions of compasses and gyroscopes studied in this project have
analogous properties. Molecular compasses have a reorienting "polar needle"
capable of finding the strongest external field, and molecular gyroscopes have a
rotating group that helps the molecule resists changes in direction. This
project intends to exploit the collective behavior of millions of such
molecules, put to work together in novel displays and optical computers. Large
arrays of molecular compasses or molecular gyroscopes have been designed to
self-assemble and act together collectively. In doing that, millions and
millions of needles changing their direction in unison will be able to bend,
twist and block beams of light as required for display applications and optical
computers. Materials made with molecular gyroscopes will have the ability of
sensing fields that change with speeds that are about 100 million-million times
faster than the fastest liquid crystal displays, and about one thousand times
faster than the processors of our fastest office computers. This project is co-
funded by the Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry
Division.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;