* 0307867
* Extending Retrieval with Stepping Stones and Pathways
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Edward Fox, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2006
* USD 124,250.00

Millions of users of information retrieval systems each day seek useful items,
but many are frustrated with the results received. Often, better results can be
found when a query is split into parts that cover different but connected
aspects of the information need. Sometimes a small set of (2-3) documents is
needed as an answer instead of a single document.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project researches an alternative interpretation of user queries and
presentation of the results. It has the potential to improve retrieval results
whenever there is a mismatch between a user's understanding of the collection
and the actual collection content. A probabilistic retrieval scheme is employed
with: a framework based on belief networks which can combine multiple sources of
evidence; and user feedback at document, cluster (group), and relationship
(e.g., citation or hypertext link) levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Query results in
this interpretation are networks of document groups representing topics, each
group relating and connected to other groups in the network that partially
answer the user's information need. New and more effective representations and
techniques help users visualize these results. The user is part of the retrieval
process, and can manipulate the network of content. The system can provide
deeper support of the user's need, in a way that goes well beyond traditional
relevance feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve scores of
students (including those in minority and under-represented groups) in
information retrieval studies, leading to several world-accessible electronic
theses and dissertations, and improved search methods. Because of this research,
scientists and the public in general should be able to more easily search for
answers to complex questions. Software and collections developed will be
available to other researchers. Results will be shared at workshops and
conferences and with companies such as AOL, and made available at the project's
Web site (http://fox.cs.vt.edu/SSP/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;