* 0307766
* KISS - KPNO International Spectroscopic Survey
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* John Salzer, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2008
* USD 417,986.00



AST-0307766 Salzer Galaxies with active nuclei (AGN) or intense starbursts
represent the most energetic phenomena known in the universe, and much of our
knowledge of them has come from objective-prism surveys using Schmidt telescopes
and photographic plates. The Kitt Peak National Observatory (KPNO) International
Spectroscopic Survey, or KISS, combines the benefits of a traditional Schmidt
objective prism survey with the advantages of using a CCD detector. So far, the
survey has been a tremendous success, detecting 2157 emission-line galaxy (ELG)
candidates at a density 168 times higher than the famous Markarian survey. The
large, deep samples obtained with KISS provide exciting new opportunities to
study activity of all types, and will allow us better to understand this
activity in the context of galaxy formation and evolution in general. This
particular project builds on the survey's existing successes, extending it to
additional regions on the sky and expanding its redshift range, and enhancing
the scientific return with high quality follow-up spectra from a variety of
large telescopes. All of the KISS data products are freely available to all
members of the community.

In addition to being extremely productive in terms of scientific results, the
KISS project has been the centerpiece for an active program of involving
undergraduate students in meaningful research. To date a dozen undergraduate and
nine master's students have participated. All have experienced scientific
research first-hand, a dozen have written theses based on their work, and
several have already co-authored papers. Students from traditionally under-
represented groups make up 71% of the KISS student researchers. ***