* 0307098
* Proposal to Operate and Analyze Data from the High Resolution Fly's Eye Detector (Part IV)
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Pierre Sokolsky, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 03/31/2007
* USD 4,364,217.00

This is a proposal requesting funds to continue to operate the High Resolution
Fly's Eye (HiRes) Observatory located on the U.S. Army's Dugway Proving Ground,
Utah. The detector is comprised of two stations, separated by 12.6 km, which
detect ultra high-energy cosmic rays via nitrogen fluorescence in the
atmosphere. The goals of the experiment are to study the spectrum, composition,
and anisotropy of cosmic rays starting from 1018 eV to beyond 1020 eV. Previous
experiments have shown evidence that the spectrum continues past the predicted
Greisen-Zatsepin-Kuzmin (GZK) cutoff. The nature of the events above the cutoff
is a puzzle and has stimulated much theoretical speculation. Monocular HiRes
data strongly confirm the dip structure observed by the stereo Fly's Eye at
3x1018 eV and the hardening of the spectrum around the GZK cut-off energy. A few
outstanding events are observed above 1020 eV. Both the location of the dip
structure and the flux of events above 1020 eV are in significant disagreement
with published results from the AGASA ground array. This proposal describes how
the additional operation of this detector will resolve these and other
outstanding issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HiRes has developed a vigorous
educational outreach program, called ASPIRE. This project, conducted in
collaboration with the Utah State Office of Education, communicates the
excitement of the HiRes scientific research to the general public. The
collaboration proposes to continue this successful outreach
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;