* 0307578
* Theoretical Investigations of the Equation of State for Stellar Interiors
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Forrest Rogers, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Briley
* 07/31/2007
* USD 338,998.00

AST 0307578&lt;br/&gt;PI Dappen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Helioseismology has opened
a two-way street, making the Sun's interior a laboratory to study temperature
and pressure relationships of a hot dense gases under conditions that cannot be
achieved on Earth. With the wealth of data from the Global Oscillation Network
Group (GONG) and the spacecraft SOHO, now is a perfect opportunity for applying
the extensive datasets from these solar oscillation frequency experiments to the
study of the 'equation of state' describing the solar interior. Although the
non-ideal effects are relatively small corrections (typically 1-10% of the
pressure), the extraordinary observational accuracy makes the helioseismic data
sensitive to them, imposing stringent constraints on their theoretical
computation to the required level. Among the physical effects to be examined are
the mechanism of pressure ionization, the influence and disappearance of bound
states in denser plasmas, and the influence of the excited states in bound
systems in the plasma (atoms, ions, molecules). Indirectly the solar experiment
also addresses a wider range of plasmas, with applications to lower-mass stars,
brown dwarfs, or laser shock experiments. Solar physics will also benefit and
improved solar models will result. They will serve as the tools to tackle the
future challenges of solar physics, such as the seat of the solar cycle, solar
variability of all kinds, as well as other key issues in the Sun-Earth
connection. A major thrust of the analysis is the application of analytic tools,
geared to equation-of-state diagnostics, developed with the support of the
preceding NSF award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research is
given by (i) the benefit of the research activity for the P.I.'s teaching, at
all levels, including General Education, (ii) the training of the P.I.'s current
and future graduate students, (iii) the free dissemination of equation-of-state
and opacity tables that the P.I. and Co-P.I. will continue, (iv) a potential
societal benefit, because of the link of the proposed work to fundamental fusion
research, and last, but not least, (v) it happens that the P.I.'s three current
and one prospective graduate students are all women, which helps to broaden the
participation of women in science.&lt;br/&gt;