* 0307052
* The Violent Interstellar Medium at the Galactic Center
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Cornelia Lang, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Brian M. Patten
* 08/31/2007
* USD 271,314.00

AST 0307052&lt;br/&gt;Lang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Cornelia Lang will carry out
an extensive observational program to investigate the astrophysics of the
violent interstellar medium in the central regions of the Milky Way galaxy. The
goal&lt;br/&gt;of this program is to use both recent and proposed multi-
wavelength observations of the central&lt;br/&gt;200 pc of the Galaxy to put
together a more complete picture of the interstellar processes in
this&lt;br/&gt;physically-extreme region. In particular, she will (1) elucidate
the complex physical arrangement&lt;br/&gt;and associations of stellar and
interstellar components in the Galactic Center using a combination&lt;br/&gt;of
high-resolution, atomic hydrogen absorption data from the Very Large Array and
existing multi-&lt;br/&gt;wavelength datasets. (2) Secondly, she will
investigate the relationship of the magnetic field in&lt;br/&gt;the Galactic
Center to the diffuse interstellar components (e.g. ionized, molecular and very
hot&lt;br/&gt;gas) and the role it plays in the transport of energy out of the
nucleus using existing and future&lt;br/&gt;radio polarimetric and X-ray
datasets. Comparisons between the magnetized and other
interstellar&lt;br/&gt;components are crucial to determining the physical
processes at work in this environment. The&lt;br/&gt;level of detail that can be
observed in the central few hundred parsecs of the Galaxy
vastly&lt;br/&gt;exceeds the resolution with which one can probe the nuclear
regions of other galaxies. Ultimately,&lt;br/&gt;this type of investigation of
the violent processes occurring in our own Galactic Center will
provide&lt;br/&gt;insight as to the nature of violent processes occurring in the
nuclear regions of other galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a key aspect of the
research program, Dr. Lang will be working with the Women&lt;br/&gt;in Science
and Engineering (WISE) program at the University of Iowa to involve
traditionally&lt;br/&gt;under-represented female physics and astronomy students
(both undergraduate and graduate) in&lt;br/&gt;an active research collaboration.
In addition to carrying out the proposed observations and analysis&lt;br/&gt;of
Galactic Center data, Dr. Lang and her students will create a web-based, multi-
wavelength&lt;br/&gt;Galactic Center resource for members of the scientific
community, teachers of all levels, and the&lt;br/&gt;general
public.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;