* 0307539
* Investigation of Lower Crustal and Uppermost Mantle Structure beneath the Illinois Basin Based on Reprocessing of High-Quality Industry Seismic Reflection Profiles
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* John McBride, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2005
* USD 99,889.00

Investigation of Lower Crustal and Uppermost Mantle Structure
beneath&lt;br/&gt;the Illinois Basin Based on Reprocessing of High-Quality
Industry&lt;br/&gt;Seismic Reflection
Profiles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0307539&lt;br/&gt;John
McBride&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-quality
vibroseis-source seismic reflection profiles from the Illinois Basin, will be
reprocessed in order to extend the presently processed record from 4 seconds
(~12 km depth) to 20 seconds (~68 km depth) in order to provide information on
the structure and origin of the lower crust and uppermost mantle beneath a
poorly studied area of the Midcontinent USA. Preliminary test processing of the
records confirms that the sub-Moho lithosphere is highly reflective (including
correlations between cross lines), which is unusual for deep seismic reflection
records from the USA, and thus assures a high probability of providing new
images of lower crust and uppermost mantle structure. An ultimate objective will
be to furnish geophysical constraints on interpreting the origin of an intra-
cratonic basin, like the Illinois Basin. The proven technique of vibroseis
extended re-correlation will be used in conjunction with state-of-the-art data
processing, including extensive testing of various filtering routines for noise
suppression, pre-stack depth and conventional time migration, and 2.5-D
visualization and mapping of lower crust and mantle reflectors using Landmark
Graphics work-station based processing modules. The fact that unambiguous mantle
reflectivity has been virtually unknown from the many thousands of kilometers of
deep seismic reflections surveys conducted in the USA means that the present
study will add considerably to our knowledge of mantle reflectivity beneath
North America. This project will provide one M. S. Geology graduate student with
a unique research experience in processing and interpreting high-quality deep
seismic reflection data using state-of-the-art technology. In addition, one
Earth Science and Space Education undergraduate major will work with and assist
the graduate student in formulating a classroom and poster/computer
demonstration of deep seismology for secondary (K-12) application. &lt;br/&gt;