* 0307063
* Evaluating the Relationship between Species- and Assemblage-Level Stability in the Neogene of the Dominican Republic
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2002,06/30/2003
* Carol Tang, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2003
* USD 13,530.00

9903151 Tang

In order to investigate whether community-level dynamics play a role in the
origination and turnover of individual species, bulk fossil samples will be
collected in the extensively studied Neogene sections of the Dominican Republic.
The sections exposed in the Cibao Valley contain a rich fossil fauna that has
been employed in a series of intensive quantitative analyses of the tempo and
mode of speciation. These studies document unambiguous episodes of morphological
stasis and punctuated speciation in multiple lineages of bryozoans and molluscs.
The faunal and paleoecological context of these well-studied speciation patterns
has not been investigated in detail previously. This study will establish a
quantitative paleoecological context for these episodes of stasis and change in
order to answer a suite of interrelated theoretical questions concerning the
relationship between species-level stasis and community-level stability. This
study will investigate the interaction between community- and species-levels
processes by addressing the following questions: (1) To what extent do stable
faunal assemblages persist in the face of physical, environmental, and biotic
disruption in the Neogene of the Dominican Republic? (2) Are changes in
biofacies composition concentrated in time? (3) Are there times when multiple
lineages undergo morphological shifts in concert? (4) Is there a relationship
between changes in species-level morphology and biofacies composition? This
study will build upon an extensive multidisciplinary research program called the
Dominican Republic Project (DRP) that has focused on the Neogene geology and
paleobiology of the Dominican Republic.