* 0307133
* The Stress Process and the Quality of Life
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Walter Ensel, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2005
* USD 68,287.00

SES-0307133 Walter Ensel SUNY Albany

Sociological research on the stress process to date has focused, primarily, on
psychological well-being as the outcome of interest. This study takes a
different approach in examining the stress model. Responding to recent calls for
the study of multiple health outcomes that have appeared in the literature on
the sociology of health and social behavior, this project study expands the
concept of well-being to include psychological, physical, and social well-being.
Taken together, these three concepts are viewed as reflecting health related
quality of life. The project also returns to the roots of stress research by re-
examining the role of stressors in the stress process. While sociological
research has focused on current stressors or stressors in the recent past (last
1-3 years), the current project expands the time frame for the measurement of
stressors to include childhood stressors as well as more moderate (last 15
years) and recent stressors. The major research question explored is "Does
childhood adversity impact the quality of life in adulthood? If so, what is the
nature of this pathway? The study involves secondary analysis of data from a
five-wave panel study that spans the period 1979-1994. Specifically, the study
will: (1) examine bivariate relationships between childhood stressors and three
types of well-being, (2) examine 3 separate models of the life stress process in
which childhood stressors, along with other stressors are examined for their
effects on three types of well-being, (3) examine the extent to which recent
stressors mediate/moderate the effects of earlier stressors on three types of
well-being, (4) examine the direct and mediating/moderating effect of resources
on well-being, and (5) test a general stress model that simultaneously includes
all three indicators of health related quality of life.

A broader impact of the current project will be the enhancement of our
understanding of the effect which exposure to stressful life events early in
life can have on our current health-related environment. It holds promise for
informing health researchers and policymakers as to the importance of past
stresses and strains and the role these psycho-social risk factors play in
effecting current every day life. A reduction in the effects of these risk
factors would result in an improvement of the health of all subgroups in the
population. Results of the work will be broadly disseminated to an
interdisciplinary audience.