* 0307961
* Theoretical Investigations of SZ Effects and Small-scale CMB Polarization and Temperature Anisotropies
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Lloyd Knox, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 06/30/2007
* USD 340,711.00

AST-0307961 Knox The PI will carry out theoretical investigations to maximize
the scientific return from surveys of the Sunyaev-Zeldovich Effect (SZE) in
galaxy clusters, and to motivate measurements of the polarization and
temperature anisotropies of the Cosmic Microwave Background radiation (CMB) with
an angular resolution five to ten times better than that of planned space
missions. Those observations will tighten the current cosmological parameter
constraints as well as provide very restrictive limits on the dark energy
equation of state and on the neutrino mass. For the SZE surveys the
investigation will focus on galaxy cluster peculiar velocities and how to use
them as cosmological probes in a way expected to be highly complementary to
supernova observations. By creating synthetic multi-frequency observations of
galaxy clusters, and studying the dependence on experimental parameters and
cluster parameters, the project will also understand the rewards of peculiar
velocity observations and how to reap those rewards. The developed tools will
help in other areas, such as how to make galaxy cluster number counts a
precision cosmological probe.

Constraining cosmological parameters with high-resolution CMB data is
complicated by the interaction of the CMB photons with the local Universe, via
Thomson scattering and gravitational lensing. However, these complications can
also prove a boon since they offer a means of probing the dark energy and the
dark ages. This work will produce forecasts that take into account these higher
order effects, and will quantify how well higher order statistics can be used to
probe the dark energy and the dark ages. These results will guide the design of
planned instruments, perhaps motivate new ones, and lay the groundwork for
future data analysis.

Two undergraduates (including one from an under-represented group) and two
graduate students each year will contribute to the research program. Materials
from the research program will be used in a lower division astronomy course, an
upper division astrophysics course, and an advanced graduate course. There will
also be public lectures about the results and a generally accessible web site to
be created by an undergraduate student.