* 0307592
* Off-the-shelf Learning Algorithms for Structural Supervised Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Thomas Dietterich, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel F. DeMenthon
* 11/30/2007
* USD 464,176.00

This project will develop machine learning algorithms, software tools, and
supporting theory for solving structural supervised learning problems. Existing
theory and algorithms have focused on learning an unknown function from training
examples, where the unknown function maps from a feature vector to one of a
small number of classes. Emerging applications in science and industry require
learning much more complex functions that map from complex input spaces (e.g.,
2-dimensional maps, time series, sequences, and graphs) to complex output spaces
(e.g., other 2-dimensional maps, time series, sequences, and graphs). Examples
include detecting fraudulent transactions in a transaction sequence, assigning
parts of speech (noun, verb, etc.) to each word in a sentence, identifying genes
in DNA sequences, and assigning a land cover class to each pixel in a remote-
sensed image. However, existing statistical, machine learning, and data mining
packages do not provide any support for these complex tasks, nor has machine
learning theory been developed to analyze these tasks. This project will develop
a general formulation of the structural supervised learning (SSL) problem,
design and test a collection of algorithms for solving SSL problems, and develop
a prototype system that will provide "off -the-shelf " tools for practitioners
to develop SSL applications.

This project will have several broader impacts. First, many important problems
confronting society involve finding patterns in sequential, spatial, or
structural data. These include (a) law enforcement challenges, such as detecting
theft of credit cards and health insurance fraud, (b) security challenges, such
as detecting attempts by terrorists to send bombs in shipping containers, (c)
health and safety applications, such as detecting outbreaks of diseases from
temporal and spatial data about emergency room admissions, and (d) ecological
applications, such as monitoring the health of ecosystems by analyzing sequences
of remote-sensed images. The tools and techniques developed in this work can
address all of these problems. Second, the project will train graduate students,
including women (who are underrepresented in computer science), and provide them
opportunities to attend scientific conferences and workshops.