* 0308764
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Systematics and Biogeography of Pocadius and Related Genera (Coleoptera: Nitidulidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Christopher Carlton, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2004
* USD 3,350.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Christopher Carlton and Mr. Andrew Cline at the
LSU Agricultural Center to study puffball mushroom-feeding beetles in the genus
Pocadius within the beetle family Nitidulidae (the "sap beetles"). This will
produce the first analysis of evolutionary relationships using modern
comparative methods for any of the more than 175 genera in the Nitidulidae. The
goals of this research are 1) provide descriptions of the 26 published Pocadius
species and approximately 30 new species, 2) produce a well-illustrated key for
identification of all Pocadius species, 3) define relationships among Pocadius
species, 4) provide descriptions of all genera contained in the tribe Pocadiini,
5) define relationships among genera within the tribe, and 6) discuss
distributional patterns of Pocadius species and analyze their biogeography. To
accomplish these goals comparative morphology and phylogenetic computer software
will be employed to accurately depict the relationships in Pocadius and the
Pocadiini.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These funds will facilitate training of one
Ph.D. student specializing on a group of beetles for which global expertise is
severely limited and the project will serve as a framework for future taxonomic
work. The research will more than double the known species within the genus and
provide a key for future workers to identify them and facilitate descriptions of
additional new species. Goals 1 and 2 will provide products for understanding
and identifying a portion of the Earth's biodiversity and provide useful data
for assessing conservation priorities in particular regions. Goals 3 and 6 are
intimately linked and will help to establish a framework for understanding
patterns of distribution and speciation in fungus-feeding beetles worldwide.
Finally, goals 4 and 5 are necessary for the development of hypotheses of
evolutionary relationships within the diverse nitidulid subfamily Nitidulinae,
which remains problematic and essential for understanding the entire family.
&lt;br/&gt;