* 0308805
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Molecular Evolution of Extracellular Hemoglobins in the Vestimentiferan Tubeworm Ridgeia piscesae
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Stephen Schaeffer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2005
* USD 12,000.00

The tubeworm Ridgeia piscesae of the hydrothermal vents in the northeast Pacific
Ocean uses extracellular hemoglobins to deliver environmental sulfide to
intracellular bacteria, which in turn uses sulfide to create sugars for the
host. R. piscesae displays several different growth forms depending on the
temperature and chemistry of vent fluids. The growth forms of R. piscesae are
genetically identical, but why R. piscesae shows variation in body shape in
different environments is a mystery. This research will characterize sequence
diversity and gene expression differences of hemoglobin subunits in two R.
piscesae growth forms to determine if this candidate molecule responds to
environmental variation in sulfide levels. Mapping the location of globin genes
within the tubeworm genome will provide a better understanding of how these
genes are regulated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrothermal vents are unique
environments on this planet because organisms use chemical energy rather than
sunlight drives the ecosystem. Genetic studies of Ridgeia piscesae will provide
more insight into how organisms adapt to extreme environments. This research
will provide a unique opportunity to learn if gene expression is influenced by
the environment. Elucidating patterns of DNA sequence variation in globin genes
will also increase our understanding of how environments influence patterns of
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;