* 0308886
* Dissertation Research: Testing an Ecological Hypothesis for the Evolution of Song Development in the Agelaius and Quiscalus Blackbirds (Passeriformes: Icteridae)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Donald Kroodsma, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jerry O. Wolff
* 07/31/2005
* USD 11,470.00

Dissertation Research: Testing an Ecological Hypothesis for the Evolution of
Song Development in the Agelaius and Quiscalus Blackbirds (Passeriformes:
Icteridae)

DONALD E. KROODSMA AND ELIJAH A. GOODWIN

The stunning diversity of vocal learning strategies in the songbirds provides an
outstanding resource for understanding animal communication. Despite major
advances in our understanding of the mechanisms of song production and song
learning, however, we still lack a clear set of hypotheses to explain the
evolution of this wide variety in learning styles and to relate them back to the
ecology of the animal. To address this need, this study will test and expand
upon the hypothesis that song imitation evolves in concert with breeding
neighborhood stability and that song improvisation evolves in concert with
breeding neighborhood instability. This hypothesis will be tested using
comparative studies of migratory and sedentary species within two genera of
blackbirds, Agelaius and Quiscalus. The study will document the song learning
behavior for each species using a combination of field studies and aviary-
rearing experiments. Field studies will test for song sharing between neighbors
and the presence of micro-geographic song dialects, while the aviary studies
will look for differences in song learning styles by different species raised
under the same conditions.