* 0308724
* A Summer School: Uncertainty and Variability in Ecological Inference, Forecasting, and Decision -- An Introduction to Modern Statistical Computation
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2003,11/30/2004
* Carol Brewer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James T. Morris
* 11/30/2004
* USD 96,020.00

A Summer School: Uncertainty and Variability in Ecological Inference,
Forecasting, and Decision -- An Introduction to Modern Statistical
Computation&lt;br/&gt;Clark, James S.&lt;br/&gt;Duke
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A two-week, graduate/post-graduate level summer
school is proposed to introduce ecologists and earth scientists to modern
statistical computation techniques that have emerged over the last decade.
Ecological inference and forecasting are limited by large and diverse sources of
variability that operate at a range of scales. Hierarchical Bayes and Markov
chain Monte Carlo simulation provide powerful tools for analyzing processes
characterized by multiple sources of uncertainty and variability. However,
adoption of these techniques in ecology has been hindered due to limited
training options. In the proposed summer school, leading statisticians and
ecologists will provide day-long presentations and hands-on training with
computation techniques. Students will include advanced graduate students and
postdoctoral associates selected by an open application process. They will
participate in small working groups that will each produce a chapter to be
included in a published volume, together with lecture notes. By training a
select group of young, quantitative ecologists and earth scientists, who will in
turn train others as well as utilize this training in their research, this
summer school will expedite the dissemination of modern statistical computation
techniques. In addition, the volume that will be published as a result of this
course will serve as a useful reference for a much broader audience. Adoption of
these modern methods by ecologists and earth scientists will strengthen the
field of ecological forecasting, enhance its reputation, and increase it
usefulness to resource managers and policy makers.&lt;br/&gt;