* 0308464
* BE/CNH:  Impact of Economics-Driven Land-Use Decisions on Watershed Health
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2003,02/28/2006
* Benjamin Stinner, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2006
* USD 99,990.00

Agriculture is the dominant human influence over most of the world's land
surface, including nearly a million square miles in the U.S. Agriculture has
changed the structure and function of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems
dramatically, so that far from being self-regulating and in equilibrium,
agroecosystems depend heavily on non-renewable inputs. Their comparative
simplicity makes agroecosystems much less nutrient conservative than their
natural counterparts. Furthermore, agroecosystems are a major source of nutrient
loading and subsequent loss of biodiversity to aquatic systems worldwide. While
complexity in agroecosystems often is low biophysically, these systems are much
more complex when the human socio-economic systems are included. Ultimately it
is this complex system of human values, beliefs, and social constructs,
including economics, that determine the ecological structure and function of
agroecosystems. Efforts to restore ecological function to agricultural
landscapes will be successful only if they include both the human and
biophysical dimensions of these systems. During the past three years, a
multidisciplinary team of ecological and social scientists has been developing a
framework and approach to agroecosystem restoration that integrates both natural
and social capital required for effective restoration of ecological function to
the Sugar Creek Watershed in northeast Ohio. The objectives of this research
planning grant are: (1) to benchmark the social, physical, and ecological
features of the headwater tributaries that most directly relate to understanding
the linkages between managed terrestrial and aquatic systems; (2) to create
increased awareness of watershed ecology, and motivate farmers to use, and
others to encourage the use of agricultural practices that improve water
quality, and (3) to restore biodiversity and ecosystem function on a tributary
by tributary basis of whole landscapes including both agricultural and non-
agricultural areas. The planning process will focus on bringing in additional
investigators with expertise in key areas, developing the necessary experiments
and data sets on which to build plans for a fuller project, and expanding an
education component that ultimately will integrate student participation into
the project and further link researchers, farmers, and students in a learning
process.

Increasing biocomplexity from microbial to human interaction scales in primary
headwater watersheds will enhance the social and economic sustainability of
agroecosystems and will decrease agriculture's ecological impact. Only by
integrating the social dynamics among neighboring farmers as a community will
the ecological compatibility between terrestrial and aquatic systems be
improved. In the long-term, the investigators expect to evaluate the impact of
restored and unrestored headwaters on downstream areas through permanent
monitoring stations. They also expect to use the data from these on-site
experiments to model impacts at sub-basin and overall watershed levels. The
restorations examined through this project will serve as a primary focal point
for developing the research framework and team-building efforts. Longer-term
educational efforts include training for elementary and secondary school
teachers. Farmers from the Sugar Creek watershed will present case studies on
agriculture and their restoration efforts to school and other lay audiences.
Future emphasis will be on using ecological processes as management strategies
at field, farm, and community/subwatershed scales. This project is supported by
an award resulting from the FY 2003 special competition in Biocomplexity in the
Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.