* 0308498
* IDEA: Large-Scale Wireless Sensor Networks for In Situ Observation of Ecosystem Processes
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Paul Flikkema, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Nily R. Dan
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,806,200.00

A grant has been awarded to Northern Arizona University under the direction of
Dr. Paul Flikkema for the development and deployment of a wireless sensor
network for the purpose of enabling a better understanding of environmental and
ecosystem processes across multiple scales. Progress in an array of
technologies, including microelectronic sensing and computation, wireless
communication, and the self-assembly of autonomous devices into cooperative
networks has inspired the vision of wireless sensor networks. While networks of
intelligent agents transparently embedded into our physical environment could
advance human welfare in a number of domains, research indicates that any
successful wireless sensor network must be carefully optimized for its
application. Our goals are to (i) complete the development of wireless
environmental sensor network technology, (ii) make significant progress in
understanding the maintenance of biodiversity and in measuring ecosystem
properties by applying this technology to three field projects, (iii) build
awareness of the benefits of the technology to society, and (iv) improve
collaboration between engineering and the sciences. The instrumentation
development component of this project builds on a successful seed effort in
which we have constructed a small proof-of-concept wireless environmental
sensing network. We will build a "distributed instrument"--a prototype network
comprising hundreds of palm-sized wireless sensors. In anticipation of this
prototype development, we have paid careful attention to ensuring that our
networking technology will scale up to thousands of sensors, providing dense
coverage at landscape geographic scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prototype
network technology will be deployed to enable a new degree of data quality in
three diverse field studies. First, we will probe the role of the role of fine-
scale environmental phenomena in the maintenance of ecosystem diversity in two
Eastern US forests. The second experiment maps the complexity of microclimates
and their effects on biodiversity in the crowns of the coastal redwoods of
California. And in the third field study, we will determine the effects of scale
on eddy covariance measurements of ecosystem energy balance in Northern Arizona.
The results of these studies will have global implications for biological
diversity and ecosystem function. Our education efforts will improve scientific
and technological literacy for everyone from researchers to the general public.
1) We will convey the scientific advances made possible by this research to a
global audience of students, the public, land mangers, and policy makers through
hands-on activities, an interactive cd-rom, and a website. 2) Our efforts in
training students from under-represented groups and in training across
biological and engineering disciplines will contribute to broadening cultural
perspectives in the sciences. 3) We will disseminate knowledge of wireless
sensor networks to an interdisciplinary and international group of researchers
through a workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to have a
spectrum of broader impacts: it will 1) convey the scientific advances made
possible by this research to students, the public, land mangers, and policy
makers through hands-on activities, an interactive CD-ROM, and a website; 2)
educate students from under-represented groups and across biological and
engineering disciplines, broadening cultural perspectives in the sciences; and
3) disseminate knowledge of wireless sensor networks to an interdisciplinary and
international group of researchers through workshops.&lt;br/&gt;