* 0308133
* Opportunities in Block Copolymers:  Reactive Rod/Coils and  Magnetooptic Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Edwin Thomas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Freddy Khoury
* 06/30/2008
* USD 620,000.00

The research proposed will further the possibility that block copolymers gain
entry into higher value, high technology applications, such as chemically
patterned surface coatings, lithographic masks and improved optical components.
To this end, the investigator proposes two broadly related fundamental research
areas: (1) creation of nanopatterns with surface-reactive rod/coil diblock
copolymers and (2) fabrication of tunable magneto-optical materials from
nanoparticle-filled block copolymers. In both these projects, the PI's previous
experience with block copolymer processing and structure-property
characterization will provide a firm base to build structure and chemical
interactions between the host copolymer and a substrate and/or an applied field,
or between the host polymer and surface engineered nanoparticles determines the
resultant nanocomposite morphology will permit attainment of new and enhanced
physical properties. Improved insight into the principles of how to best create
ordered block copolymer based systems will have broad applicability to a host of
emerging technologies. Key to this will be knowledge of how the processing
conditions interplay with chemical structure to achieve desirable end states and
thus afford superior materials based on BCPs.

Rod/coil BCPs and their blends with both coil- and rod-homopolymers are largely
unexplored and present an opportunity to learn about the role of liquid
crystallinity on microphase separation. Emphasis will be on rod/coil - coil
blends to investigate rod BCP micelles, and on the presence of reactive groups
on the rod block to provide means for locking-in morphologics, for tuning
substrate interaction, and to create synthetic anistropic organic nano-objects,
which can then be employed as unique building blocks in hierarchical self
assembly. Self assembled nanocomposites based on polymer-inorganic materials
with magnetic field tunable optical properties will be produced by spatially
templating superparamagnetic nanoparticles in BCPs. Surface engineering
nanoparticles will be sequestered in the BCP and should display superior
properties over the corresponding bulk materials due to their small size (single
domain particles). By choosing a BCP that has sufficient molecular weight so
that the microdomains' periodicity provides a visible wavelength photonic ban
gap (PBG), these researchers will fabricate a magnetic field tunable PBG
materials. Such materials have potential as polarization rotators and optical
isolators ("one way light valves") via the field dependent Verdet constant of
the composite. In addition, the experimental data set of nanoparticle-BDP
morphologies will be used to compare to recent theoretical models of the
geometry of nanoparticle-BCP self-assembly.

This project has several ways to impact society. Visits of graduate students to
other universities and to industry are envisioned to give them a broader
experience, as well as to access to novel instrumentation. The PI has several
highly productive collaborations: C. Ober and S. Gruner (Cornell) - block
copolymer synthesis and synchrotron scattering (routine visits by 3-4 students
to CHESS and short (one week) periods to Ober lab; S. Margel (Var-Llan, Israel)
- nanoparticle synthesis (due to the present situation in Israel, no students
have yet visited his lab) and B. Lotz Strasbourg) - TEM and electron diffraction
characterization (month long visit to CNRS). The PI has recent experience co-
founding a start up (Omni Guide Communications, Inc.) with another professor and
a former graduate student, affording a perspective on how to undertake tech
transfer from the university into the market place. Over the past 12 years, the
PI has filed a total of 15 patent disclosures and 5 patents have been issued. In
addition, the PI's group has always hosted several undergraduates, called UROPs,
at MIT. Their successful participation in research is attested by co-authorzship
of several publications.