* 0308392
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  From Individuals to Populations:  Female Decisions and Group Size Variation in Barn Swallows
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* David Winkler, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 06/30/2004
* USD 7,579.00

FROM INDIVIDUALS TO POPULATIONS: FEMALE DECISIONS AND GROUP SIZE VARIATION IN
BARN SWALLOWS PROJECT SUMMARY Using information gathered experimentally on the
individual habitat- and mate-selection decisions of barn swallows to model
population-level patterns of group size variation, this study offers a new
perspective for examining the causes and consequences of group breeding. The
samples necessary to evaluate the relationship between a known signal of
individual quality, feather coloration, and the social and genetic mate choice
of females across different group sizes were collected during a field experiment
in 2002. Funds are requested to conduct genetic parentage analyses using
variation in five polymorphic microsatellite loci. These data will (1) provide
information about the differences between social and genetic mates selection and
whether these vary with group size; (2) are necessary to parameterize the mate
selection rules for an agent-based model; and (3) will also add to our knowledge
of the effects of density on female mate choice decisions, a relationship that
has only once been examined experimentally and has potentially large impacts on
sexual selection. Additionally, the genotype data will be used for the
independent honor's thesis of a Cornell undergraduate and the DNA samples will
be deposited in the Cornell Lab of Ornithology's Genetics Facility and made
widely available to other researchers.