* 0308197
* NSF Workshop on Distributed Communications and Signal Processing for Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2003,07/31/2003
* Aggelos Katsaggelos, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2003
* USD 40,802.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0308197&lt;br/&gt;Thrasyvoulos Pappas&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern
Univ&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of distributed sensor networks for data
gathering and analysis is one of the key emerging technologies at the beginning
of the 21st century. Such networks consist of a possibly large number of devices
(nodes) equipped with multiple sensors (acoustic, imaging, video, seismic,
magnetic, infrared, micro-radar, etc.), storage and processing capability, and
wireless communication links to neighboring nodes and/or a central
location.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distributed sensor networks offer a lot of
exciting possibilities for a number of applications, ranging from environmental
monitoring, to industrial process control, to military and security
applications, to health monitoring. They also pose a lot of challenging problems
for research that derive from the distributed nature of the network, the
multimodal nature of the information collected by the sensors, the reliability
of the individual nodes, the bandwidth and impairments of the communication
links, the power consumption constraints, and the dynamic nature of the overall
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in several domains, including
sensor technologies, computational speed, storage capacity, networking, and
miniaturization, make the project possible and set the stage for significant
breakthroughs. A substantial research effort on various aspects of the problem
is already under way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recent issue of the IEEE Signal
Processing magazine summarizes some of the ongoing research in the area of
signal processing. A substantial effort is coordinated by the DARPA Sensor
Information Technology (SensIT) Program, whose mission is the development of all
necessary software for networked micro-sensors. SensIT was founded on the
concept of a networked system of cheap, pervasive platforms that combine
multiple sensor types, embedded processors, positioning ability and wireless
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will take place at the Allen
Center on Northwestern University's Evanston campus and its duration will be two
days. The goal of the proposed workshop will be to identify fundamental research
directions in the signal processing and communications areas, the advancement of
which will lead to major breakthroughs in the specific focus areas as well as
important scientific progress, in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the
discussions of the workshop, a report will be generated that will provide advice
to NSF on promising directions for near and long term research in the area of
distributed communications and signal processing for sensor networks. The report
will also be used to clarify the soon to be announced call for proposals under
the title "Sensors and Sensor Networks for Information, Decision and
Action."&lt;br/&gt;