* 0308019
* Multi-scale Phenomena in Macromolecular Fluids and Nano-Composite Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* M Forest, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 167,000.00

The goal of this research is the development of a mathematical&lt;br/&gt;theory,
models, and computational tools which underpin the design and&lt;br/&gt;of
macromolecular materials and nano-composites. These materials
are&lt;br/&gt;comprised of anisotropic molecules (nematic polymers), which
undergo a&lt;br/&gt;spontaneous disorder-order transition above a critical
concentration.&lt;br/&gt;Materials made from nematic polymers achieve their
properties through&lt;br/&gt;the collective molecular alignment structure.
Specific molecular&lt;br/&gt;elements yield diverse property enhancements, from
strength (the&lt;br/&gt;Dupont product Kevlar and spider silk), to electrical
conductivity&lt;br/&gt;(carbon tubes and conducting polymers), to barrier
penetration&lt;br/&gt;properties (discotic clay platelets). The major
technological&lt;br/&gt;challenge is to extend results with fibers to other
geometries such as&lt;br/&gt;films and molds. However, in typical laminar
processing flows, the&lt;br/&gt;molecular response is highly sensitive to flow
type and strength, and&lt;br/&gt;to molecular properties such as shape and
concentration. In addition&lt;br/&gt;to complex dynamics, during flow processing
there is a spatial&lt;br/&gt;conflict between interior flow response and
molecular anchoring&lt;br/&gt;conditions at solid boundaries. The result is that
instead of a&lt;br/&gt;uniform molecular orientational distribution, as in fiber
processing&lt;br/&gt;flows, film and mold flows always generate morphology on
length scales&lt;br/&gt;between the molecules and the processing devices. These
ubiquitous&lt;br/&gt;structures are not understood, either theoretically or
experimentally,&lt;br/&gt;yet they dictate the effective properties of the end-
use materials.&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this award will help to
understand the dynamics&lt;br/&gt;and structures that occur in typical laminar
flows of nematic&lt;br/&gt;polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern
high-performance materials and nano-composites are primarily&lt;br/&gt;designed
with simple elements, from rod-like to platelet molecules.&lt;br/&gt;Remarkable
property enhancements have been achieved thus far in&lt;br/&gt;laboratory-scale
experiments, with increased strength and durability,&lt;br/&gt;the ability to
shield heat or gases, and to tune electromagnetic wave&lt;br/&gt;transmission.
The technological challenge is to scale these&lt;br/&gt;experimental results to
industrially viable processes and materials.&lt;br/&gt;The challenge to
mathematics and computational science is to build a&lt;br/&gt;solid foundation
of theory, modeling, and simulation tools from which&lt;br/&gt;to design and
control the processes and final material properties.&lt;br/&gt;The theory of
flowing molecules in confined spaces is still unable to&lt;br/&gt;predict and
control the molecular structure created during flow&lt;br/&gt;processing. Yet
micron-scale molecular structures always occur in&lt;br/&gt;processed films and
molds of nano-composites. Furthermore, the bulk&lt;br/&gt;material performance
properties as well as their failure and damage&lt;br/&gt;modes are dominated by
the molecular structures generated in&lt;br/&gt;processing. The award will
support a research program combining&lt;br/&gt;theory, modeling, simulations,
and comparisons with laboratory data in&lt;br/&gt;the dynamics and structure
properties of nematic polymer materials and&lt;br/&gt;nano-composites in
processing flows. These results will be the basis &lt;br/&gt;for the next phase
of the materials pipeline, where bulk material&lt;br/&gt;properties are deduced
from the molecule properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;