* 0308810
* DOCTORAL DISSERTATION: Phylogeny and Character Evolution in the Panicoid/centothecoid Clade (Poaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Lynn Clark, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2004
* USD 5,901.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Lynn Clark and Mr. Jorge G. Sanchez-Ken at Iowa
State University to conduct research on evolutionary relationships within the
panic grasses (also called the Panicoid/Centothecoid clade). Current knowledge
of grass diversity shows two major groups: 1) the bamboos, rices, and
bluegrasses, and 2) the panic grasses, wiregrasses, lovegrasses and reeds. The
latter group comprises about half the species diversity of the grass family
(over 5,000 species), including several major crops and weeds, yet relationships
within this group are still poorly understood, hampering a rigorous
understanding of the evolution of several biologically significant features. The
objectives of this study are 1) reconstruction of major evolutionary
relationships within the panic grasses (a lineage of over 3,000 species
including sorghum, maize, sugarcane, and some important weeds), and 2) the
evolutionary interpretation of flower sexuality, starch grains, and leaf anatomy
within this group. Information from chloroplast and nuclear genes, as well as
morphological data, will be used, and sampling of the poorly understood
Centothecoids and allies will be increased. A preliminary study of changes in
the waxy gene and its effects on the development of the starch grains will be
included.&lt;br/&gt; The broader significance and scientific importance of this
project are that an improved understanding of the evolutionary history and
diversification of a major group of grasses will provide a point of departure
for broader research in fields such as ecology and conservation, crop
improvement, weed control, and molecular biology. A predictive classification
for this lineage will also result, and the first steps in exploring gene
expression in starch grains in grasses will be taken. A graduate student from an
underrepresented group will be provided with advanced training in modern
systematics.&lt;br/&gt;