* 0308926
* Collaborative Research: Paleobiology, Paleoceanography, and Paleoclimatology of a Time Slice through the Late Cretaceous Western Interior Seaway
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Neil Landman, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2006
* USD 18,369.00

ABSTRACT

This multidisciplinary study proposes using O, C, and Sr isotopic analyses of
pristine mollusks found within a single interval delineated by the Late
Campanian Baculites compressus biozone (74 MA; Late Cretaceous) from the Western
Interior Seaway (WIS) to examine four over-arching hypotheses which exploit the
strengths of the PIs and consultant. These are: 1. Geochemical analyses taken
through the ontogeny of individual specimens - sclerochronology (sensu Jones,
1983) - provides annual to subdecadal records of environmental conditions (e.g.,
seasonal temperature fluctuations, water-mass dynamics) that are critical to
understand the dynamics of Late Cretaceous epicontinental seas. 2. Growth rates
and other paleobiologic aspects of Late Campanian organisms, such as migration
patterns, can be established using the sclerochronologic approach. 3. The biota,
especially molluscan elements, occupied different niches within the water column
and on/in the substrate and the signals of these various habitats are captured
in their isotopic signatures. 4. Significant environmental gradients existed in
the WIS, forced by differences in temperature and salinity, and can be measured
and differentiated using oxygen and strontium isotopes from well-preserved
molluscan shells. In addition to addressing our general hypotheses, the isotopic
data will allow us to critically analyze a range of competing paleoceanographic,
paleobiologic, and paleoclimatic hypotheses that have been proposed for the Late
Cretaceous world. These include: circulation patterns within the WIS,
stratification of the WIS, habitat ranges and depths of individual ammonite
taxa, growth rates of Cretaceous molluscs, as well as seasonal fluctuations in
marine temperatures. In order to address the questions posited above, we propose
to undertake a detailed investigation of a single time interval through the Late
Cretaceous in the very fossiliferous PIerre Shale focused on the B. compressus
biozone. Deposition during this biozone was widespread in the WIS and was often
accompanied by exquisite preservation of the fauna, including aragonitic
elements, within early diagenetic concretions. To collect the necessary
specimens, we will sample localities in central Colorado, central and western
South Dakota, and western to eastern Montana that represent north-south and
onshore-offshore transects. We will measure detailed sections at all localities
and collect concretions containing diverse molluscan fauna. Before any isotopic
analysis is undertaken, all specimens will be screened for any evidence of
diagenesis using microscopic as well as geochemical techniques. Those specimens
that pass the diagenetic screening will then be analyzed for d13C and d 18O to
establish their sclerochronologies. Because the value of the aqueous environment
in which the shell material was secreted is critical to deriving accurate
estimates of temperature and salinity, we also propose to analyze a subset of
our samples for their Sr isotopic ratio. Recent studies have shown that in
areas, such as estuaries, where freshwater input is an important component in
the system, that 87 Sr/86 Sr dominantly reflects the salinity rather than
geologic age and our preliminary data suggest that this approach can be
successfully applied to the WIS. These Sr data supply an independent, salinity
proxy with which can better constrain the isotopic composition of the water.
Together, these approaches will allow us to test our three hypotheses and add
significantly to our understanding of the WIS and the macroinvertebrates that
inhabited it. The broader impacts of this study include insights into the short-
term biologic and environ-mental dynamics of greenhouse climate modes. The
anticipated results should have a substantial impact as 'ground truth' for
constraining hypotheses generated about greenhouse climates. It will result also
in the training of several graduate and undergraduate students in a
multidisciplinary project that will introduce them to the synergy between field
and laboratory techniques. As in the past, where underrepresented groups have
been involved in various projects undertaken by the PIs, we will continue to
attempt to involve those students in this endeavor. Furthermore, because this is
a collaborative project involving PIs from universities, a natural-history
museum, and the Federal government, it will necessarily involve networking and
foster interaction among these institutions. The involvement of the AMNH offers
unique opportunities to present these research results to a broad, public
audience. This is especially significant because a better understanding of
greenhouse climate is critical to society's understanding of predicted human-
induced climate change as well as to the larger ramifications that these changes
may entail for future Earth history.