* 0308923
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Pollinator-mediated Interspecific Competition in Ipomoea
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Mark Rausher, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2005
* USD 11,525.00

Self-fertilizing species have evolved repeatedly from outcrossing ancestors in a
number of plant species. Despite the long history of work on plant mating system
evolution, however, there are major gaps in the understanding of the ecological
context in which this evolutionary transition occurs. Several hypotheses link
the evolution of self-fertilization to environmental conditions. One such
hypothesis suggests that self-fertilization can be advantageous when two species
co-occur and compete for shared pollinators, as a means of reducing reliance on
such pollinators or as an isolating mechanism to prevent gene flow between them.
The purpose of the proposed work is to examine this hypothesis in the two
morning glory species Ipomoea hederacea and I. purpurea.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of self- and cross-fertilization has
interested evolutionary biologists from Darwin's time to the present. The
proposed research will be a step towards a greater understanding of the
transition between these two reproductive modes. The competitive interaction
between I. hederacea and I. purpurea will be used as a model to examine the role
self-fertilization may play as a reproductive isolating mechanism, and to
address more mechanistic questions about the specific conditions under which
competition for pollination is likely to favor self-fertilization.&lt;br/&gt;