* 0308772
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Genetic and Ecophysiological Causes of Differential Fitness in a Natural Plant Hybrid Zone
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Diane Campbell, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

Natural hybridization is an important process in the evolution of many plant
species. Determining how selection acts against different hybrid genotypes is
necessary for understanding the likelihood of different outcomes of
hybridization. This study uses a model natural hybrid system between Ipomopsis
aggregata and I. tenuituba to examine potential causes of fitness differences
among hybrids, and thus what processes are important in limiting and promoting
hybridization. Using field and greenhouse experiments, this study examines: (1)
the distribution of nuclear and cytoplasmic genotypes in a natural hybrid
population; (2) the influence of nuclear and cytonuclear interactions on fitness
of hybrid genotypes, and if these interactions are environment-dependent; (3)
ecophysiological variation among hybrid and parental genotypes that may affect
relative performance across environmental conditions in a hybrid zone.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This work uses an integrated approach that examines both
genetic and ecological factors that may influence the outcome of natural
hybridization. Understanding how these factors affect differential hybrid
fitness is necessary for understanding the evolutionary consequences of
hybridization, and ultimately gene flow between species. Such information about
hybrid zone dynamics has broad implications for evaluating the potential impacts
of hybridization between native and exotic or genetically modified species.
&lt;br/&gt;