* 0308340
* Assessment of Indirect Radiative Effects of Aerosols Using Aircraft and Satellite Data Collected During the Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX)
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Guosheng Liu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 04/30/2007
* USD 232,166.00

The focus of this project is the use of state-of-the-art techniques for
retrieving cloud optical properties, utilizing both in-situ and satellite data
from the Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX) to quantify the first and second
indirect effects of aerosols on clouds, that is the effects on cloud albedo and
on cloud lifetime. The principal research objectives are to: (a) retrieve and
collocate liquid water path, effective radius, cloud number concentration, and
cloud thickness data; (b) develop and validate a technique for drizzle/rain
detection using the ratio of the liquid water path derived from microwave
brightness temperatures to the liquid water path derived from solar
reflectances; (c) estimate the interrelated terms that determine cloud particle
size, and use them to assess aerosol indirect radiative effects, and (d) extend
the methodology to satellite measurements to gain better temporal and spatial
coverage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modeling community will benefit from a better
quantification of aerosol indirect effects. Further, the synergetic use of
different airborne instruments is a necessary step before combining data from
similar spaceborne instruments and developing cloud products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One post-doc and one graduate student will also receive
scientific guidance and training during their contribution to this study. The
project also promotes collaboration between Florida State University, the
Georgia Institute of Technology, and the National Center for Atmospheric
Research.