* 0308666
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: Integrated Computational-Experimental Program for Ductility and Failure in Cast Aluminum Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Somnath Ghosh, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 06/30/2008
* USD 295,000.00

Integrated computational- experimental program for ductility and failure in cast
aluminum alloys &lt;br/&gt;Somnath Ghosh, Bhaskar Majumdar and Steve Harris
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's The automotive industry is faced with major
challenge of improvedmustis faced with major challenges to improve performance
to and reduce weight ratio in order to meet lofty fuel efficiency and emissions
standards at low cost. Improved mAs designs become more complex and the power
output requirements increase, the practical limits of their ductility and
ultimate strength are being reached.,. which Scrapped parts and downtime can
cost a manufacturer millions of dollars in terms of scrapped parts and downtime.
Compounding The proposed Industry-University Collaborative GOALI research is
aimed at addressing thisese issues for meeting goals of materials with high
ductility, ultimate strength and strength at low cost. It will build a
collaborative relation between the Ohio State University (PI), New Mexico
Institute of Technology and Ford Research Laboratory (industry partner) to
launch an integrated experimental-computational research program. The program
will augment a major thrust area at FRLord called Virtual Aluminum Casting or
VAC that is targeted to (a) reduce product development time (b), improve quality
and performance, and reduce scrap and (c) improve performance and lower weight,
and (d) reduce costs. &lt;br/&gt;and cycle time. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed program
will develop a system of experimentally validated adaptive multiple scale
computational models for predicting localization and ductile fracture of cast
Al-Si components from microstructural information and process conditions. The
models will simulate the evolution of microstructural features such as voids and
secondary phases into incipient cracks and determine how the loss of
ductilityductile failure depends on alloy properties and on the , distributions
and interactions of different phases in the microstructure. The mechanics of
particle fracture, interface decohesion, matrix rupture and damage percolation
through the dendritic network will be studied. The role of porosity size and
distribution on failure will also be investigated. Various dDevelopmental
modules will include: (i) Quantitative metallography using SEM, and orientation
imaging microscopy (OIM), and microstructural characterization to identify and
characterize critical microstructure features that control important material
response; (ii) Mechanical tests accompanied bywith in-situ SEM and fracture
surface observations, computer imaging and microstructural characterization
observation to generate strain fields and to provide understanding of critical
mechanisms in the failure process; (iii) Neutron diffraction measurements and
Raman microprobe techniques for microstress evolution and probabilistic strength
estimation of particles; (iv) Development of an adaptive multi-level model for
multiple scale analysis to predict the failure process as a phenomenon of multi-
scale incidence and propagation of cracks; (v) Development of image-based
microstructural Voronoi Cell finite element model for efficient and accurate
analysis of plastic deformation, strain localization and damage evolution in
nonuniform heterogeneous microstructures; and (vi) Incorporation of a
probabilistic analysis framework to account for the effect of input
variabilities on ductility and failure. The major intellectual merit of the
proposed research is in its innovative blend of state state-of of-the the-art
computational tools andwith experimental methods to advance provide a
comprehensive analysis tool and design methodology for advanced metallic
materialscast metals to increase their effective utilization. The uniqueness of
this approach is in the broad attack on the problem: (a) iIntroduction of
adaptive hierarchical and multi-scale computational models, incorporating image-
based microstructural models to depict the percolation of damage at different
length scales;. T (b) he iIncorporation of detailed microstructures at the
critical regions of evolving damage and localization is possible through the
efficient and accurate Voronoi Cell finite elementFE model, being developed by
the PI.; and (c) Robust validation of the models through rigorous feedback from
multi-scale experiments and material characterization by using in-situ SEM,
orientation imaging microscopy (OIM), in-situ neutron diffraction and Raman
microprobe. To the best knowledge of the investigators, there is a lack of such
a necessary comprehensive approach to the understanding of response and failure
characteristics of complex cast microstructures. The program, upon completion,
is expected towill provide a good understanding of stress and strain evolution
ofin the the complex phases in cast Al, their strength levels, and damage
initiation and percolation through the network of brittle, ductile and porous
phases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The broader impact of the program will occur on
two fronts. front, the It will reach beyond the automotive industry to aid the
entire casting industry, where significant gains in alloying and solidification
technology is are often stymied by unknowns regardingnot knowing how variability
in material and process parameters affect damage tolerance and ductility. The
methodology will allow industry be able to leapfrog thepresent technology and
use these lightweight allows into in new safety -critical applications, armed
with the knowledge that ductility and fracture can now be predicted with a
reasonable degree of confidence. The second front will be oGraduate students
will intern at FRL every summer and NMT students will have access to equipment
at the national labs. As a consequence of the university-industry collaboration
collaboration, students in this program will have a strong interaction with and
mentorship from industrial researchers . There will also be student interaction
with researchers at Sandia National Laboratory. researchers. In addition, the
national laboratories will be involved in the experimental component of the
work. &lt;br/&gt;