* 0308331
* High Dimension - Low Sample Size Statistical Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* James Marron, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2007
* USD 185,592.00

DMS-0308331&lt;br/&gt;James S. Marron&lt;br/&gt;High dimension - low sample size
statistical analysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
is proposed in the areas of medical image analysis and the gene expression
micro-array analysis. These seemingly divergent fields have a common structure.
The over-arching abstraction that contains them both is "High Dimension - Low
Sample Size" (HDLSS). HDLSS data are completely outside of the domain of
classical statistical multivariate analysis, because the critical first step of
"sphering the data" can no longer be performed. This motivates the development
of a very large new toolbox of statistical methods, which will be useful in
fields far beyond those motivating this research. An important part of the
proposed analytical work is the development of a completely new type of
asymptotic analysis, where the sample size is fixed, and the dimension tends to
infinity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be on the development
and assessment of new data analytical methods. These will provide critical
statistical infrastructure for the large teams of people that are tackling
current major challenges in the field of medicine. The first challenge is the
ongoing war on cancer. The second challenge is to make the rapidly developing
breakthroughs in medical imaging technology much more useful to practicing
medical professionals. Both areas will be substantially benefited by the
creative new methods of statistical analysis that will be developed during the
course of this research.&lt;br/&gt;