* 0308155
* On-Screen Deconvolution to Facilitate Computer Access for Users with Visual Impairments Involving Higher-Order Wavefront Aberrations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Malek Adjouadi, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2007
* USD 745,563.00

Successful interaction with a computer through a graphical user interface
implicitly requires the undistorted perception of the images displayed on the
computer screen. This is a problem for individuals with severe and irregular
visual limitations that cannot be corrected through traditional mechanisms such
as eyeglasses or contact lenses. In this project the PI will explore the
possibility of having the computer generate modified displays to correct
conditions such as keratoconus, pellucid marginal degeneration, Terrien's
marginal degeneration, and related refraction disorders that distort the images
perceived by the eye in asymmetrical and irregular ways. The irregularity of the
distortion introduced by these conditions is captured by the need to include
higher-order (i.e., &gt;2) terms in the Zernike polynomial approximation of the
eye's wavefront aberration (WA) function, which represents the distortion of
images through the optical components of the eye (cornea, lens). Recent advances
in image processing and optometry, as well as the continued promise of
increasing computing power for real-time applications, make it possible to
envision a computer system that, given the proper characterization of the visual
capabilities of its user, will generate a display that matches his/her vision
limitations in a complementary way, thus overcoming the user's vision problem.
Furthermore, instruments capable of accurately characterizing a person's WA are
now commercially available. The PI and his team will use the point-spread
function (PSF), obtained from a person's WA, to pre-compensate (by
deconvolution) the images shown on the computer screen, so that they are
perceived undistorted by the individual whose PSF is
considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will lead to the
design of novel assistive technologies, which in turn may well lead to tools
that benefit the population at large. A substantial impact on education is also
to be expected, due to the large number of students who will participate in the
project and in light of the fact that the PI's institution is one of the few
minority institutions in the nation with comprehensive programs through the PhD
level. The deconvolution work has the potential for broad impact in both
technical and societal dimensions, in that it constitutes a novel approach to
compensation of images for visual correction purposes via digital rather than
optical means, and in consideration of estimates that higher-order visual
impairment neglected in traditional solutions may affect as many as 7,000,000
Americans who have excessively irregular refractive errors. &lt;br/&gt;