* 0308014
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Taphonomic and Paleoenvironmental Factors Influencing Hominid Incorporation at Gondolin and Other South African Cave Sites
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Glenn Conroy, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 05/31/2004
* USD 11,793.00

Since the initial recovery of the remains of early human ancestors from cave
deposits in South Africa roughly eighty years ago, anthropologists have
attempted to identify the processes by which those remains became incorporated
into the fossil record. However, the previously well-sampled South African sites
are geographically constrained (most lie within a 3km-radius) and early
collection techniques biased fossil assemblages in favor of certain skeletal
elements and primate specimens. As such, it is difficult to model the means by
which the fossil remains became incorporated within cave deposits or to
reconstruct accurately the paleoenvironment of the sites. In 1979, excavation at
Gondolin, a cave site 35km northwest of Pretoria, yielded an unusual fossil
assemblage for a South African cave deposit: despite excellent preservation and
extensive sampling, it is the only site from South Africa in this time period
without a single primate or early human specimen. This is particularly
intriguing as initial work done with the fossils indicates that the processes of
incorporation and the environment at the time of site formation are similar to
those suggested for other sites of similar age that have substantial primate
remains. Excavation at Gondolin in 1997 has made interpretations of the site
more complicated with the recovery of the first early human specimens, but from
an area within the Gondolin cave deposits that have been poorly sampled. This
research will further excavate and compare fossil assemblages from Gondolin in
an attempt to clarify the processes that were (or were not) conducive for the
incorporation of primate and early human specimens within the South African cave
sites. Minimally, this research will provide a better context for the recovered
hominid specimens. As a site from outside the geographic range of well-sampled
sites, this research will begin to expand the range of excavated South African
assemblages. As a larger research objective, through inter-site comparisons,
this research will attempt to identify patterns among specific variables used in
reconstructing processes of deposition and ancient environments to provide
greater resolution in understanding the range of factors that influenced the
incorporation of early human specimens within South African cave assemblages.
With increased national and international interest in South African
paleontology, due in part to the recent naming of the Sterkfontein Valley and
surrounding cave sites as a World Heritage Site, further excavation and analysis
of materials from Gondolin will provide the first detailed examination of one of
the most poorly understood cave sites within the designated World Heritage Site
region. Development of the site provides local students the opportunity to
participate in paleontological research. Finally, this research will renew
interest among both foreign researchers and the South African people in the
continued exploration of human evolution in southern Africa.

