* 0308347
* Finite Element Approximation of Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Richard Falk, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2007
* USD 172,375.00

The first area of study is the approximation properties of several types
of&lt;br/&gt;finite element spaces defined on irregular hexahedral elements
obtained by&lt;br/&gt;trilinear mappings from a reference cube. Such spaces are
used to &lt;br/&gt;approximate three-dimensional vector functions and arise
naturally in many applications,&lt;br/&gt;including the approximation of
Maxwell's equations and the use of mixed and&lt;br/&gt;least squares finite
element methods for second order elliptic &lt;br/&gt;equations. The research is
to determine precisely what is needed for optimal order&lt;br/&gt;approximation
and construct families of finite element spaces that have
this&lt;br/&gt;property. The second area of study is the finite element
approximation by&lt;br/&gt;discontinuous Galerkin methods of convection-
diffusion problems. The aim is&lt;br/&gt;to derive new local error estimates in
order to understand which methods of&lt;br/&gt;this promising class of
approximation schemes work well both for&lt;br/&gt;diffusion-dominated and
convection-dominated second order partial &lt;br/&gt;differential equations. The
third area of research is to use the now well-developed &lt;br/&gt;theory for
the approximation of the Reissner-Mindlin plate model (used to study
the&lt;br/&gt;bending of a thin plate under external loads) as a basis for
developing new&lt;br/&gt;approaches to the use of finite element methods for the
approximation of&lt;br/&gt;elastic shells. Both the plate model and to a greater
extent the shell &lt;br/&gt;model suffer from the problem of "locking'' when
standard finite element&lt;br/&gt;approximation schemes are applied, causing
poor approximations for thin &lt;br/&gt;plates and shells. The final area of
research involves the design of effective&lt;br/&gt;numerical methods for the
Einstein equations, used to numerically &lt;br/&gt;simulate the emission of
gravitation radiation from massive astronomical events such as&lt;br/&gt;black
hole collisions. The approach taken will be to use simpler
model&lt;br/&gt;problems with some of the same features to understand why
standard numerical&lt;br/&gt;methods for the Einstein equations fail and to help
design methods that&lt;br/&gt;overcome these problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
mathematical modeling of physical and biological processes using
partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations has become the standard method of
studying a host of&lt;br/&gt;important scientific problems. Since it is usually
not possible to solve &lt;br/&gt;such equations exactly, the development of
reliable and efficient numerical&lt;br/&gt;approximation schemes, which can be
implemented on computers, makes this &lt;br/&gt;into a practical approach and is
central to progress in many areas of science and&lt;br/&gt;engineering. This
project studies "finite element" type approximation &lt;br/&gt;schemes for
mathematical models of a variety of applied problems. These include
&lt;br/&gt;flows of gases and fluids in which both convection and diffusion are
present,&lt;br/&gt;Maxwell's equations for the modeling of the electric and
magnetic fields &lt;br/&gt;in a body subject to an applied current, the bending
of thin structures (e.g., a&lt;br/&gt;roof) under external loads, and Einstein's
equations for the simulation &lt;br/&gt;of the emission of gravitation radiation
from massive astronomical events such as&lt;br/&gt;black hole collisions. This
work is expected to lead to new and improved&lt;br/&gt;numerical methods for use
by scientists and engineers in applied &lt;br/&gt;computations.&lt;br/&gt;