* 0308746
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Kinematics, Neural Control, and Evolution of the Head Retraction Startle Response in Elongate Anamniote Vertebrates
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Elizabeth Brainerd, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 06/30/2005
* USD 10,100.00

Dissertation Research: Kinematics, neural control and the evolution of the head
retraction startle response in anamniote vertebrates

Elizabeth L. Brainerd and Andrea B. Ward University of Massachusetts Amherst

Escape responses are a model system for understanding the function and
evolution of the nervous system. These responses are controlled by giant cells
in the hindbrain called Mauthner cells. Fishes and amphibians perform
stereotyped escape responses when startled by potential predators. Most aquatic
vertebrates perform a C-start that is named for the C-bend that these
vertebrates make in response to a stimulus. However, previous work on elongate
fishes, larval lampreys (Petromyzon marinus), spiny eels (Mastacembelus sp.),
and American eels (Anguilla rostrata), have suggested that there is another
aquatic escape response, head retraction, which is defined by multiple bends on
the body. The primary goal of this project is to describe the head retraction
startle response in a number of unrelated fish and amphibian species. Additional
goals are to trace the evolution of startle response behavior in vertebrates and
to correlate anatomical characteristics, including anatomy of the Mauthner
neuron, with startle response type. Startle response behavior will be examined
in several salamanders (Eurycea bislineata, Siren intermedia, Amphiuma
tridactylum), a caecilian (Typhlonectes natans), African lungfish (Protopterus
annectens), bichir (Polypterus palmas), reedfish (Erpetoichthys calabaricus),
ladyfish (Elops saurus), American eel (Anguilla rostrata), freshwater moray eel
(Gymnothorax polyuranodon), threespine stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus), bay
pipefish (Syngnathus leptorhynchus), feather blenny (Hypsoblennius hentzi),
crescent gunnel (Pholis laeta), high cockscomb (Anoplarchus purpurescens), ocean
pout (Zoarces americanus), snake head (Channa micropeltes), and two spiny eels
(Macrognathus siamensis and Mastacembelus armatus). Startle response behavior
will be analyzed using high-speed video (250 frames/second), electromyography to
determine muscle activation patterns, and histological techniques to describe
the Mauthner cell morphology. This project aims to study the head retraction
startle response by integrating functional morphology and anatomy of the
Mauthner neuron in order to increase understanding of the function and evolution
of nervous systems.



