* 0308801
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Role of Programmed Cell Death in Heartwood Formation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Noel Holbrook, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2006
* USD 10,850.00

Dissertation research: The role of programmed cell death in heartwood
formation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rachel Spicer and N. Michele
Holbrook&lt;br/&gt;Harvard University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heartwood formation
occurs in nearly all known tree species and marks the senescence of secondary
xylem, such that it no longer functions in water transport or carbohydrate
storage in the living tree. The process of heartwood formation is driven by the
death of parenchyma cells oriented both axially and radially within the stem.
These cells exhibit a remarkable range of longevities (from 2 to 200 years,
depending on species and site), but the actual cause of death is not known. This
research is designed to test the hypothesis that parenchyma cell death during
heartwood formation is a form of programmed cell death (PCD), and drives an
important stage in woody plant development. This hypothesis will be tested
through the application of molecular biological techniques to wood development,
including the in situ detection of fragmentation of nuclear DNA (a hallmark of
PCD) via a fluorescent-labeling assay (TUNEL assay), as well as tests for the
formation of DNA fragments using gel electrophoresis. Changes in cell
ultrastructure (i.e., changes in the morphology of cell membranes, mitochondria,
and the nucleus) during parenchyma cell death will also be compared against
those associated with other examples of PCD in plants. Species to be studied
represent a range of xylem structures and physiologies, including a conifer
(Eastern hemlock, Tsuga canadensis), a ring-porous angiosperm (white ash,
Fraxinus americana), and a diffuse-porous angiosperm (bigtooth aspen, Populus
grandidentata). Results from this work will create the foundation for a new,
biological model of heartwood formation in trees.&lt;br/&gt;