* 0308575
* Low Temperature Scanning Probe Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2008
* Alex de Lozanne, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 12/31/2008
* USD 383,850.00

This project emphasizes the use of unique capabilities in scanning probe
microscopy for the study of novel materials, such as high temperature
superconductors, manganite compounds, dilute magnetic semiconductors, and
combined or nanostructured versions of these. Graduate and undergraduate
students are trained in the design and development of sophisticated instruments
and on the properties of materials of current interest in condensed matter
physics. The forward thrust of the project is the development of a low
temperature scanning tunneling microscope with two tips that can be located
within 100 nm from each other, with the goal of probing the Green function of a
wide gamut of materials. This will give detailed information about
semiconducting or metallic samples such as their mean free path, the phase and
energy dependence of scattering from impurities, details of the band structure,
and the transition from ballistic to diffusive transport. This instrument will
also allow the test of a prediction that electrons in two neighboring nanotubes
will become quantum mechanically entangled via contact with a superconducting
surface.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Scanning probe microscopes have had a
tremendous impact on science and technology since the early 1980's because of
their ability to study and manipulate surfaces down to the atomic level. This
project continues this tradition in the design and construction of such
instruments, and of their use to study new materials. Recent work, using these
scanning probe methods, has shown novel properties of new magnetic materials
that have great potential for use as sensors or memory media. Another example is
the use of carbon nanotubes as tips for scanning probe microscopes. Some of this
work may have technological applications beyond microscopy, such as the
micropositioner developed using novel ideas that reduce or eliminate static
friction. Graduate and undergraduate students participating in these projects,
some of whom are Hispanic, are thus trained in the design and development of
sophisticated instruments and on the properties of new materials, some of which
are promising for commercial and/or defense applications.&lt;br/&gt;