* 0308900
* Can Scanned Cathodoluminescence (SEM-CL) of Quartz Silt be Applied to Provenance Studies of Mudstones? A Feasibility Study
* GEO,EAR
* 10/30/2002,08/31/2003
* Juergen Schieber, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/2003
* USD 34,912.00

0073995&lt;br/&gt;Schieber&lt;br/&gt;Most of recorded earth history is contained
in mudstones and shales, fine-grained sediments derived from weathering and
erosion of continental landmasses. Yet, mudstones are the least understood
sedimentary rock type, and extracting information from them is difficult. A
basic task in the study of sediments is the determination of provenance, meaning
how the constituents of a rock originated and got to their site of deposition.
Whereas we have quite sophisticated ways of doing this for sandstones, the fine
grain size of mudstones has long defied efforts to decipher their history in
detail.&lt;br/&gt;Clay minerals, the dominant constituent of mudstones, are
unfortunately chemically labile and altered substantially during burial and
diagenesis. As a consequence, it is very difficult to determine after the fact
what the original clay minerals were and where they came from. Detrital quartz
grains are second in abundance, and are chemically and mechanically very
resistant. In principle they would be the ideal component to examine for a well-
preserved provenance record, but in the past they only showed limited promise
for provenance studies.&lt;br/&gt;The recent development of scanning
cathodoluminescence (SEM-CL) allows us to observe previously unrecognized
textural features in quartz grains. Its application to principal source rocks
(plutonic, volcanic, metamorphic) of sediments strongly suggests that quartz
grains that originate under different conditions can be differentiated through
textural features visible under SEMCL. This has created new opportunities for
the in depth examination of sedimentary particles. Because it allows the
examination of small particles, such as quartz silt grains, it has potential for
the provenance study of mudstones. Examination of quartz silt in Late Devonian
mudstones by SEM-CL shows that textures related to metamorphic, plutonic, and
volcanic quartz are still recognizable, and that it is very likely that SEM-CL
could become an important tool in the study of mudstones.&lt;br/&gt;This study
is the first step in a systematic study of source rock related SEM-CL features.
We want to developing criteria by which to differentiate metamorphic, plutonic,
and volcanic quartz grains on the basis of SEM-CL features, and then examine how
reliably these features are retained trough soil forming and sedimentary
processes. There is very good potential that once there is a solid foundation
for the application of this technique, SEM-CL will become a very important tool
in the study of all kinds of quartz bearing sedimentary rocks. Because the
sedimentary record is so strongly dominated by mudstones, understanding where
its quartz component originates will contribute greatly to a sensible
interpretation of the geologic record. Our catalog of SEM-CL features in
metamorphic, plutonic, and volcanic quartz should also stimulate research by
igneous and metamorphic petrologists into processes and causes behind these
features, and lead to new insights into the origin of igneous and metamorphic
rocks. Because the observed SEM-CL features reflect fundamental processes that
occur during the formation of igneous and metamorphic rocks, the results from
this study should also be applicable to the study of rocks from other worlds.
Specifically, they may provide new ways of interpreting quartz grains that will
in all likelihood be retrieved from Mars in the near
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;