* 0308815
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogenesis of Hostshifts and Specialization in Neodiprion Sawflies
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Brian Farrell, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2005
* USD 10,570.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Brian Farrell and Ms. Catherine Linnen at
Harvard University to investigate the ecological and geographical circumstances
under which new species arise. In particular, evolutionary biologists have long
debated whether geographic barriers to reproduction are required for species
formation. There is now convincing evidence that in plant-feeding insects, new
species can arise in the absence of geographical barriers to reproduction (i.e.,
in sympatry) when individuals shift to a new host plant. But the role that this
speciation mode has played in generating the staggering diversity of plant-
feeding insects remains untested, as most studies have focused on single
diverging or recently diverged species. The goal of this research is to
understand the contribution that different speciation modes have made to
contemporary diversity and to determine whether certain life history attributes
(e.g., herbivory and dietary specialization) predispose organisms to particular
speciation modes. These questions will be addressed in the sawfly genus
Neodiprion (Hymenoptera: Diprionidae), a group of North American conifer-feeding
insects that includes several pest species. Specifically, this study will
elucidate the evolutionary relationships between species in the genus Neodiprion
by examining interspecific variation in DNA sequences and morphological
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will provide
important insights into the fundamental biological question: How and why do new
species form? In addition, this research will contribute to our understanding of
native and invasive species of Neodiprion and may uncover cryptic, host-
specialized species within the genus. Upon completion of these studies, a
database including museum specimens, publications, life history information,
geographic range, and digital images for each Neodiprion species will be made
publicly available via the World Wide Web.&lt;br/&gt;