* 0308762
* A Fundamental Study of the Bulk Modulus in Polymers and its Dependence on Chemical Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2006
* Sindee Simon, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2006
* USD 306,000.00

A fundamental study of the bulk modulus of polymers is proposed with the aim of
determining how it depends on chemical structure. The hypothesis that the bulk
modulus arises primarily from intramolecular relaxations while the shear modulus
depends on intermolecular (or intersegmental) relaxations will be tested using
model systems in which the strength of the b-relaxation can be systematically
varied by changing, for example, tacticity, crosslink density, or conversion.
Comparison of the time-dependent bulk modulus with the time-dependent shear
modulus will also be made in order to resolve the issue of whether or not the
dispersions in these viscoelastic properties involve a similar spectrum of
relaxation times and arise from the same molecular origins. Three model systems
will be investigated, including i) poly(methyl methacrylate) as a function of
tacticity, ii) a heterocyclic network based on hexamethylene diisocyanate and
hexyl isocyanate as a function of crosslink density, and iii) a dicyanate
ester/polycyanurate thermosetting material as a function of crosslink density
and conversion. The measurements will be made using a pressurizable mercury
dilatometer which has been built specifically for determination of the time-
dependent bulk modulus and bulk compliance in stress- and strain-controlled
modes, respectively. Temperature control in the instrument is stable to better
than 0.01 K, and measurement temperatures will cover a broad temperature range
from far below to above the glass temperature with measurements made in the
glass following conventional protocol. Time-temperature superposition will be
used to construct master curves from which the relaxation or retardation time
spectra can be obtained. The master curves and relaxation (or retardation) time
spectra for the model compounds will be compared in a given family to determine
the effects of tacticity, crosslink density, and conversion on the bulk modulus,
in addition to being compared to the data from the shear modulus. The results
for the thermosetting system will also be used to test whether a general model
based on concepts of time-temperature and time-conversion superposition is able
to quantitatively describe the time, temperature, and conversion dependence of
the bulk modulus in a reacting system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research program will provide excellent training for the graduate
student involved in the project and will also involve an undergraduate
researcher. Efforts will be made to include women and underrepresented
minorities through special recruiting efforts at women's and minority colleges
in the Texas and southwest region. An attempt will be made to include
undergraduate students who participate in the TTU McNair Scholars Program for
first generation college students (often minorities). In addition to providing
excellent training for the students involved in the program, the work will also
be broadly disseminated within the scientific community by presentation at
national forums and publication in both proceedings conferences and archival
journals. The results of the project will also be incorporated to the extent
feasible in both undergraduate and graduate courses taught by the PI.&lt;br/&gt;