* 0308493
* BE/CNH:       An Integrated Investigation of Coupled Human and Sea-Ice Systems:     A Comparison of Changing Environments and Their Uses in the North American Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2003,02/28/2007
* Shari Fox, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 02/28/2007
* USD 157,000.00

Inuit and Inupiat hunters in the North American Arctic rely on sea ice for
travel and hunting for much of the year. Their use of the ice requires detailed
knowledge of ice conditions for both safety and success in hunting, their main
livelihood. The sea-ice environment in the Arctic is changing, however. Studies
of sea-ice characteristics from scientific and indigenous knowledge perspectives
have found major changes in the extent and thickness of the Arctic ice pack as
well as local and regional changes in certain characteristics like the
thickness, stability, and dates of formation of the shorefast ice used by
hunters. As a result, Inuit and Inupiat communities are making changes to their
day-to-day and long-term livelihood strategies and are dealing with traditional
knowledge and skills that are, at times, no longer applicable. At the same time,
scientists struggle to understand the interactions of the forces influencing
sea-ice changes and variations of change at multiple scales. How can these two
groups inform each other and benefit from collaboration on this topic of mutual
concern? This project will investigate the dynamics of the coupled systems of
Inuit and Inupiat hunters and shorefast or drifting sea ice in the context of
environmental change. A multidisciplinary team of investigators will collaborate
with the communities of Barrow, Alaska, and Clyde River, Nunavut, to carry out
this investigation. The main objectives of the project are (1) to document Inuit
and Inupiat knowledge and use of sea ice along with those factors that limit or
enable this use, (2) to document Inuit and Inupiat observations and perspectives
on sea-ice changes and correlate these with scientific observations, (3) to
examine the differences and similarities in sea-ice changes and community
interactions with them in the Baffin Bay and Chukchi Sea locales, and (4) to
document how Inuit and Inupiat cope with changes in sea ice in their respective
regions as well as how different approaches in one region may inform the other
regarding adaptation strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anticipated intellectual
contributions of this project include illumination of frameworks for integrating
scientific and indigenous knowledge, particularly the integration of traditional
and scientific views of ice conditions and the comparison of large-scale trends
with local changes in sea ice. Anticipated broader impacts of this project
include training and education of indigenous Arctic communities, scientists and
graduate students in practical and theoretical studies of environmental changes
and their consequences. The project also is expected to contribute important
information to the Arctic Climate Impact Assessment (ACIA) program of the Arctic
Council and to the 2005 report on Climate Impact Assessments of Working Group 3
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. This project is supported by
an award resulting from the FY 2003 special competition in Biocomplexity in the
Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;