* 0308268
* Quality-Adaptive Media-Flow Architectures to Support Sensor Data Management
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Kyung Ryu, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gia-Loi Le Gruenwald
* 08/31/2007
* USD 470,000.00

This project develops novel quality-adaptive real-time media-flow architecture
to support sensory/reactive environments. Arts, Media, and Engineering (AME)
Center at Arizona State University houses an advanced performance stage, known
as the Intelligent Stage that allows performers to have novel interactions with
their environment through various sensors and actuators. Within this framework,
we develop an adaptive and programmable media-flow ARchitecture for Interactive
Arts (ARIA) that enables design, simulation, and execution of interactive
performances. ARIA interfaces with real-time sensing components and it streams
various types of audio, video, and motion data. It extracts various features
from streamed data, and fuses and maps media streams onto output devices as
constrained by the Quality of Service (QoS) requirements. ARIA provides the
choreographer with a visual design tool to describe the structure of the media-
flow network, where the nodes correspond to sensors, quality-adaptive computing
elements, and actuators. We develop novel media-flow management techniques
including real-time and QoS driven media sensing, feature extraction, and data
and media fusion algorithms. The impact of the project includes a better
understanding of QoS-based data and media-stream management. ARIA offers a new
medium that allows artists to integrate novel sensing, interaction, content, and
response mechanisms in staged performances. ARIA also acts as a
research-/test-/development-bed where engineering and arts students learn and
experiment with various aspects of multimedia stream management. The results
obtained by this project will lead to a better understanding of quality-based
data and stream management issues and will therefore influence the development
of novel sensor data management technologies. The project web site is
http://aria.asu.edu.&lt;br/&gt;ARIA is being disseminated to the public through
the Arts, Media, and Engineering Center at ASU. &lt;br/&gt;