* 0308598
* SGER:    Protein Interactions with Nano-Scale Controlled Surfaces:   Non-Fouling Mechanism
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Shaoyi Jiang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2004
* USD 120,000.00

Shaoyi Jiang&lt;br/&gt;U of Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"SGER: Protein
Interactions with Nano-Scale Controlled Surfaces: Non-Fouling
Mechanism."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-fouling surfaces are critical to the
performance of biosensors and biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;Despite of their
importance and enormous effort, non-fouling mechanism is still unknown at
present. Many experiments remain unexplained and many controversial issues
remain unresolved. There exist several models attempted to elucidate non-fouling
mechanism. However, there is a lack of a unified model (or hypothesis), which
can explain various experiments and identify the origin of non-fouling surfaces.
Among several theoretical studies, either protein molecules are not included, or
simplified protein models with continuum medium are used. The novelty of this
proposed work is its hypothesis that nano-scale structures of a surface are
responsible for protein adsorption/resistance and its integrated experimental
and simulation approach designed to prove the hypothesis. In the proposed work,
the state (e.g., ieliquid crystalli or ircrystall.) of polyethylene glycol (PEG)
terminated self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) will be altered by forming the SAMs
at different temperatures or by adjusting the composition of mixed PEG and OH
terminated SAMs. Protein adsorption on these surfaces will be measured using
surface plasmon resonance (SPR) biosensors. Atomic force microscopy
(AFM)/scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(XPS), Fourier transform IR spectroscopy-attenuated total reflection (FTIR-ATR),
and sum frequency generation (SFG) will be used to characterize these SAMs and
adsorbed water molecules. In parallel, molecular simulations will be performed
to study how protein adsorption/resistance is affected by nano-scale SAM
structures by calculating free energy change upon protein adsorption and
examining adsorbed water structure near SAM surfaces. The success of this work
will advance the fundamental understanding of protein behavior at interfaces and
provide a guide to design better biosensors and biomaterials. It will meet the
urgent need for the detection and identification of chemical and biological
substances in many areas from homeland security to environmental monitoring to
biomedical applications.&lt;br/&gt;