* 0308377
* Interactions and Disorder in One-, Two-, and Three-Dimensional Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Dmitrii Maslov, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2007
* USD 240,000.00

The common theme of this theoretical research is the interplay between electron-
electron interactions and the disorder in one-, two-, and three-dimensional
systems. Such an interplay is at the core of many, if not all, phenomena that
define the current agenda in the fields of strongly-correlated and mesoscopic
systems including high-Tc materials, new phases in two-dimensional systems with
and without magnetic field, quantum dots, carbon nanotubes,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combination of strong interactions, disorder and
reduced dimensionality may result in a significant deviation from or even a
complete breakdown of the Fermi-liquid state. Non-Fermi-liquid metals are the
subject of intensive studies in many subfields of condensed matter physics. An
important, and in many cases only, tool for studying the Fermi-liquid state of a
metal or its breakdown are the magneto-oscillations in thermodynamic and
transport properties. For a Fermi liquid, the pattern of these oscillations
encodes the principal parameters of the state, such as the effective mass and
spin susceptibility. The first part of this project is devoted to the
reconsideration of the theory of magneto-oscillations in a two-dimensional
disordered, interacting system. Such a study is particularly relevant in view of
recent experiments aimed at characterizing the state of electrons in
semiconductor heterostructures which exhibit an unexpected metal-insulator
transition, and is also of fundamental importance on its own footing. Although
it is known that the conventional description of magneto-oscillations breaks
down in two-dimensions, a comprehensive theory which replaces the conventional
one and allows detailed comparison with experiment will be very
useful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The peculiarity of a two-dimensional, interacting
system is that even a relatively weak magnetic field leads to a non-perturbative
reconstruction of the ground state. The theme of a magnetic-field induced
reconstruction of the ground state is continued in the second part of the
project that deals with three-dimensional metals in a strong magnetic field. In
the extreme limit, when only the lowest Landau level remains populated, the
magnetic field is known to induce instabilities of the ground state with respect
to, e.g., spin-and charge-ordering or exciton pairing. It has recently been
shown that the excitations of such a system behave similarly to those of a one-
dimensional Luttinger liquid. This research aims at constructing a theory of
transport in the "magnetic-field-induced Luttinger liquid." Also, there is a
pressing need to develop the theory of dephasing in a strong magnetic field. The
last part of the project is on Anderson localization and dephasing on one-
dimensional systems and is related to the second part of the research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students will be involved the project and
will receive training in both solving the fundamental problems and applying them
to understand experiments. Results will be incorporated into the graduate course
on modern condensed matter physics that the PI
teaches.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The common theme of this theoretical research
is the interplay between electron-electron interactions and the disorder in
one-, two-, and three-dimensional systems. Such an interplay is at the core of
many, if not all, phenomena that define the current agenda in the fields of
strongly-correlated and mesoscopic systems including high-Tc materials, new
phases in two-dimensional systems with and without magnetic field, quantum dots,
carbon nanotubes, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Graduate students will be involved
the project and will receive training in both solving the fundamental problems
and applying them to understand experiments. Results will be incorporated into
the graduate course on modern condensed matter physics that the PI
teaches.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;