* 0309369
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Evolution of the Cranial Cavity in Mammals and Extinct Cynodonts
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Timothy Rowe, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

Abstract for DEB-0309369&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr.
Timothy Rowe and Mr. Ted Macrini of The University of Texas at Austin to study
the evolution of the braincase, endocranial cavity, and brain in Recent mammals
and some of their closest extinct relatives within Cynodontia. The relative
importance of different sensory modalities, endocranial capacity, and
intelligence will be assessed for selected Recent and extinct specimens, chosen
to represent the last 200 million years of mammalian diversification. X-ray
computed tomographic (CT) scanning will be used to quantitatively explore
different components of sensory acuity, behavior, and intelligence through the
examination of digital endocasts, or three-dimensional infillings of the
braincase. Brains rarely, if ever, fossilize, but brain volume and external
shape are often preserved by the bones of the braincase that enclose the
endocranial cavity. Until recently natural endocasts were largely unobtainable
without destroying the specimen. X-ray CT permits non-destructive recovery of
endocranial surfaces and volumes from living and extinct species never before
studied in this capacity. Comparisons will be made between endocasts and actual
brains in Recent species, and between those extinct species whose phylogenetic
positions are relatively well constrained. Scanning will be performed by the
University of Texas High-Resolution CT Facility, an NSF-sponsored Multi User
Facility.&lt;br/&gt;This study will generate large volumes of high quality
digital data and visualizations of interest to the wide audience that studies
the evolution of mammalian behavior and intelligence. Data generated in this
study may also help resolve persistent problems in mammalian systematics. Legacy
data generated by this study will be distributed via www.DigiMorph.org, an NSF-
sponsored Digital Library of Vertebrate Morphology.&lt;br/&gt;