* 0309162
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Diversification in Trees of the Lowland Neotropical Rainforest, Based on Studies of the Ubiquitous Legume Swartzia
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* Barbara Schaal, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 05/31/2006
* USD 19,696.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Barbara Schaal and Mr. Benjamin Torke at
Washington University to study species origins and evolutionary relationships in
Swartzia, a diverse genus of tropical trees that occur in lowland rainforests of
Central and South America. In terms of structure, productivity, and botanical
species richness, lowland rainforests are dominated by trees, but the
evolutionary mechanisms that underlie diversification (i.e., genetic and
morphological divergence and species origination) in tropical trees are largely
unknown. Hypotheses range from those that postulate high rates of species
origination driven by historical climate and landscape changes to those that
stress the role of modern transitional habitats. This study will test
contrasting diversification hypotheses by identifying statistical correlations
between the locations of geographical features, such as transitional habitats,
and spatial patterns of genetic and morphological variation within and between
species of Swartzia. A significant portion of the field and laboratory work will
be carried out in Eastern Brazil in close collaboration with Dr. Andre Amorim of
the Universidade Estadual de Santa Cruz-Bahia, Brazil. Human mediated
destruction of tropical rainforests and associated loss of biodiversity is a
problem of international concern. Approximately half of all species on earth
occur in tropical rainforests. Many hold great potential as sources of food,
medicine, and building material. Effective conservation of rainforests will
require detailed knowledge of the processes that generate and maintain
biodiversity. Despite the fundamental role of trees in these ecosystems as the
dominant botanical component, diversification has been poorly studied in
tropical trees. Are historical mechanisms sufficient to explain species
diversity or do modern habitat heterogeneity and transitional habitats
effectively maintain genetic and morphological divergences between species? By
making significant contributions toward answering these questions, this study
will have important implications for prioritizing conservation in lowland
rainforest areas to maximize protection of biodiversity