* 0309816
* Introducing Action-Based Graphics into Undergraduate Computer Science Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Karen Sutherland, Augsburg University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 06/30/2007
* USD 63,875.00

Computer Science (31) This project jump-starts an active learning approach to
the computer science curriculum at Augsburg College by developing learning
experiences involving the existing virtual reality laboratory. A newly designed
upper division computer graphics/VR course moves CS majors from the comfort of
the traditional lecture-based course to an experience that requires them to
think on their feet, critically and quantitatively. At the other end of the
curriculum, a module on graphics/VR is developed for the introductory course.
How the active involvement will appeal to students who tend not to thrive in the
traditional lecture-based classroom is tested and effects of this approach on
retention documented. Undergraduate research projects, including developing a
virtual data structures package and a virtual robotic environment paves the way
for a wide range of undergraduate VR projects in the future. Intellectual merit
lies in the research, particularly the development of the robotics environment.
However, the emphasis of the project is pedagogical. The results on how this
approach to teaching affects students of different learning styles make a useful
contribution. Building on the department's existing strong minority recruitment
program, the broader impact of increased retention of students from
underrepresented groups who often have learning styles, which clash with a
computer scientist's teaching style, is significant. Prof. Roger Webster of
Millersville University, who uses a well-equipped VR lab in his undergraduate
courses, is consultant on the project. Prof. George Bebis of University of
Nevada, Reno is outside evaluator. This project is adapting model courses from a
number of sources the most significant one is the Computer Graphics and Virtual
Reality course developed by Professor Roger Webster at Millersville University
in Pennsylvania.