* 0309379
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Evolutionary History of Lagenorhynchus Inferred from Nested Phylogeography of Nuclear and Mitochondrial Loci
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Rodney Honeycutt, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/2005
* USD 22,205.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Rodney L. Honeycutt and Ms. April D. Harlin at
Texas A&amp;M University to examine worldwide patterns of genetic variation of
the dusky dolphin. This small and acrobatic dolphin occurs in deep waters off
the coasts of the south island of New Zealand, South Africa, Argentina, and
Peru. Genetic information in the form of DNA sequences will be used to estimate
levels of genetic variation within each geographic region as well as to compare
overall levels of divergence between regions. The primary goal of the study is
to reconstruct the genetic history of this widely distributed, yet highly
subdivided, marine mammal in an effort to reconstruct events responsible for its
current distribution and overall levels of genetic variation. Furthermore,
information from the dusky dolphin will be compared to related species occurring
either in South America or other regions of the Northern
Hemisphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this project has
broader scientific merit and impact. Unlike similar studies, this research
pertains to an ecologically versatile and broadly distributed dolphin species,
and the genetic information collected will represent the most thorough
assessment of any small-bodied marine mammal. In New Zealand dusky dolphins are
the focus of an ecotourism industry of economic importance. Genetic information
from this species will be useful for developing conservation strategies in all
parts of the species' range. The proposed research also has a strong
international component that will foster collaboration with scientists from
several countries including Peru. Additionally, activities supported by this
grant will contribute to the career development and scientific training of
underrepresented groups of graduate and undergraduate students. Because dolphins
are of general interest to the public, results from this research can be used
for informal science education through the use multiple media sources and
activities associated with K-12 education at the investigators'