* 0309968
* Cretaceous Intensity of Earth's Magnetic Field from Thellier Analyses of Single Plagioclase Crystals
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2006
* John Tarduno, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2006
* USD 224,572.00

Tarduno&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0309968&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowing the past intensity of
Earth's magnetic field is essential for understanding the geodynamo.
Unfortunately, accurate and precise data are limited because of experimental
alteration. The investigators have developed a new approach that uses
plagioclase crystals separated from mafic rocks. They have shown that these
crystals contain minute magnetic inclusions (50-250 nm in size) that are less
susceptible to alteration. In this work, the investigators will (i.) gain an
increased understanding of the basic rock magnetic carriers in plagioclase
through rock magnetism and high resolution scanning transmission electron
microscopy; (ii.) constrain the nature of the field during a time when
geomagnetic reversal frequency was at a minimum (the Cretaceous Normal Polarity
Superchron) using Thellier paleointensity analyses of plagioclase crystals
separated from mafic rocks formed at low latitude sites and (iii.) test further
the general relationship of reversal frequency and intensity by Thellier
analyses of plagioclase crystals from lavas formed during a time of high
reversal frequency. Importantly, sites with existing paleointensity results of
high technical quality based on analyses of whole rock basalt and submarine
basaltic glass will be studied, affording the opportunity to compare results
derived from different geologic recorders. Broader impacts of the study include
support for a Research Scientist and a graduate student (the latter contributing
to Ph.D. thesis studies). In addition, the investigators will involve several
undergraduate students in the work, contributing toward undergraduate research
and undergraduate Senior thesis studies at the University of
Rochester.&lt;br/&gt;