* 0309218
* Coupled Core-Mantle Thermal Evolution and the History of the Geodynamo
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,09/30/2005
* W H Francis Nimmo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2005
* USD 201,320.00

EAR-0309218 Nimmo

The evolution of the Earth's core is one of the most fundamental topics in
geophysics, relating as it does to the processes of planetary accretion and
differentiation; the history of mantle and core temperatures; and the generation
of the Earth's magnetic field. This proposal plans to combine geodynamo theory,
mineral physics data and mantle convection calculations (both parameterized and
numerical) into an integrated model. Model results will be compared with
observations and inferences of core and mantle behaviour over time to to
investigate the following questions. (1) Is core potassium required to fit the
observations? (2) How old are the inner core and the geodynamo? (3) What is the
role of mantle compositional layering and plate tectonics in determining
geodynamo activity? For each question care will be taken to assess the
robustness of the results in view of the uncertainties.

The proposal seeks to link the often separate fields of geodynamo studies and
mantle convection. Furthermore, because one effect of the geodynamo is to
deflect the solar wind, the proposed investigation will have implications for
the early implantation and loss of terrestrial atmospheric species. Charged
particles mutate or kill primitive organisms, so the early history of the
geodynamo is also relevant to the origin of life. Improved models of geodynamo
evolution are equally applicable to other silicate bodies, many of which possess
or once possessed comparable dynamos. The study should thus have a broad impact
across the geological and planetary science community. It also promotes
international collaboration and will foster the educational development of one
or several undergraduates.