* 0309670
* Collaborative Research: Evaluation of the Mid-Cretaceous Cool Tropics Paradox Using Isotopic Global Climate Models (GCMs) and Foraminiferal and Paleosol Siderite d18O Datasets
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Christopher Poulsen, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2004
* USD 16,140.00

During the warmest episodes of Earth history, various paleoclimate proxies
indicate that mid-and high-latitude temperatures were considerably warmer than
today, whereas low-latitude temperatures were similar to or even cooler than
present. These observations create a climate paradox since planetary-scale
latitudinal heat transport generally decreases with decreased latitudinal
temperature gradients. As a result, high atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2)
contents can explain extra-tropical warmth, but lead to tropical temperatures
that are warmer than expected from the proxy evidence. This cool tropics paradox
hinges on interpretation of paleo-tropical planktonic foraminiferal oxygen
isotope (delta18O) values, which require a seawater delta18O estimate to deduce
seawater paleotemperature. Cretaceous seawater delta18O is generally assumed to
have been globally uniform, or similar to the modern, though the hydrological
cycle during this past greenhouse world is thought to have been considerably
different from present. This award will help test the hypothesis that the cool
tropics paradox stems from uncertainty of Cretaceous seawater delta18O values.
This will be accomplished using a combined model and data comparison approach to
predict Cretaceous surface-seawater delta18O values, as well as temperatures,
using a coupled Ocean/Atmosphere General Circulation Model (O/AGCM) and an
isotopic Atmospheric General Circulation Model (AGCM). An asynchronous modeling
strategy has been developed for this purpose that benefits from existing model
strengths, and avoids massive model development. A Fully Coupled Ocean
Atmosphere Model (FOAM) will be used to simulate the mid-Cretaceous climate. An
isotopic AGCM, GENESIS2, with sea-surface temperatures specified from FOAM will
predict delta18O surface fluxes including precipitation delta18O values. The
delta18O surface fluxes from GENESIS2 will then be used to run a tracer-capable
version of delta18O distribution (from FOAM) and the delta18O surface fluxes
(from GENESIS2) will be passed iteratively between models until predicted
seawater delta18O values converge. This technique will be used to predict
oceanic delta18O for the present climate, as well as mid-Cretaceous climates
with 4x and 10x CO2 levels. This award will also fill in existing data gaps
through the collection and isotopic analysis of paleosol siderite spherules from
Africa, Europe, and the Southern Hemisphere, and the isotopic analysis of
planktonic foraminiferal from Alaska, British Columbia, and the North
Atlantic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address topics that are highly
relevant to a future greenhouse climate. Through the prediction and validation
of Cretaceous surface delta18O values, the work will lead to important insights
into whether or not Earth's hydrologic cycle is radically different under
conditions of elevated atmospheric CO2 content, and whether or not negative
feedbacks in the tropical climate system must be invoked to limit tropical sea-
surface temperatures. Because the major source of atmospheric water vapor is the
tropical ocean, attention to mid-Cretaceous tropical climate processes will
provide a better understanding of greenhouse hydrologic cycle dynamics.