* 0309910
* Collaborative Research: Identification of the Plate Boundary Between India and Indochina Through Integrated Petrologic, Structural, and Paleomagnetic Analyses
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* John Geissman, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2009
* USD 117,473.00

0309910&lt;br/&gt;Geissman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's propose an integrated
provenance, structural, and paleomagnetic study to determine the location of the
plate boundary between the NE corner of India (in Assam/Bangladesh) and
Indochina during early Cenozoic time. Precise location of this boundary will
contribute to the age of contact (collision) between India and Indochina, which
is presently very poorly known. Preliminary compositional studies on Eocene-
Oligocene (ca. 43 to 23 Ma) foreland strata of the eastern Himalaya indicate
that two dramatically different sedimentary sequences are present. One, exposed
in the Bengal basin, has a mature sediment source from the Indian craton to the
west. The second, exposed in Assam, India is interpreted to have an orogenic
source from the Indo-Burman ranges and/or easternmost Himalayas, as part of
Indochina, to the east and north. The boundary between these two sequences is
not exposed, but the PI's hypothesize that it is near the Kaladan fault, which
has young to active displacement. Two testable hypotheses regarding these two
sequences bear on the overall history of collision between India and Asia: (1)
the Bengal basin was protected from orogenic detritus by a barrier to sediment
transport, such as a peripheral forebulge; or, (2) the two sequences were
separated by a considerable distance before the terranes reached their present
positions. Understanding the paleolatitudes of the sequences at the time of
deposition is critical to testing these hypotheses. If the two sequences were
deposited on different plates, the Bengal Basin could have been as far to the
south as ~2500 km, with the distance between them probably decreasing during the
waning stages of deposition. If the sequences were deposited at similar
latitudes, and thus perhaps on the same plate, then the initial suturing between
India and Indochina would have occurred during Eocene/Oligocene time and the
major plate boundary that accommodated the northward movement of India would be
farther to the east. The significance of this project lies in the largely
unexploited stratigraphic record accessible on land in the eastern Himalayan
foredeep, which provides the opportunity, in a well-constrained modern
continental collision, to reconstruct orogenesis and surface processes that pre-
date strata studied from the Siwaliks and the distal Bengal fan. Clarification
of the paleolatitudes of the Bengal basin and Assam sequences will provide
invaluable information for Southeast Asia reconstructions. Detailed provenance
studies of the pre-Miocene sequences on both sides of the Kaladan fault,
including sandstone petrology, heavy-mineral analysis, mineral chemistry,
single- grain geochronology, and isotopic analyses of selected mineral phases,
will define the sediment sources of the two terranes and, in concert with
paleomagnetic and structural studies, will aid in reconstructing major elements
of the early Tertiary collision.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed
research: The proposed research will involve the training of three graduate
students at three separate institutions. The students will collaborate with one
another and their interactions with each other and the PI's will foster the
development of considerable breadth of expertise in the geological sciences. In
addition, at least two undergraduate students will be intimately involved in
aspects of the research at Auburn and New Mexico. In addition to collaboration
with scientists from several academic institutions (Auburn, Florida State, MIT,
New Mexico) in the United States, this proposal also involves collaboration with
geoscientists from countries (Bangladesh and India) that are not well supported
to do geoscience. The PI's plan to disseminate the results of our work in as
timely a fashion as possible in geoscience journals with a broad readership.