* 0309005
* DISSERTATION  RESEARCH: Phylogeny of the Hesperiidae (Lepidoptera: Hesperioidea)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* Andrew Brower, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/2005
* USD 10,025.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Andrew Brower and Mr. Andrew Warren at Oregon
State University to investigate the evolutionary relationships among the
subfamilies and tribes of the skipper butterflies of the world (family
Hesperiidae). As his dissertation research, Warren will combine DNA sequences
from several different genes with morphological character data from examination
of pinned adult specimens, to elucidate the pattern of relationships of this
large and poorly-understood group of butterflies. The DNA part of the study will
sample broadly among more than 100 genera, while the morphological component
will examine a reduced set of about 50 exemplars representing the range of
variation from the global fauna.

As the most charismatic group of invertebrates, butterflies have served as model
organisms in a broad range of evolutionary and ecological studies, and enjoy a
broad constituency of amateur enthusiasts who appreciate them in various ways
from collecting to photography to watching. Because they have been the subject
of this attention for hundreds of years, butterflies have perhaps the most
comprehensive geographical and temporal records of distribution patterns of any
diverse animal taxon, which makes them excellent indicators of environmental
change. Surprisingly, however, our knowledge of their evolutionary relationships
is quite limited. This research represents a key component of an effort that is
currently underway to develop a comprehensive phylogenetic hypothesis for all
butterflies - that is, to have a complete "tree of life" for butterflies that
will provide a predictive basis for future studies of the evolution of wing
patterns, mimicry, aposematism, host plant coevolution, and other topics of
recurrent interest in the fields of ecology and evolution.