* 0309779
* Quantifying Glacial Erosion Rates, Magnitudes, and Paleotopography in the Coast Mountains, British Columbia
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Todd Ehlers, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2007
* USD 270,000.00

Quantifying Glacial Erosion Rates, Magnitudes, and Paleotopography in the Coast
Mountains, British Columbia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;P.I. Todd A. Ehlers -
University of Michigan&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0309779&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last 12
years a global scientific debate has ensued over if climate change or tectonics
provided the impetus for the appearance, or reality of accelerated mountain
uplift. This three year project at the University of Michigan will test the
hypothesis that cooler climates, and more specifically glaciation, increase the
topographic relief and maximum height of mountain ranges, thereby producing the
appearance of accelerated uplift in the last ~10 Million years. Previous
attempts to test this hypothesis have been hampered by a lack in understanding
of the distribution and amount of glacial erosion over million-year time scales.
This study will integrate geochemical data (low-temperature thermochronometers)
with three-dimensional computer models to quantify the glacial erosion history
in the southern Coast Mountains, B.C.&lt;br/&gt;The integration of new data
collection and modeling for this study will involve several steps. (1) Two
seasons of fieldwork will provide 60 new samples within a ~25x25 km area of the
southern Coast Mountains. (2) Two years of computer program development are
needed to modify an existing three-dimensional computer model to simulate
evolving topography. The model will predict exposed sample ages under a variety
of tectonic, and erosional scenarios. (3) The last two years will apply an
inverse computer-modeling program to determine the range of glacial erosion
histories, and ancient preglacial topographies, that satisfy the measured
geochemical sample ages. The results from these three steps will test the stated
hypothesis by reconstructing the mountain topography prior to glaciation in the
Coast Mountains and assess if glaciation increased topographic relief.
&lt;br/&gt;In addition to addressing a long-standing problem in the scientific
community, this study will also provide a Ph.D. for one graduate student. The
principle investigator and graduate student will give regular talks in K-12
school science classes on 'glaciers and ice ages' and at least one undergraduate
student will be involved, and mentored in the research process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;