* 0309658
* US-France Cooperative Research (INRIA): Environments and Tools for High Performance Grid-Enabled Scientific Computing
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Jack Dongarra, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2006
* USD 37,869.00

0309658&lt;br/&gt;Dongarra&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From its inception, the rapidly
growing movement to build "computational grids" to support advanced modeling and
simulation in nearly every scientific field requires new environments and tools
for high performance, grid-enabled scientific computing. This topic is addressed
in the proposed US-France cooperative research project between the University of
Tennessee's Innovative Computing Laboratory and the Laboratoire de
l'Informatique du Parallelism of French National Institute for Informatics and
Applied Mathematics (INRIA) and the Ecole Normale Superieure de Lyon. Led by US
and French principal investigators, Jack Dongarra and Frederic Desprez
respectively, this collaborative effort extends their prior joint research on a
set of tools for portable and efficient parallel scientific software. Over the
last few years, their effort led to well-known research software such as LAPACK,
Netsolve, and Scilab. The focus areas of their new research effort include: (1)
exploration of easy-to-use systems for Grid-enabled computing and ways to
combine NetSolve (University of Tennessee) middleware with Scilab (INRIA) to
solve problems in Grid computing; (2) creating of self-adapting, grid-aware
numerical libraries; (3) building of performance monitoring tools for clusters
and grids; and (4) construction of next generation software repositories to
deploy scientific software in grid-computing environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents the US side of a joint proposal to
NSF and INRIA. NSF provides travel funds and living expenses to US
investigators, postdoctoral researchers and students for visits to France to
participate in collaborative research and joint workshops. INRIA supports the
visits of French researchers to the United States. The joint activities take
advantage of combined US-French expertise in parallel and distributing computing
and use of advanced-computer architectures. The project advances NSF's priority
area - cyberinfrastructure research and development - which will enable
collaboration among scientists and engineers across disciplines and national
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;