* 0309800
* Investigating the Origin and Early Evolution of Primates in Asia
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2003,09/30/2008
* K. Christopher Beard, Carnegie Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Jean E. Turnquist
* 09/30/2008
* USD 267,002.00

This research aims to illuminate one of the largest remaining gaps in our
knowledge of primate and human evolution-understanding when, where, and how the
earliest primates evolved. Modern primates include lemurs, lorises, bushbabies,
tarsiers, monkeys, apes and humans. Currently, the fossil record is inadequate
to resolve a number of important questions about the earliest phases of primate
evolution. At present, the oldest fossil primates are roughly 55 million years
old. However, by this time primates already possessed virtually modern anatomy,
and they had already diversified into several major groups. Both of these points
imply that primates experienced some earlier interval of evolutionary history
that has so far eluded the best efforts of paleontologists. Because the nearest
living and fossil relatives of primates are found in Asia, we will search for
additional fossil evidence of early primates on that continent. Specifically, we
will survey fossil-bearing strata of appropriate age in Inner Mongolia to test
whether primates appear earlier in Asia than they do elsewhere on the planet.
Preliminary fieldwork in this region has shown that small, tree-dwelling fossil
mammals can be recovered there in great abundance, suggesting that early
primates will also be found once reasonable samples are collected.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will also undertake anatomical and evolutionary studies
of fossil primates from Asia that were collected by our earlier expeditions to
this region. Among other things, this research will show that Asia harbored a
wider range of early primates than was previously suspected. Some of these new
and undescribed Asian primates are related to fossils from North America, while
others share affinities with African fossils. Once evolutionary studies of these
new Asian fossils are completed, we will have a much greater understanding of
how global climate change and continental drift impacted the early evolution of
our distant primate relatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance
broader societal objectives by: (1) increasing public understanding of
evolutionary biology and paleoanthropology through popular books, magazine
articles, museum exhibits, and public lectures; (2) training students in
practical and theoretical aspects of paleontology and paleoanthropology; (3)
enhancing international collaboration among American and Chinese scientists; and
(4) generating a unique collection of fossils that will become a permanent
resource for scholars for generations to come. &lt;br/&gt;