* 0309998
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Alejandro Lleras, Lleras                  Alejandro
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Minority Post-Doctoral Research and Training Fellowship will be conducted
at the University of British Columbia, in Vancouver, Canada, under the
supervision of Dr. Alan Kingstone. The central topic of investigation is a
phenomenon known as Troxler Fading (Troxler, 1804). Troxler Fading (TF) occurs
when an observer pays attention to an object (the target) in his/her peripheral
field of vision, while keeping his/her eyes focused on a secondary object. After
several seconds of sustained attention, the target disappears from the
observer's view for a few seconds. At its location, the observer instead
perceives a smooth continuation of the background surface. This phenomenon is
also known as perceptual filling-in, a name that reflects the introspective
experience of seen the target getting filled-in by the background. The research
project is divided into three related, though almost independent, sub-projects.
The first sub-project is centered on learning the technique of functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) and applying it to the study of TF. The
objective of this sub-project will be to identify the areas of the brain where
the fading and filling-in of the target takes place. The results from this sub-
project will not only have implications regarding theories of TF, but also
regarding theories of normal surface perception. The second sub-project is
centered on learning the technique of Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) and using
it to investigate TF and perceptual awareness. The objective of this sub-project
will be to utilize the "visual" or "sensory" ERPs (the so-called P1/N1 complex),
which are believed to reflect the cortical processing of visual stimuli, as a
functional marker to determine whether visual events occurring at the faded
location are processed by the visual cortex. The results from this project will
have important implications regarding theories of perceptual awareness and TF,
as well as, theories regarding how sensory information is processed by the
visual system. The third sub-project is a continuation of the behavioral
investigation of TF. In this sub-project, the factors determining the duration
of fading events will be investigated. Factors such as eye movements and coverts
shift of visual attention (i.e., moving the focus of attention without
accompanying eye movements) will be studied. The results of this project will
have important implications regarding theories of TF and selective attention.
Furthermore, when interpreted in the context of the other two sub-projects,
these results will also provide important new information regarding the
different brain regions where visual selective attention can influence
perceptual processing. The University of British Columbia is uniquely equipped
to house a project with the scope of the present proposal. UBC has research-
dedicated, state-of-the-art, fMRI and ERP facilities at the Brain Research
Center. Furthermore, UBC hosts a select group of highly expert academics in the
fields of Cognitive Neurosciences and Visual Perception, who will provide the PI
the appropriate learning training environment.