* 0309408
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: An Experimental Test of the Relationship Between Seed Predator Density and Recruitment Limitation in Tropical Trees
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Marcel Rejmanek, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 09/30/2005
* USD 15,450.00

Abstract- Rejmanek, Marcel (0309408) The processes that are responsible for
maintaining the high levels of diversity of trees in tropical forests are not
well understood. There is increasing evidence that a particularly important
process is recruitment limitation, where the seeds of many species do not reach
sites favorable for germination and growth before the seeds of another species
do. As a result, less competitive species are able to persist simply by virtue
of getting a head start in growth over more competitive species. However,
recruitment limitation may not be due entirely to chance. Instead, it more often
may be an outcome of the "opportunity" seeds have to be dispersed. Many animals
are important consumers and dispersers of seeds, and it can be expected that
whether a seed gets eaten or dispersed and cached depends on the type of animal
handling the seed, how many animals there are in an area to handle the seed, the
relative preference animals have for any particular type of seed, and where the
animal caches the seed. It has been hypothesized that more seeds will be
dispersed and cached when seed-eating animals have more food, but this has not
been experimentally tested. This research would test this hypothesis with an
experiment focused on three species of palm with different sized seeds, and the
spiny pocket mouse (Heteromys desmarestianus), the dominant mammal seed
predator/disperser in the lowland rainforests of Belize. The abundance of H.
desmarestianu would be experimentally reduced, and then seed removal and
dispersal rates, and where seeds are cached between plots with and without
reduced abundance of H. desmarestianus would be compared. This is the first
study to experimentally test the relationship between seed predator density and
recruitment limitation in tropical forests, and is a collaboration between
scientists from UC Davis, the Belize Foundation for Research & Environmental
Education, and the University of Belize. Funding has been provided through a
Dissertation Improvement Grant from the Directorate of Biological Science, with
additional funds from the International Science and Engineering Program.