* 0309225
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Do Common Mycorrhizal Networks Limit Plant Competition and Species Exclusion in Temperate Forests?
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Oswald Schmitz, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* James T. Morris
* 12/31/2004
* USD 10,080.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Do Common Mycorrhizal Networks Limit
Plant Competition and Species Exclusion in Temperate
Forests?&lt;br/&gt;Schmitz&lt;br/&gt;DEB-0309225&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In nature,
networks of mycorrhizal fungi encompass and connect the roots of neighbor
plants, often including multiple species over several square meters. Greenhouse
experiments show that carbon and nitrogen acquired by seedlings move
directionally into neighbors via these common mycorrhizal networks (CMN) when
neighbors are shaded or have low N concentration. It has been hypothesized that
CMN limit competition, particularly between overstory and recruiting tree
populations, and have indirect effects on forest community structure. This
research will 1) demonstrate the importance of CMN for the growth and survival
of three tree seedling species growing in a temperate forest, 2) evaluate the
influence of CMN on the hierarchy of seedling species performance, 3) quantify
mycorrhizal host-specificity and the frequency of interspecific CMN in the
field, and 4) clarify the rules that govern the distribution of soil N to
multiple hosts by CMN. An additional study will demonstrate, for the first time,
carbon flow between overstory trees and seedlings using13-C isotope analysis.
This study will aid in interpretation of CMN effects on seedling performance,
and stand as a major contribution to our understanding of mycorrhizal
functioning, plant competition, and succession in forest ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;