* 0309742
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Angela Gomez, Gomez                   Angela
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

This Minority Post-Doctoral Research and Training Fellowship will take place in
Chile with the sponsorship of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (ECLAC) and under the guidance of Dr. Rolando Franco who is ECLAC's
director of the Social Development Division. The research will be focused on an
anthropological analysis of people's agency and social capital within the
context of Chile Solidario, a poverty alleviation program being implemented by
Chile's Ministry of Planning and Cooperation (MIDEPLAN). Current anthropological
studies view poverty within the political, economic and ideological contexts
shaping capitalistic processes and state activity. This study will be framed by
three interconnected anthropological approaches to the study of poverty:
economic polarization, political demobilization, and market triumphalism, all of
which are present in the neoliberal model that postulates the economic, social
and moral value of competition and unregulated markets, and the role of the
state in promoting free market. The main goal of the proposed research is to
explore how the agency and the social capital of families participating in Chile
Solidario are affected by the program. These two interrelated theories are
explored through various research methodologies. Data collection will take place
in two communities and will include: (1) information about the historical,
political, economic, and organizational aspects of each community through the
combination of document reviews and key informant interviews; (2) semi-
structured interviews with families, case managers, and other individuals
identified by families as being relevant to them in terms of their survival; (3)
community asset mapping; and (4) tracking of enrollment rates, number of
families inserted in the labor market, and services provided to families in the
selected communities through the program's monitoring database. The proposed
research study will be significant in that: (1) it will emphasize the importance
of considering and building on the social capital and capacity for agency of the
poor in the implementation of poverty alleviation programs. This is significant
considering that ECLAC is influential in the development of social policies
throughout Latin America; (2) by selecting two distinctive study sites in terms
of human, social, cultural, and economic resources the study will provide
information about human and cultural variation, which will be reflected in
families' differential responses to Chile Solidario; and (3) it will shed light
on the implementation and impact of poverty alleviation programs within a neo-
liberal model. The training objectives are: (1) to acquire an in-depth
understanding of how existing economic tendencies and globalization are
resulting in increased poverty; and (2) to gain a deeper understanding of poor
people's agency and social capital in dealing with their financial condition.
These objectives will be achieved through: (a) Guidance and mentoring from Dr.
Franco and a multidisciplinary team of professionals that includes
anthropologists, sociologists, and economists (ECLAC 2000); (b) Participation in
the multiple national and international seminars and workshops organized by
ECLAC to address issues related to social and economic development in Latin
America and the world; and (c) Implementation of the proposed research project.