* 0309327
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Convergent Local Adaptation in White Sands Lizards
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2005
* David Wake, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2005
* USD 11,985.00

White Sands, New Mexico is a geologically young landscape of stark white dunes
surrounded by dark desert scrubland. In three lizard species, there has been
dramatic convergent adaptation to this feature; dune populations exhibit
blanched coloration while adjacent populations are dark. This system provides a
unique opportunity to better understand the conditions under which organisms
adapt rapidly to changing environments and, ultimately, how new species evolve.
An integrative approach will be employed to investigate adaptation in White
Sands lizards. Molecular techniques will be used to study the relationship
between gene flow and local adaptation and to identify specific genes involved
in color evolution in reptiles. Field experiments will be conducted to study the
relationship between ecology, reproductive biology and speciation.

This project contributes to understanding a central issue in biology, the
evolution of biological diversity. Empirically, this study addresses an ongoing
debate about the importance of ecological factors in speciation. Results are
also relevant in formulating conservation policy. Focusing on conservation of
landscapes represents a shifting paradigm toward preserving evolutionary
processes rather than current species distribution patterns. Previous work has
suggested that ecological transition zones are important for generating and
maintaining biological diversity, and the proposed research will help evaluate
the role of these areas as conservation targets.