* 0309844
* Cretaceous-Earliest Tertiary Basin Development, Deformation, and Magmatism in Southern Tibet: Implications for Pre-Indo-Asian Collision Lithospheric Structure
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Paul Kapp, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2006
* USD 247,731.00

How are continental collisional orogens preconditioned by tectonic processes
that operate along convergent margins prior to the collisional events? The
Tibetan plateau, which is generally accepted as the archetype of collisional
orogens, is a perfect natural laboratory to study this question because it
contains a record of pre-collisional, Andean-style arc-related tectonics as well
as collisional tectonics during the Cenozoic. General models for Tibetan Plateau
evolution begin with assumptions of initial conditions for crustal thickness and
mantle structure that strongly influence the results of the models. However,
geological support for these assumptions is scarce. This study is integrating
geologic mapping and structural, stratigraphic, sedimentologic, and
geochronologic studies of widely exposed Cretaceous and earliest Tertiary basin
fill and igneous rocks in the Lhasa terrane of southern Tibet to provide new
constraints on the pre-collisional history of strain, basin development,
paleogeography, denudation, and magmatism. It is hoped that integration of these
new constraints with previous studies will lead to a unified tectonic model that
provides realistic initial conditions for the lithospheric structure of southern
Tibet prior to the Indo-Asian collision. The results should have broad
implications for models of Cenozoic orogeny in central Asia, as well as
collisional orogenesis in general.