* 0309810
* Melt Influx and the Effects on Os-Sr-Nd Isotopic Systems and Platinum Group Elements in Jurassic Oceanic Mantle (Totalp Massif, Swiss Alps)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Richard Walker, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 137,936.00

EAR 0309810&lt;br/&gt;Becker&lt;br/&gt;Melt ascending in the mantle interacts
with peridotite wall rock in various ways. Movement in fractures may result in
dissolution of peridotite minerals and precipitation of pyroxenes and garnet or
spinel in the fractures. Percolative flow in dunite channels appears to dissolve
pyroxenes and Al-phases and result in precipitation of olivine. In other
environments, diffuse refertilization of previously depleted peridotite may
occur. The effects of these interaction processes on abundance patterns of
platinum group elements (PGE) and Re, and possibly on radiogenic 187-osmium in
peridotites have not been studied in a systematic way.&lt;br/&gt;Results of a
pilot study suggest that the Jurassic Totalp ultramafic massif in the Swiss
Alps, a lithospheric fragment of the Ligurian ocean basin, is a suitable site to
study these effects. The Re-Os, Rb-Sr and Sm-Nd isotopic systematics will be
studied, and PGE and sulfur concentration data will be obtained and compared to
major element variations in order to confirm the hypothesis that melts with
suprachondritic 187-Os refertilized the spinel peridotites. Whole rock data will
be supplemented by laser ablation ICP-MS work on PGE in sulfides from grain
boundaries and inclusions in silicates to test for micro-scale equlibration.
Concordant pyroxenite layers in this massif are precipitates of mafic melts and
show subchondritic to highly suprachondritic Os isotopic ratios. This study will
evaluate the distribution of Os isotopic ratios in the pyroxenites,
particularly, whether suprachondritic Os isotopic ratios predominate in spinel
websterites, the most ubiquitous pyroxenite. The radiogenic Os isotopic ratios
may reflect a high-Re reservoir in the convecting mantle, most likely recycled
oceanic crust. Isotopic and concentration profiles across layered pyroxenites
and peridotites will yield constraints on the scale of isotopic homogenization
for Os in the presence of silicate and sulfide melts in the mantle. This work
will improve our understanding of chemical effects of ascending melts on
surrounding mantle in the transition region between asthenosphere and
lithosphere.&lt;br/&gt;