* 0309486
* Experimental Determination of the Thermal Equations of State of Mantle and Core Materials
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Dion Heinz, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2006
* USD 250,000.00

EAR-0309486&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The equations of state of several
constituents of the lower mantle and core will be determined at high pressures
and temperatures. The compounds to be studied include (Fe,Ni) alloy, the
(Mg,Fe)O series, (Mg,Fe)SiO3-perovskite, Fe3C, and FeS. Unit cell volumes and
other crystallographic information are to be obtained using synchrotron x-ray
diffraction while the samples are compressed and laser-heated in a diamond anvil
cell. Subsolidus phase transitions will be detected and identified during the
course of the equation of state measurements. Internal standards will be used
for pressure calibration. The experimental methodology for these experiments has
been proven successful at the Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National
Laboratory. The data to be collected are critical not only to understand the
seismological data, which show variations in density and elasticity within the
Earth, but also for developing models of chemical evolution of the Earth.
Results from the proposed study will be disseminated primarily through
publication in the scientific literature, by participation at scientific
conferences, and when warranted, through wider-reaching news outlets. Additional
benefits of the proposed research include the continued development and
refinement of experimental high-pressure, high-temperature techniques; continued
exposure of university researchers, including student participants, to the
facilities and talent at government-funded multi-user sites; and the training of
students in the wide range of experimental techniques and scientific protocols
associated with performing the proposed work.