* 0309116
* Collaborative Research: Petrogenesis of Jadeitite and Other High-Pressure Rocks in Serpentinites, Motagua Fault Zone, Guatemala
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Hans Ave Lallemant, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2008
* USD 92,134.00

Jadeitite-jadeite rock-is a rare material found at about ten locations
worldwide, but in central Guatemala there are two distinct sources, on either
side of the Motagua Fault Zone (MFZ) - the plate boundary zone separating North
American and Caribbean plates. Jadeitite is sourced from serpentinites and
associated with eclogite and blueschist, the markers of subduction zones.
Jadeitites appear to represent high-pressure / low-temperature (HP/LT)
crystallization of fluid derived from subducted ocean crust, without
preservation of remnants of a protolith. Jadeitite petrogenesis represents an
important geological process, but we lack a deep understanding of jadeitites, of
their relationship to eclogites, blueschists, and host serpentinized peridotite,
and of how they are exhumed. Recent dating of micas in HP/LT rocks show that
remnants of two collisions, an 125-113 Ma Aptian one on the south side of the
MFZ and a 77-65 Ma Maastrichtian. Not only is this a singular pairing of
collisional belts, but the pairing of two jadeitite-bearing terranes. Moreover,
the presence of abundant lawsonite eclogite south of the MFZ indicates very high
pressure, low-temperature, wet processes that contrast with the more moderate
mostly blueschist conditions north of the MFZ. These differing terranes offer an
extraordinary opportunity to investigate the collisional environments and the
processes that produce and exhume jadeitites, other HP/LT rocks, and their host
serpentinites. It is anticipated that new data will enable a rigorous testing of
the fluid crystallization hypothesis as well as assessment of the sources of
fluid and solutes that crystallized jadeitite, altered blueschists and
eclogites, and produced serpentinite and the conditions at which these
multistage processes occurred.&lt;br/&gt; The results of this three-year
investigation will include (1) additional field studies to sample and study the
local geology of the newly discovered high-P/T rock occurrences in Guatemala;
(2) structural/tectonic studies to understand the distribution and mechanisms of
tectonic emplacement; (3) characterization of the mineralogy and petrology of
the high-P/T rocks including geothermobarometric and geochemical studies; (4)
modeling fluid/rock interactions; (5) constraining the rock histories using
U/Pb, Sm/Nd, Rb/Sr, Ar/Ar, and fission-track methods; and (6) investigation of
Nd, Sr, Pb, and S isotope systematics by TIMS on separates and by microbeam
techniques to infer protoliths and to investigate fluid sourcing, partitioning,
and fractionation at high P/T. This information will be integrated into both
tectonic and petrogenetic models for the evolution of the Guatemalan
paleosubduction zones and the formation, in particular, of jadeitites. The
broader impacts of this study include the collaboration of researchers at
universities and museums, involvement of students, links with archaeological
studies on Middle-American jade which is jadeitite, connections between
Guatemalan and U.S. researchers, outreach to both the media and the public via
interviews, articles and a Museum web-site, and planning for an exhibition that
will feature the scientific dimensions of jade in relation to culture and
procurement.&lt;br/&gt;