* 0309401
* Optimizing the Impact of Online Professional Development for K-12 Teachers (Resubmission)
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Glenn Kleiman, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,775,212.00

Many changes in K-12 education have created an increased and critical need for
effective&lt;br/&gt;professional development for teachers. These changes include
new standards; new&lt;br/&gt;curriculum and assessments; changes in student
demographics; advances in classroom&lt;br/&gt;technology; and a growing shortage
of qualified teachers. To address this need, many&lt;br/&gt;educational
organizations are turning to web-based, online professional
development,&lt;br/&gt;which can provide teachers with flexible scheduling and
access to resources, mentors,&lt;br/&gt;and peers that would not be available
otherwise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant body of research enables us to
define principles of effective professional&lt;br/&gt;development in face-to-
face settings, and some research is available showing that
online&lt;br/&gt;courses can be effective at the college and high school levels.
However, very little&lt;br/&gt;research is available about the effectiveness of
online professional development in which&lt;br/&gt;the goals are to impact both
the content knowledge and the classroom practices of K-12&lt;br/&gt;teachers.
The proposed project will begin to establish a solid research base about
online&lt;br/&gt;professional development by addressing three major questions,
which fall under ROLE&lt;br/&gt;Program Quadrant III, Research on STEM Learning
in Education Settings:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. What is the comparative impact on
teachers' content knowledge and instructional&lt;br/&gt;practices of alternative
models of online professional development, face-to-face&lt;br/&gt;models, and
hybrid models that combine the two?&lt;br/&gt;2. How do the types of
interactions among participants and between participants and&lt;br/&gt;workshop
leaders differ across different online professional development models,
and&lt;br/&gt;are these differences related to participants' satisfaction,
knowledge acquisition, and&lt;br/&gt;changes in practice?&lt;br/&gt;3. What are
the factors that maximize the impact of online professional development
on&lt;br/&gt;teachers' content knowledge and instructional
practices?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these questions, the project will
develop and implement a series of contrastive&lt;br/&gt;professional development
workshops, including several online models, hybrid models&lt;br/&gt;that
integrate some face-to-face meetings into the context of online workshops, and
a&lt;br/&gt;more traditional onsite workshop model. The workshops will focus on
topics selected&lt;br/&gt;from the middle school mathematics curriculum, and
seek to both deepen participants'&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the mathematics and
enhance their approaches to teaching this content.&lt;br/&gt;Within each content
area, the goals, learning activities, teaching approach, and
time&lt;br/&gt;requirements for participants will be held as constant as
possible across workshop&lt;br/&gt;models. Multiple measures, including
assessments of participants' content knowledge&lt;br/&gt;within the context of
teaching tasks, participant surveys and interviews, analyses of&lt;br/&gt;lesson
plans and student work, classroom observations, student surveys, and
discourse&lt;br/&gt;analyses will be employed to address the three main research
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results will inform educational policy
makers, school and district administrators,&lt;br/&gt;professional development
providers, faculty in teacher preparation programs, and&lt;br/&gt;teachers, as
well as the research community.&lt;br/&gt;