* 0309510
* Grain Growth and Recrystallization of Marble in Nature and Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Brian Evans, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2007
* USD 269,432.00

Deformation in metasediments is often localized within limestone and marble
formations. Thus, faults and shear zones in these rocks record an important part
of the strain history of tectonic events and are likely critical in determining
the overall strength of the rock mass. It is often posited that such fine-
grained, highly strained rocks deform by diffusion creep. Observations of
exhumed shear zones show that the rocks are polyphase assemblages exhibiting a
complex interplay of metamorphic reactions, grain size refinement,
recrystallization, and internal deformation. Field observations, laboratory
data, and continuum mechanics theory suggest that under some temperature,
pressure, and strain rate conditions, the processes of localization may depend
on a competition between grain growth during diffusion creep and dynamic
recrystallization during dislocation creep. Based upon previous experiments,
grain boundary mobility will be highly dependent on disperse second phases,
solute impurities, preexisting porosity, and grain-size distribution, as well as
temperature, stress, and pore-fluid chemistry. Recent experiments in the rock
mechanics laboratory at MIT indicate that grain growth is strongly inhibited by
the addition of Mg in solid-solution in the calcite matrix. Additionally, the
diffusion creep strength, while not directly affected, is indirectly affected,
owing to the suppression of grain growth. In this project, investigators are
constructing synthetic marble samples using Mg, Fe, Sr, and Mn as solid solutes.
After fabrication, the samples are used to study normal grain growth, mechanical
properties within the diffusion creep regime, and static recrystallization tests
of previously deformed material. The mechanical tests include conventional
triaxial compression and extension, as well as high strain experiments using
loading in simple shear. Similar tests are being done on some natural samples
containing nanometer-sized graphite particles from shear zones in the Helvetic
Alps. Two-phase synthetic samples containing calcite + dolomite are being
fabricated to understand the effect of second phase dispersions on strength in
the diffusion creep regime and on grain growth during creep and under
hydrostatic pressure. Microstructure observations are being done on naturally
deformed rocks, and on synthetic and natural samples deformed in the laboratory.
Detailed analysis of the chemistry of grain boundaries are being done to
evaluate the possibility of chemical segregation at the calcite grain
boundaries. One broad impact of the study is the development of a teaching
collection of field data, optical and TEM photomicrographs, and electron
microprobe data to be archived as part of the open courseware initiative at MIT.