* 0309719
* New Course Development in Advanced Mechatronics
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Mohan Krishnan, University of Detroit Mercy
* Standard Grant
* Barbara N. Anderegg
* 08/31/2006
* USD 174,192.00

Engineering - Mechanical (56) Mechatronics refers to the interplay between
mechanical and electrical principles that apply to a growing number of
industrial products and processes. Despite the importance of this
interdisciplinary area, many of today's engineering graduates are unprepared to
function competently in environments that require them to integrate electrical
and mechanical knowledge areas. In addition, engineers with better skills in
communication and teamwork are needed to ensure U.S. competitiveness in today's
global economy. Our project addresses these competency gaps by the development
of two team-oriented, project-based courses as a follow-up to a previously
developed Introduction to Mechatronics course. For our project, we have been
working on the following goals: (a) to address the need of industrial partners
to have engineers educated in the principles and applications of mechatronics,
(b) to improve student competencies in communication skills, teamwork, and
project management through the increased use of team-oriented, project-based,
interdisciplinary approaches to instruction in mechatronics, (c) to increase in
engineering students an appreciation for lifelong learning by delivering
instruction in mechatronics to this population, and (d) to increase the
participation of women and underrepresented minorities in engineering by
engaging the freshmen and pre-college populations in hands-on instruction in
sensors and actuators. To achieve our goals, a number of activities have been
undertaken. Our courses have been modeled around the Mechatronic System Modeling
and Simulation at Michigan State University and the Mechatronics System Design
at Clemson University. In addition the Actuator and Sensors in Mechatronics at
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute course and Sensors and Instrument course at the
University of Illinois/Urbana-Champaign have also been used to guide the
development of our new courses. Materials developed for the sensors and
actuators course have been adapted for use in hands-on pre-college learning
modules. These modules are being integrated into existing pre-college outreach
activities that serve a high percentage of female and minority high school
students. An important feature of our project has been the assessment of our
outcomes. Our project team includes an experienced evaluator who works closely
with our CO-PI's to assure that our project goals are being met.

