* 0309111
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Phylogeny of the Genus Microlophus (Squamata: Tropiduridae): A History of Colonization and Dispersal
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Jack Sites, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/2004
* USD 11,970.00

A grant has been awarded from the National Science Foundation to Dr. Jack Sites
and Mr. Edgar Benavides, Brigham Young University, to study the "Phylogeny of
the South American lizard genus Microlophus." This genus consists of 22
recognized species with an extremely unusual geographic distribution; 9 species
are found only in the Galapagos islands, ~ 1000 km off the west coast of Ecuador
in the eastern Pacific, while the remaining 13 species occur in western South
America from southern Ecuador to central Chile. Most of the mainland species are
confined to the Atacama Desert within a few km of the coast, and thus occupy a
linear 'strip' of habitat almost 5000 km long. This distribution is absolutely
unique among land vertebrates. The main objective of the study will be to
reconstruct the evolutionary relationships of all species in this group using
DNA sequences from seven different gene regions, and computer-assisted tree-
building algorithms to test the strength of support for specific genealogical
groups identified in the trees. &lt;br/&gt; The project is broadly significant
for two reasons. First, earlier studies have suggested that ancestors of the
mainland species of this group have colonized the Galapagos independently on two
occasions, but none of these studies have been based on sampling of all mainland
species, so results can be explained as possibly spurious consequences of
incomplete sampling. Benavides has now collected all recognized mainland
species, and can overcome this criticism with more statistically powerful
analyses that were not available to earlier investigators. Second, there are at
least three alternative scenarios for the sequence of coloniazation of islands
within the Galapagos Archipelago, but again sampling limitations have not permit
a rigorous evaluation of alternatives. Sites and Benavides have obtained all but
two of the Galapagos taxa, and will collect the missing species during this
study; this more complete sampling design coupled with extensive molecular data
will give a clearer picture, based on statistically robust hypotheses, for the
assembly and evolution of the unique Galapagos fauna.&lt;br/&gt;