* 0309192
* WORKSHOP: Technological Challenges for Flexible, Light-weight, Low-cost and Scalable Organic Electronics and Photonics being held in Arlington, VA
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2003,07/31/2003
* Ananth Dodabalapur, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2003
* USD 65,000.00

The field of organic and polymeric electronics and photonics has progressed
enormously in recent years as a result of worldwide activity in numerous
research groups. Advances have been made both in the fields of devices and
applications as well as in the underlying chemistry, physics, and materials
science issues. The impact of this field will also influence many adjacent
disciplines such as nanotechnology, sensors, and
photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The growth of the field has been impressive. The
first commercial products were based on photo-conductive films, a business now
with annual sales in the multi-billion dollar range. Light emitting diodes
(LEDs) and displays based on light emitting diodes have been introduced to the
market and a large expansion in market penetration has been forecast in the next
decade. Efficiencies of organic and polymeric LEDs have reached figures close to
theoretical maxima. Thin-film transistor based circuits and systems
incorporating several hundred devices in flexible substrates have been
demonstrated. These levels of integration are sufficient for application such as
radio frequency identification tags. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transistors have also
been successfully integrated with display elements such as PDLCs and
electrophoretic cells and used as chemical sensors. Photodiodes have been
fabricated with quantum efficiencies in excess of 70% and solar cells with power
conversion efficiencies more than 3% have been reported. Solar cell efficiencies
are expected to increase with improvements in materials design. There have been
major strides made in understanding the physics of charge transport and
luminescence and in understanding interfaces between organic materials and also
between metals and organics. There continue to be advances made in the synthesis
of new compounds and in improved synthetic procedures of important materials.
Another area that has seen a lot of growth is the use of novel low-cost
fabrication procedures such as in the realization of a variety of organic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite this impressive set of advances, it is
clear that more research needs to be done. The chief objective of the workshop
is to help define the future of the field. This will be done by having a series
of experts give talks on key subjects and also by encouraging debate and
discussion amongst all participants in a series of panels. The proceedings of
the workshop will be a set of reports and discussion summaries by group
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will also have an impact on graduate
education. A large number of universities offer courses in the general area of
organic semiconductors, and the workshop will help define directions in this
area as well as in retraining high technology workers for careers in the organic
semiconductor field.&lt;br/&gt;