* 0310860
* Virtual Simple Architecture (VISA):     Exceeding the Complexity Limit in Safe Real-Time Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Eric Rotenberg, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 07/31/2007
* USD 275,000.00



Rotenberg

Virtual Simple Architecture (VISA): Exceeding the Complexity Limit in Safe Real-
Time Systems

Abstract

This project resolves a long-standing problem in embedded systems: bounding the
worst-case execution times (WCET) of tasks on contemporary processors. WCETs are
essential for real-time scheduling; yet deriving them for contemporary
processors is intractable. The Virtual Simple Architecture (VISA) framework
shifts the burden of bounding the WCETs of tasks, in part, to hardware. A VISA
is the pipeline timing specification of a hypothetical simple processor. WCET is
derived for a task assuming the VISA. At run-time, the task is executed
speculatively on an unsafe complex processor, and its progress is continuously
gauged. If continued safe progress appears to be in jeopardy, the complex
processor is reconfigured to a simple mode of operation that directly implements
the VISA, thereby explicitly bounding the task's overall execution time by the
WCET.

VISA provides a general framework for safe operation on unsafe processors,
setting up new opportunities for exploiting higher performance in embedded
systems.

The project anticipates and contributes to a major shift in computing (the kind
that occurs once every decade), thus helping to preserve the nation's leadership
in this area. Computers have always evolved by integrating higher levels of
complexity and performance into smaller systems. In the 1990s, this evolution
led to highly functional personal computers (PC) with supercomputer-like
performance. Now, in the post-PC era, users interact with embedded computers
continuously, transparently, and in real time (e.g., cell phones, cars,
airplanes, appliances, industry/military applications, etc.). This project
radically increases the performance, functionality, and reliability of embedded
systems, which are vital to the day-to-day functioning of our society.