* 0310245
* Speeding up Integer Based Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Yijie Han, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 07/31/2007
* USD 150,000.00

This project focuses on research issues concerning integer based algorithms in
which each word is capable of storing only a w-bit integer. The notion of the
integer based computation differs&lt;br/&gt;from the traditional comparison
based computation in that the model is more realistic and practical. The goals
of this project are: (1) To study and compare comparison based computation and
integer based computation and to develop methodologies, paradigms, strategies
and &lt;br/&gt;techniques for designing integer based algorithms. (2) To quest
for&lt;br/&gt;the ultimate limit of integer based computation and to
discover&lt;br/&gt;algorithms(resp. lower bounds) of complexity that matches or
approaches the lower (resp. upper) bound for fundamental problems such as
sorting and searching. (3) To investigate and refine methods for
designing&lt;br/&gt;integer based algorithms for a wide range of computational
problems, e.g. graph problems and problems in algebra. (4) To investigate and
propose integer based algorithms which are not only fast in big-O
&lt;br/&gt;notion of complexity but also having a simpler structure, more
intuitive and more practical.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Sorting is probably the most
basic and fundamental problem in algorithm design. Sorting provides one of the
most basic building blocks for the design of many other algorithms. With the
speedup of the sorting algorithm, many other algorithms can be speeded up. In
the past comparison sorting was used as one of the major tools for the design of
algorithms for many problems. As fast integer sorting algorithms are discovered
they can be used to replace comparison sorting in many situations. The
techniques invented in the design of fast sorting and searching algorithms can
be applied to the algorithm design for many other problems including minimum
spanning tree, shortest path, network flow, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sorting
and searching are problems encountered in many science and engineering problems.
For example, sorting has been used in database design, computer graphics,
computational geometry, network management, computational robotics, data mining,
data warehouse, etc., etc.. Due to the vast wide applicability of sorting and
searching, the impacts of fast integer sorting and searching algorithms are
huge. Sorting and searching also serve as a basic vehicle for the education of
computation for undergraduate and graduate students. Discovering fast integer
sorting and searching algorithms can benefit this purpose. The simple structured
integer sorting and searching algorithms can be lectured in the undergraduate
courses and advanced integer sorting and searching algorithms can be lectured in
graduate level courses. Education with integer sorting and searching algorithms
will present to the students the common techniques in constructing an efficient
algorithm. &lt;br/&gt;