* 0310632
* U. S.-Russian Collaborative Research:    Codes for Multiple-Access Channels, Genetic Testing, Deletion-Insertion Correction, and Synchronization
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Vladimir Tonchev, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Sirin Tekinay
* 07/31/2007
* USD 178,457.00

Synchronization is an important component of reliable&lt;br/&gt;data
transmission. The problem of avoiding conflicts in
asynchronous&lt;br/&gt;multiple-access channels is investigated by utilizing
methods from&lt;br/&gt;algebraic and combinatorial coding
theory.&lt;br/&gt;Difference systems of sets are combinatorial
structures&lt;br/&gt;that are being used to facilitate the design of codes with
good&lt;br/&gt;synchronization properties. Comma-free codes are brought into
play &lt;br/&gt;in the organization of protocols for transmission over collision
&lt;br/&gt;channels in the absence of word synchronization.&lt;br/&gt; Group
testing techniques have numerous applications in fault &lt;br/&gt;detection,
error-control codes, and experimental designs.&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, group
testing has been studied in connection &lt;br/&gt;with emerging new applications
in multi-access communications,&lt;br/&gt;the analysis of genetic information,
chromosome mapping,&lt;br/&gt;and DNA library screening. This project explores
the link between &lt;br/&gt;optimal 2-stage testing schemes and combinatorial
designs that &lt;br/&gt;minimize the expected number of tests, as well as
algorithms &lt;br/&gt;for the reconstruction of sequences by their subsequences
or &lt;br/&gt;super-sequences.&lt;br/&gt; Packet loss is a common source of
errors in Internet transmissions &lt;br/&gt;that has renewed the interest in
deletion-correcting codes. &lt;br/&gt;The research concerning deletion and
insertion correcting &lt;br/&gt;codes will focus on finding bounds on the
optimal size of a code &lt;br/&gt;with prescribed error-correcting capacity, as
well as&lt;br/&gt;constructions of good 2-deletion-correcting codes that
exceed&lt;br/&gt;the Gilbert bound, and constructions of ordered
Steiner&lt;br/&gt;systems that yield optimal deletion-insertion
correcting&lt;br/&gt;codes.&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research program presents an
excellent &lt;br/&gt;opportunity for introducing graduate and upper level
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;students to the use of computers for learning and
solving problems&lt;br/&gt;that involve large scale algebraic and combinatorial
operations &lt;br/&gt;applied on data structures of formidable size, and
utilizing&lt;br/&gt;the computer as a tool for learning and solving real-world
problems&lt;br/&gt;that arise in various areas of science and
engineering&lt;br/&gt;of today's information age.&lt;br/&gt;