* 0310490
* Collaborative Research: Graphical Passwords -- Design, Analysis, and Human Factors
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Susan Wiedenbeck, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 07/31/2006
* USD 160,000.00

1) Abstract ===========

Proposal Number: CCR-0310793, CCR-0310490, CCR-0310159 and CCR-0310571

TITLE: Graphical Passwords -- Design, Analysis, and Human Factors

PI: J.C. Birget and Dawei Hong (Rutgers-Camden),

Co-PIs:

S. Man (Southwest State U., Minnesota), N. Memon (Polytechnic U., Brooklyn), S.
Wiedenbeck (Drexel).

Abstract:

Humans are not good at remembering alpha-numeric passwords, if the passwords are
complicated enough to be secure. Graphical passwords seem easier to remember and
to use. Here, an image is displayed and the user chooses a few places in the
image. To log in, the user has to click close to these places again. Older
systems use preprocessed images with predefined click regions, among which a
user has to choose. The investigators designed systems that allow users to
choose any points as click points, and that allow users to import their own
images. The investigators invented a ``robust discretization'' of images; this
enables users to produce exactly the same discrete password even though they
cannot click on exactly the same pixels at each login. Passwords are vulnerable
to ``shoulder surfing'', which consists of a user being observed, or filmed,
during login. The investigators designed password systems that are immune to
shoulder surfing.

One of the objectives of this proposal is a human factors study, concerning
learnability, memorability, speed, security (unsafe practices), and user
satisfaction of graphical password systems. A second objective is to design new
graphical password systems, based on curves, movement, and three-dimensional
scenes, as well as to design ``bundles'' of passwords that a user can use on
different accounts, and that are easy to remember (and distinguish) as a group.
New robust discretization algorithms and probabilistic analyses of the security
of graphical password systems will be developed.