* 0310183
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Physical and Numerical Modeling of Geogrid-Soil Cyclic Interaction
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Alaa Ashmawy, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 29,375.00

0310183&lt;br/&gt;Ashmawy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports
a joint research project between Dr. Alaa Ashmawy, Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, University of South Florida (USF), Tampa, Florida and
Dr. Ahmed Abdel-Rahman, Civil Engineering Department, the National Research
Center (NRC), Cairo, Egypt. They propose to investigate the physical and
numerical modeling of geogrid-soil cyclic interaction. The use of geogrids as
mechanical inclusions in earth construction has been on the rise in both the US
and Egypt. However, the interaction mechanisms between granular soils and
geogrids are not yet fully understood, especially under cyclic loading
conditions such as traffic and earthquake loading. In an earlier project, the
principal investigators designed and manufactured a new multi-purpose
geosynthetic testing apparatus capable of performing pullout and direct shear
testing on soil-geogrid interfaces. The PIs plan to utilize the new apparatus,
currently housed at the NRC in Cairo, to investigate the cyclic interaction
between granular soils and geogrid inclusions. The Egyptian team will carry out
a comprehensive experimental program to examine the dependence of static and
cyclic pullout strength on geogrid opening dimensions in relation to grain size.
The team at USF will conduct numerical modeling of the micromechanics of the
system using the Discrete Element Method (DEM) to verify and calibrate the
experimental data. Modifications to the current reinforced earth design and
geogrid manufacturing standards will be proposed accordingly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The PI has recently developed a new technique for
numerical modeling of angular particles using the DEM method. This planned
research activity will allow validation and improvement of the technique through
comparison with experimental data collected by the Egyptian team. The NRC in
Cairo possesses the necessary infrastructure for the experimental study, and the
DEM software, algorithms, and numerical research tools are available at the USF.
The findings are expected to advance the state of knowledge with respect to
geosynthetic-soil interaction as well as discrete element modeling of reinforced
granular soil systems. The project will involve an American graduate student who
will have a unique learning opportunity through her visit to and work at the
cooperating scientist's laboratory in Cairo. An undergraduate student working on
the project will also be supported through a REU program at the USF's College of
Engineering. Both students are members of underrepresented groups. Broad
dissemination of research findings will be done through publication in journals,
conference proceedings, and the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;