* 0310079
* The K' of Highly Compressible Silicate Liquids: An Experimental Study
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Rebecca Lange, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2006
* USD 178,543.00

Lange&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0310079&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge to modeling
the partial melting process at deep mantle depths is the lack of information on
the density of magmatic liquids at high pressure. The largest uncertainty is
with the pressure dependence on melt compressibility (K0' = dK0/dP), and how K0'
varies with melt composition. The goal of this proposal is to tightly constrain
values of K0' for four silicate (NaAlSi3O8, CaTiSiO5, Na2Si2O5, K2Si2O5) and
three carbonate (Li2CO3, Na2CO3, K2CO3) liquids that are highly compressible at
one bar (KT,0 between 4 and 17 GPa at 1600 degrees C). These results, when
combined with K0 and K0' data in the literature will provide a robust test of
the hypothesis that the K0' of a silicate liquid is inversely correlated with
its one-bar bulk modulus (K0). If this new hypothesis is verified, it will allow
the K0' of magmatic liquids to be estimated from their one-bar bulk modulus, for
which there are well-calibrated models. Conversely, if the postulated relation
between K0 and K0' is shown not to hold, the new K0' data for silicate and
carbonate liquids will substantially augment the existing data set for liquids
for which K0' is known independently of K0. The method that we will use to
determine liquid K0' is fusion curve analysis, combined with high-quality phase-
equilibrium experiments. This project will provide training to two female
graduate students in X-ray diffraction, FTIR spectroscopy, and electron
microprobe analysis, as well as with high-pressure and high-temperature
equipment including a cold-seal pressure vessel and piston-cylinder apparatus.
It will also provide them with an education in thermodynamic calculations of
crystal-liquid equilibria, and on the importance of their results to studies of
magmatism and volcanism. The skills that they will develop will prepare them
equally well for a career in either the earth sciences or the high-tech
materials industry. &lt;br/&gt;