* 0310329
* Understanding Controls on the Scale and Style of Explosive Volcanic Eruptions with Observational and Multi-Phase Computational Techniques
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Amanda Clarke, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2007
* USD 249,965.00

EAR-0310329&lt;br/&gt;Clarke&lt;br/&gt;Population density around active
volcanoes has increased rapidly over the last century, and in fact, roughly 500
million people today live in regions of the world directly threatened by
volcanic hazards. Pyroclastic flows, or hot, high-speed avalanches of pumice and
gas, are a major cause of destruction and loss of life in explosive eruptions.
Their effects can be extremely destructive, as indicated by the deaths of 27,000
inhabitants of St. Pierre (Martinique) in 1902, the devastating eruption of
Lamington (Papua New Guinea) in 1951, and the eruptions of Merapi (Indonesia) in
the last century. Similar impacts can be anticipated in the future at other
volcanically active locations. Two of the most important eruptions of the last
20+ years, with respect to monitoring, hazards mitigation and post-eruptive
research, have been the eruptions of Mount St. Helens (MSH) during the 1980's
and the ongoing eruption of the Soufriere Hills volcano, Montserrat (SHV). Each
of these volcanoes, at different times during a single eruptive period,
exhibited two different scales and styles of explosion - one style aborting
after only a few minutes, generating what are termed Vulcanian explosions, and
the other style continuing rather than aborting, thus producing larger-scale,
sustained Plinian eruptions. The controls on such explosions are poorly
understood, are imperative to hazard mitigation and are therefore the focus of
the proposed research. Our previous studies successfully compared observational
and field data from Vulcanian explosions at SHV with conduit and explosion
models, validating our computational methods. The proposed research will build
on this work in order to identify the salient controls on explosive style in two
ways. First, because our previous studies required several simplifying
assumptions, we intend to further develop the conduit flow model allowing for
increased complexity of the magmatic system. Second, we will analyze explosions
of different scales and styles: the 1996 sustained, sub-Plinian explosion at SHV
and a series of short-lived eruptions at MSH, in July and August 1980. Our
improved model combined with field-based studies of real explosions will lead to
a better understanding of the potential impact of such volcanic
eruptions.&lt;br/&gt;