* 0310157
* PostDoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Denne Reed, Reed                    Denne          N
* Fellowship Award
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 05/31/2007
* USD 144,375.00

This Minority Post-Doctoral Research and Training Fellowship employs fossil
micromammals to reconstruct hominid paleoenvironments in Ethiopia during the
Plio-Pleistocene. It expands on previous work by integrating three large,
existing data sets and applying quantitative tools such as geographical
information systems (GIS), geospatial statistics, 2- and 3-dimensional imaging
techniques with morphometics and multivariate statistics in novel ways to
improve paleoecological analysis. The proposal addresses the traditionally
challenging problem of interpreting paleoenvironmental change and its affect on
early hominid adaptation, ecology and lifeways. Many new discoveries associate
early hominids with a greater diversity of habitats. As a result of these
discoveries, we are faced with the challenge of discerning environmental
influence on hominid adaptive traits between synchronous species as well as
adaptations within a lineage through time. Explanation of these events will
require greater paleoenvironmental and paleoecological resolution than is
currently available. Paleoenvironmental analyses using micromammals have been
inconclusive because analytical methodologies were not extensively tested under
controlled conditions where precision and accuracy of faunal response to habitat
change could be assessed. Furthermore, alternate lines of paleoenvironmental
evidence (e.g. soil geochemistry, Paleobotany and megafaunal studies) often
contradicted each other and microfaunal results. The intellectual merit of this
proposal resides with its ability to address fundamental questions regarding the
spatial ecology of African small mammals and use the results in more powerful
and precise paleoenvironmental analyses. The proposed research examines the
geographic and temporal distribution of micromammal species and their
morphological adaptations from a paleoecological perspective. It asks, 1) what
are the minimally perceptible morphological differences between micromammal
species, and how does it bias the detection of fossil species? 2) What are the
functional bases for the morphological differences and how are they informative
of habit, ecology and paleoecology? 3) How are systematic and morphological
differences geographically and spatially distributed? What is the strength of
correlation with other ecological variables and which systematic and
morphological qualities are best able to predict biotopic, climatic and
ecological variables? 4) What do fossil microfaunal assemblages indicate about
the paleoenvironmental and paleoecological preferences of early hominids? 5)How
can disparate data sources relevant to hominid paleoecology be combined to yield
more powerful and precise results? These questions are addressed through
morphometric, statistical, geographical and phylogenetic analysis of
micromammalian skeletal morphology. The proposed research will yield tangible
results including a knowledgebase uniting 2- and 3-dimensional imagery of
thousands of specimens residing in disparate collections with diagnostic
morphometric algorithms, phylogenetic analyses, and a geographical information
system (GIS). Additionally the project, under the sponsorship of Dr. Anna K
Behrensmeyer of the National Museum of Natural History, Paleobiology, Washington
DC, will train the minority investigator in multivariate morphometric and
phylogenetic analysis, foster interaction with leading investigators in the
field of paleoecology and produce publications detailing phylogeographic
analyses of African micromammals, and analyses of fossil microfauna from the
Hadar and Dikika-Asbole paleontological research areas in Ethiopia. Finally, the
Fellowship will positively impact under representation of minorities in science
and engineering fields.

