* 0310104
* Collaborative Research: Climate as a Principal Control on Monsoon-Dominated Deltas: Late Quaternary Records from the Ganges-Brahmaputra System
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Steven Kuehl, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2005
* USD 157,123.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds are requested for a two-year study to
reconstruct a 40-ky stratigraphic record of climate impacts and
fluviosedimentary responses in the Ganges-Brahmaputra (G-B) delta system. The
study's main objectives are to determine how changing source areas, weathering
patterns, and delivery of sediment have influenced development of the Bengal
basin under the control of shifting monsoon regimes. Previous NSF-supported
studies of the Bengal Basin by the PIs demonstrate that it contains a high-
resolution record of Late Quaternary fluviosedimentary signals from the
Himalayan catchment, presenting an unparalleled opportunity to understand how
dramatic changes in South Asian climate have impacted the sediments and
character of a major deltaic sequence. Key features of the G-B sediment
dispersal system that make it particularly appropriate for this study include:
(1) strong climatic responses and rapid signal propagation from the catchment to
margin, (2) a suite of geochemical and mineralogical signatures that can be
related to processes and regions within the Indo-Himalayan catchment, and (3)
the preservation of thick, high-resolution, and diverse stratigraphic records at
the margin.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, the G-B system will provide important insight
for river system behavior and&lt;br/&gt;stratigraphic responses to climate
change, especially for the seven major fluvial systems fed by the
Himalayan/Tibetan uplift.&lt;br/&gt;The main approaches for this study involve:
(1) geochemical, stratigraphic, and&lt;br/&gt;paleoenvironmental studies of
borehole samples, (2) conceptual model development for monsoon-affected sediment
dispersal systems and, (3) testing of basin response to changing climate and
sediment delivery using state-of-art numerical models. Borehole samples will be
collected from areas dominated by Ganges, Brahmaputra, and mixed inputs, as well
as those of fine- and coarse-grained textures, providing a variety of
sedimentary signals and sequences. Strontium and neodymium isotopes, along with
mineralogy, will be used to trace the production and dispersal of sediment over
recent interglacial, glacial, and interstadial periods. Weathering patterns will
be traced using clay mineralogy and stable O and H isotopes. Radiocarbon and
optically-stimulated luminescence dating will be used to establish a chronology
and determine changing accretion rates. These data will be further correlated
with organic d13C values and a collaborative palynology study to infer shifting
floral communities. Altogether, this multi-proxy approach will allow us to
identify diagnostic geochemical and stratigraphic signatures in the Bengal Basin
that can be related to changing climatic conditions during the Late Quaternary.
Finally, numerical-modeling experiments using both hydrologic and stratigraphic
models will allow us to test our conceptual ideas regarding the influence of
Late Quaternary climate change on river behavior and basin
stratigraphy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader societal impacts: Understanding the
influence of climate on the delivery of river sediment to the Bengal margin will
contribute to our ability to predict the environmental consequences of climate
change in monsoon-influenced fluviodeltaic settings. In particular, the
subsistence livelihood of Bangladesh's 130 million inhabitants depends largely
on agricultural practices that are sensitive to changes in sediment delivery,
flooding patterns, and erosion/accretion cycles of lowland and coastal areas. In
addition, mediation of the country's current groundwater arsenic crisis may
hinge on a more complete understanding of the mineralogy and geochemistry of
subsurface aquifers, to which this study will contribute. Furthermore,
substantial scientific exchanges between the PIs and scientists/students in the
developing host country will broaden the local and international impact of our
results. Collaborative arrangements with Dhaka University and the Geological
Survey of Bangladesh will assure the full involvement of Bangladesh scientists
and resource managers. Two graduate students from the U.S., one at William &amp;
Mary and one at Stony Brook, will participate in all aspects of this work, and
their theses/dissertations will shape the outcome of this study. The project
will also involve undergraduate students through independent and/or senior
research studies. Finally, both PIs are teaching faculty at their respective
institutions, and the progress and results of this study will be incorporated
into relevant courses.&lt;br/&gt;