* 0310970
* Discrete Location Theory and Its Application to Peer-to-Peer Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* C. Greg Plaxton, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 06/30/2007
* USD 150,000.00

Discrete location theory is concerned with combinatorial
optimization&lt;br/&gt;problems in which spatial considerations play a prominent
role. For&lt;br/&gt;example, one basic discrete location problem asks for a
specified&lt;br/&gt;number of points in a given metric space to be marked so
that the sum,&lt;br/&gt;over all points, of the distance to the nearest marked
point is&lt;br/&gt;minimized. Peer-to-peer computing is an emerging discipline
concerned&lt;br/&gt;with the seamless interconnection of dynamic collections of
nodes for&lt;br/&gt;the purpose of sharing computational resources such as
bandwidth,&lt;br/&gt;storage, and CPU. A good first-order model of peer-to-peer
networks&lt;br/&gt;assumes that the nodes reside in a metric space, and that the
cost of&lt;br/&gt;communication between a pair of nodes is given by the
corresponding&lt;br/&gt;distance in the underlying metric space. Because the
internode&lt;br/&gt;distances in peer-to-peer networks tend to vary
significantly, spatial&lt;br/&gt;considerations play a prominent role in peer-
to-peer computing. This&lt;br/&gt;project addresses a number of basic questions
in discrete location&lt;br/&gt;theory, emphasizing questions that arise in
applications to&lt;br/&gt;peer-to-peer computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discrete
location theory is not a new subject, having been studied&lt;br/&gt;within the
operations research community for decades. Many of the&lt;br/&gt;basic problems
in this area are NP-hard, so practitioners have&lt;br/&gt;generally resorted to
heuristics in order to search for optimal or&lt;br/&gt;near-optimal solutions.
Unfortunately, with few exceptions, the&lt;br/&gt;solutions returned by these
heuristics can be arbitrarily far from&lt;br/&gt;optimal. In recent years, there
has been an explosion of interest in&lt;br/&gt;the design and analysis of
provably good approximation algorithms for&lt;br/&gt;NP-hard optimization
problems. This research has shed considerable&lt;br/&gt;light on the
approximability of a number of basic discrete location&lt;br/&gt;problems, for
example, establishing that the optimal solution to the&lt;br/&gt;facility
location problem can be approximated to within a factor of&lt;br/&gt;1.52 in
polynomial time, but that achieving a factor of 1.463 would&lt;br/&gt;violate a
standard hardness assumption. Given such theoretical&lt;br/&gt;advances, it is
natural to ask whether these provably good&lt;br/&gt;approximation algorithms
are preferable to existing heuristics in&lt;br/&gt;practice. For the most part
this is not the case, since the running&lt;br/&gt;times of these approximation
algorithms, while polynomial, tend to be&lt;br/&gt;considerably higher than
those of existing heuristics. For the&lt;br/&gt;discrete location problems
addressed in this project, the primary&lt;br/&gt;objective of this project is to
develop constant-factor approximation&lt;br/&gt;algorithms that are comparable
to (or improve upon) existing&lt;br/&gt;heuristics in terms of running time and
ease of implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peer-to-peer computing is a young
field with obvious potential, but&lt;br/&gt;significant technical challenges
remain to be addressed before this&lt;br/&gt;potential can be realized. More
scalable than client-server,&lt;br/&gt;peer-to-peer enables a wide-range of
large-scale applications that&lt;br/&gt;cannot be supported by existing server
farms. Furthermore,&lt;br/&gt;peer-to-peer computing holds the promise of
delivering&lt;br/&gt;supercomputer-like performance to the average user. But
before such&lt;br/&gt;lofty goals can be achieved, existing peer-to-peer systems
need to be&lt;br/&gt;significantly refined and extended in order to
comprehensively address&lt;br/&gt;issues related to locality, concurrency, fault
tolerance,&lt;br/&gt;self-stabilization, heterogeneity, cost sharing, and
security. This&lt;br/&gt;project investigates novel approaches to the design of
practical and&lt;br/&gt;provably efficient peer-to-peer infrastructure,
emphasizing&lt;br/&gt;locality-related concerns.