* 0310122
* Integrated Modeling of Precipitation-Recharge-Runoff at the River Basin Scale: The Susquehanna
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Patrick Reed, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2007
* USD 410,001.00

0310122&lt;br/&gt;Duffy&lt;br/&gt;Although the river basin is the organizing
principal of the terrestrial water cycle research, until recently, models which
couple the complexity of climate, terrain, ecology, and geology at this scale to
the particular needs of a water resource forecast, have not been considered
practical. The present research proposes to investigate the multi-scale dynamics
of precipitation-recharge-runoff, and the partitioning of water and energy
budgets over complex terrain and hydrogeological conditions. The approach
maintains the natural coupling between surface and subsurface processes at each
scale of interest but recognizes that surface water basins and groundwater
basins may have distinct delineations. The modeling approach is based on a
finite volume representation, where conservation and constitutive equations are
averaged over a specified support scale. The model is multi-scale in the sense
that climatic, vegetative, topographic and hydrogeologic elements of the
landscape are resolved in such a way as to preserve the necessary space-time
scales for a particular water resource forecast (flood dynamics, stream-aquifer
response to drought, etc.). The research addresses the tradeoff between the
scale of computing and the need to include fine-scale material properties in
water resource predictions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-term flow forecasts for
the SRB must account for the competing time scales of the surface and subsurface
processes governing the basin's response to climatologic or landuse forcing. Our
strategy is to condition forecasts on both rapid surface responses as well as
slower subsurface responses using multiobjective evolutionary algorithms. This
multiobjective framework will adapt model parameters and resolution to account
for the disparate time-scales and physical complexities of surface and
subsurface flow regimes.&lt;br/&gt;This research will initially focus on
developing regional conceptual surface-groundwater models for component
watersheds within the SRB. The next phase of the research will develop a
strategy for synthesis of the regional conceptual models with geospatial data as
input to a large-scale model for the surface-groundwater dynamics of the entire
SRB. The final phase of the research will develop a decision-support system that
will assimilate new climatologic data into long-range runoff predictions. These
long-range predictions will support the development of improved water management
policies for the entire SRB. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses four
fundamental questions: 1) What role does hydrogeology play in long-term and
short-term runoff and what is the relation to climate and landuse dynamics? 2)
When does small-scale soil and subsurface variability control runoff and how can
models "adapt" to changing external (climate) and internal conditions (landuse)?
3) What are the space-time scales at which tributaries of the river basin are
dynamically coupled? 4) How can evolutionary computing strategies and
"qualitative" conceptual models be incorporated to better resolve model
dimensionality, parameterization, and prediction at the river basin scale?
&lt;br/&gt;