* 0310941
* The Algebraic Structure of Linear Transforms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Jose Moura, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2007
* USD 307,105.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0310941&lt;br/&gt;Pueschel, Markus&lt;br/&gt;Carnegie Mellon
U&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discrete signal processing (DSP) transforms, for example,
the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) or the discrete cosine transform (DCT), are
major tools that underlie many of the practical applications of signal
processing. Deriving and understanding their fast algorithms has been and
continues to be a major research thrust. It is well known that the DFT can be
characterized in the framework of the representation theory of cyclic groups.
This connection provides deep insight into the DFT and, more importantly,
provides the tools to understand, concisely derive, and analyze its fast
algorithms. The first goal of this research is to develop the corresponding
algebraic framework for other transforms, in particular, for the sixteen
discrete trignometric transforms (DTT): the eight discrete cosine transforms and
eight discrete sine transforms. The investigators characterize the DTTs in the
framework of representation theory of polynomial algebras and develop the theory
and the methods to derive the DTTs fast algorithms by manipulating algebras
rather than transform matrix entries. This algebraic approach addresses one of
the large voids in the theory of DSP algorithms: despite the numerous
publications on fast DTT algorithms there is yet no general theory that explains
why these algorithms exist or that gives insight into their structure. The
research will develop a comprehensive algebraic framework for the DTT algorithms
that will provide a concise and transparent derivation of their fast algorithms.
More importantly, the algebraic approach is the appropriate framework to
discover new algorithms that have not been found with conventional methods--
recently, the new class of Cooley-Tukey FFT like DCT algorithms was derived by
the investigators using these algebraic methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
second goal of the research is to extend the connection between algebra and
signal processing transforms beyond the derivation of fast algorithms to
consider the fundamental question of to what extent is transform-based signal
processing algebraic. The investigators pursue the following directions: (1)
establish the foundation by formally developing the connection between algebra
and signal processing by relating signal processing concepts to algebraic
concepts; (2) generalize the algebraic approach to derive new transforms and
their fast algorithms for applications in one and more dimensions; and (3) to
capture existing transforms beyond the DFT and the DTTs in an algebraic
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In summary, the goal of this research is to work
towards a universal algebraic foundation of linear transforms and their fast
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;