* 0310284
* Experimental and Petrofabric Study of Hybrid Fractures and the Transition From Joints to Faults
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Frederick Chester, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David Fountain
* 05/31/2007
* USD 299,546.00

Joints and faults are two types of fractures generally recognized in rock. A
popular model for fracture development presented in many college and graduate
level textbooks on structural geology and tectonics is based on the Mohr-Coulomb
failure criterion. The model suggests that the failure criterion for rock is
continuous and parabolic in the tensile regime, describes the formation of both
joints and faults, and predicts that hybrid fractures (i.e., fractures with
characteristics intermediate to joints and faults) form under mixed compressive
and tensile stress states. However, many questions remain concerning the mode of
failure and mechanical behavior across the joint to fault transition because few
experiments have been conducted under mixed stress states. As such, a
fundamental question regarding fracture of rock is whether joints and faults
represent end-members in a continuum of fracture types. Preliminary experiments
using dog-bone shaped samples of Carrara marble extended under confining
pressure in the rock deformation laboratory at Texas A&amp;M University provide
strong evidence for the existence of hybrid fractures. Fractured samples appear
to display a continuous transition in macroscopic fracture orientation and
surface morphology from classic joints to Coulomb faults. Fracture strength,
however, does not appear consistent with a parabolic Mohr-Coulomb failure
criterion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The joint to fault transition in Carrara marble
and Berea sandstone is being investigated through experimental rock deformation
and petrofabric study of brittle failure under mixed tensile and compressive
stress states. The experiments are being used to determine the exact form of the
failure envelope from jointing to faulting. Acoustic emissions are monitored to
determine relative timing and number of microfracture events leading up to
macroscopic failure, and sequential strain experiments provide samples for
petrofabric analysis of different stages of fracture development. Detailed
petrofabric analysis using optical and scanning electron microscopy, and surface
profilometry are used to characterize the morphology of the macroscopic fracture
surface and determine the microscopic structure and mechanisms of deformation.
The relative contribution of intragranular fracture, grain boundary fracture,
cleavage, and twinning along the macroscopic fracture is being quantified.
Specific goals of the project include testing the stepped-crack model for
formation of hybrid fractures, developing a micromechanical model of fracture
development consistent with experiment observations, and deriving a failure
criterion for hybrid fracture.