* 0310240
* Extension of the Newark Geomagnetic Polarity Reference Sequence to Address Problems of the Carnian and the Middle Triassic
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2003,12/31/2005
* Paul Olsen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2005
* USD 166,760.00

ABSTRACT

The geomagnetic polarity time scale (GPTS) for the Late Triassic developed from
the thick, continuous continental record from the Newark basin is based on cycle
stratigraphy for 26 million years represented by the lacustrine Passaic,
Lockatong and upper Stockton formations but on extrapolation of sedimentation
rates for the fluvial lower Stockton Formation for which the single
magnetostratigraphic record from a core hole has not been verified. Correlation
of the Triassic-Jurassic boundary within the Newark succession seems secure but
placements of the Norian-Rhaetian and especially the Carnian-Norian boundaries
based largely on palynology have become highly problematical in attempts to
merge the marine biostratigraphic and nonmarine lithostratigraphic records.
Recently proposed correlations of the Carnian-Norian boundary in marine sections
to the Newark sequence place this boundary in the middle of the Stockton
Formation and would imply a boundary age of ~228 Ma. This is appreciably older
than usually shown in geologic time scales although not precluded by available
radiometric age data. If confirmed it would have major implications to our
understanding of regional and global historical geology including the timing of
evolution of major groups of land vertebrates like the dinosaurs and the rifting
of Pangea. However, the correlation of the marine and nonmarine sequences
depends strongly on the reliability of a reference polarity sequence, which
needs to be validated and refined for the time represented by the lower Stockton
Formation. We propose a two-pronged approach to resolving the ambiguities in the
correlations between the marine Carnian and older strata and the Newark
reference section: 1) paleomagnetic analysis and measurement of outcropping
Stockton Formation to test and extend the polarity sequence delineated in the
Princeton corehole and to link this record directly to the astronomically
calibrated GPTS, and 2) paleomagnetic analysis and measurement of correlative
outcropping strata of the Timesgadiouine Formation (Argana Basin, Morocco) for
cycle stratigraphic control. Successful completion of this 2-year project will
extend the astronomically calibrated GPTS to encompass more than 30 million
years of the Late Triassic and possibly into the Middle Triassic. A precise
geologic time scale has broad applicability and will, for example, provide a
rare opportunity to resolve marine and nonmarine correlations over a significant
and interesting interval of geologic time just prior to the breakup of Pangea,
to correlate important land vertebrate faunal assemblages on a global scale, and
to incorporate some of the few radiometric dates that are available for age
control but which come from nonmarine sections. Our work includes collaboration
with a Moroccan geologist and a significant in-kind logistical contribution from
ONAREP, the Moroccan state oil company that in addition to being integral to the
project itself will help build bridges between Arab and U.S. institutions during
this difficult time. Finally, we will develop a web site that will include an
Arabic version so that it can be used as an educational tool for both U.S. and
Moroccan groups and revolve around the concept that the two areas (eastern U.S.
and Morocco) are sister geological and biological provinces, now separated by an
ocean, but were once part of the same vast land mass and directly adjacent to
one another. U.S. undergraduates will be involved with several stages of this
project in which they will get valuable experience in quantitative methods as
well as exposure in the U.S. to Arab scientists and culture.