* 0310619
* Accuracy and Stability of Computational Representations of Swept Volume Operations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Denis Blackmore, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 12/31/2007
* USD 468,000.00

A rigorous, effectively computable theory for the analysis of swept volumes (the
set occupied by objects moving in space) is developed in this project. The work
involves mathematical and computing sciences in the specialty of computational
topology. The goals are to make fundamental contributions to the automated
computation and representation of swept volume operations, and explore
generalizations and applications to timely problems in engineering and science.
This will lead to new approaches and insights that advance the state-of-the-art
in computer aided geometric design and related fields. Traditional methods will
be integrated with advanced mathematical techniques to achieve the goals, which
encompass the following tasks: (1) Develop algorithms for smoother
representation of swept volumes that include effectively computable
characterizations of accuracy and stability, and extend these results to more
general objects. (2) Create new methods for computing and representing Boolean
operations for swept volumes that are real-time executable, and include accuracy
and stability algorithms. (3) Compare the new algorithms with current solid
geometry methods, and develop efficient ways to interface these approaches with
existing software. (4) Investigate applications to emerging problems in such
areas as tissue engineering and virtual sculpting.

Swept volumes have important applications in design, manufacturing and the
health sciences. A basic question concerning the representation of swept volumes
and other objects is, how can one insure that computer based representations are
accurate, especially when the data contains errors, and when different methods
are used to render the object? This question, which concerns the shape of
computer-generated objects, provides the motivation for and the main focus of
the project. In some cases there are readily computable quantities
characterizing shape that can be included in programs for representing objects.
Such quantities, especially as they apply to swept volumes, are to be studied in
depth, along with methods for obtaining smoother representations of geometric
objects. Applications of the approaches developed to tissue engineering and
virtual design and manufacturing will be investigated, and additional
applications in the computing sciences are anticipated. Findings from the
project will be used to create innovative programs for computer aided design,
and engineering applications, and will be disseminated via publications,
lectures, the Web, existing and new undergraduate and graduate courses, new
programs in computational topology, and interactions with scientific and
engineering collaborators.