* 0310622
* Portable DNA-Probe-Array Synthesis System Using Acoustic-Wave Ejector and Atomizer Array
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Eun Kim, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2006
* USD 240,000.00

For efficient and convenient DNA sequencing, we propose to develop a portable
system for on-demand DNA probe-array synthesis, using two-dimensional MEMS
ejector array (to shoot out DNA bases onto a DNA probe chip in any desired
sequence) and atomizer array (to scatter away unbound DNA bases from the probe
chip). The technical innovations of the proposed system are as follows: (1) the
ejector array (unlike a nozzle-based ejector) can eject liquid droplets at any
oblique angle, and does not have to be moved to ink a spot with four DNA bases,
and (2) the atomizer array atomizes the unbound DNA bases (after a spotting
step), and blows off the unwanted bases before moving to another spotting step
for DNA synthesis, thus removing the costly step of the washing and drying
steps. Also, we will integrate the 2-D ejector array with microchannels,
chambers and other microfluidic handling components on a single silicon chip for
a small, portable, affordable system. The portable DNA probe synthesis system
will allow geneticists to produce any two dimensional array of any DNA sequence
on a chip at their sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One major research objective is
to develop a flexible, low cost technology for an efficient genotyping to
characterize hundreds of DNA samples for specific mutations for molecular
genetic or molecular epidemiologic research. Genotyping is currently very time-
consuming (and, therefore, very expensive), and it is timely to develop an
efficient and flexible genotyping technique that allows formation of any DNA
sequences on a glass chip on demand. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity
will also include (1) research involvement of students from underrepresented
groups (through active search of such applicants and more than usual mentoring
of the selected students), (2) data and information dissemination through an
internet web site that describes detailed information on DNA and protein
microprobe-array synthesis on a chip surface through ink-jet printing of DNA
bases or peptides, and (3) close collaboration with a research group (at USC's
medical school) that specializes on DNA sequencing for genotyping and
phenotyping for public health concerns. &lt;br/&gt;