* 0310539
* Algorithms and Numerical Analysis for Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Lars Wahlbin, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2007
* USD 360,000.00

Wahlbin Lars Wahlbin and Alfred Schatz first continue their study of
asymptotically exact a posteriori error estimators for the pointwise error in
approximating the gradient on each simplex by the finite element method. The
problems they consider involve solutions with singularities that pose new
difficulties. What makes these problems difficult is that one wants totally
local information about errors when, in fact, the solution and its approximation
are globally influenced in particular by the singularities. The investigators
also look into a priori error estimates for second order elliptic partial
differential equations with discontinuous coefficients on nonconvex polygonal
domains, allowing meshes that are highly refined. The estimates under
consideration justify the use of refined grids in a variety of highly singular
problems. Because most refined grids are constructed using self-adaptive codes
that may have different methods of choosing a grid, no a priori assumption is
made about the distribution of the mesh. The work described above is carried out
under the assumption that meshes are shape-regular, but basically nothing else
is assumed concerning the meshes. If some further local structure is placed on
the mesh (so-called one plus alpha regular meshes), then a limited amount of
superconvergence may occur (as shown by Xu and Zhang in a particular situation).
The investigators, together with Zhang, apply this idea in greater generality,
namely to meshes that are perturbations of those symmetric with respect to a
point. The symmetry theory predicts superconvergent points in many practical
situations and it is important to determine how this stands up under
perturbations. If even more structure is given to the mesh, namely, that it is
translation invariant, difference quotients may be used for approximating
derivatives. The investigators construct new compact forms of such difference
quotients. Finally, the investigators consider finite element methods for visco-
elastic problems. The investigators look into basic properties of the finite
element approximation method, widely used in engineering and science practice,
in industry, in research laboratories as well as in academia. The finite element
method builds an approximation to the solution of a differential equation on a
region by breaking the region into smaller pieces and approximating the solution
on each separate piece, say as a combination of functions that is easy to
compute. Pasting together the separate approximations gives a global
approximation to the solution. The method has its roots in the airplane industry
and started to be used in all branches of science and engineering in tne 1960's.
Well over a hundred thousand articles have been written on this method. The
investigators' aim in pursuing the fundamental behavior of this method is two-
fold: to get a deeper understanding for what the method does, as currently
practiced, and to use this understanding to develop new and better methods. A
particular aspect that the investigators consider is that of reliably gauging
how well the computer method approximates the underlying engineering or
scientific model, whose exact solution is of course unknown.

