* 0310624
* Incorporating High-Field NMR Spectroscopy Throughout the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Matthew Dintzner, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/2006
* USD 107,845.00

Chemistry (12) The attraction for many undergraduate students to science is the
experimental nature of it; they learn by doing. In chemistry and related fields,
NMR spectroscopy is arguably one of the most well-developed and broadly
applicable experimental techniques for structure determination and dynamic
measurements. In recent years, NMR spectroscopy has had an enormous impact on
chemistry education as high field spectrometers become more available to
undergraduate institutions through NSF support. In order to strengthen the
overall chemistry curriculum, attract and retain more science students, and
better prepare those students for graduate work and employment in the sciences,
DePaul University is incorporating hands-on high field FT-NMR spectroscopy
throughout its four-year program. This project is modeled after similar NSF-
funded programs that have been extremely effective elsewhere at exploiting the
full power of NMR spectroscopy as a teaching tool (Davis-UE9751056, Ball-
DUE9950413, Liotta-DUE0126678). Students at all levels of the curriculum
experience NMR spectroscopy first-hand, through experiments that have been
adapted from the literature (primarily from J. Chem. Ed.) or developed at
DePaul. In general chemistry, students use proton-decoupled carbon NMR to
determine the structure of simple isomeric hydrocarbons and observe the effect
of electronegative atoms on chemical shift. In organic chemistry, proton NMR and
multidimensional techniques are used to determine the structure of unknowns, and
reaction products, especially novel monomers and copolymers. Research students
and upper level students in physical chemistry, instrumental analysis,
intermediate inorganic, and biochemistry use NMR spectroscopy for both structure
determination (of dihydride and dihydrogen organometallic complexes) and to
evaluate dynamic processes (equilibrium, keto-enol tautomerism, hydrogen
bonding, yeast metabolism). Through progressively more sophisticated
experiments, students learn to appreciate the full power of NMR spectroscopy
while also developing their problem solving and critical thinking skills, and
enhancing their overall understanding of chemistry and the relatedness of each
subdiscipline.