* 0311218
* Writing to Learn Mathematics at the Developmental Level
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Bette Daudu, Montgomery College
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 02/28/2006
* USD 52,130.00

Mathematical Sciences (21) To provide an additional path to student involvement
in learning mathematics, the mathematics department at Montgomery College Takoma
Park Campus is implementing the writing software program, Calibrated Peer Review
(CPR), developed at UCLA (NSF DUE#:95-55605). Students using this program
demonstrate their understanding of mathematical concepts by writing related
expository essays. Therefore, the students are actively involved in the learning
process.

The outcomes of adding this component to the curriculum are that more students
are seeing the relevance of the mathematics learned, retaining the mathematical
and quantitative problem solving skills, improving their writing skills and
improving their critical thinking skills. Each student is individually involved
in a critical thinking situation related to a particular topic being taught by
the instructor. The use of skills not generally tapped in a mathematics class
provides another way to make the topics more accessible and more meaningful to
those students who are not natural quantitative thinkers. The CPR software
concentrates on critical literacy and communication skills. Students write
expository essays that focus on both the understanding of a mathematical concept
as well as meaningful examples of the concept.