* 0311950
* Effects of Environmental Growth Conditions on the Composition and Morphology of Bacterial Magnetosome Crystals and on the Subsequent Dissolution and Preservation of Magnetofossils
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Dennis Bazylinski, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2007
* USD 506,791.00

Magnetotactic bacteria (MB) are a metabolically and morphologically diverse
group of gram-negative prokaryotes in the Domain Bacteria. Cells of MB
biomineralize intracellular membrane-bounded crystals of the magnetic minerals
magnetite (Fe3O4) and/or greigite (Fe3S4) via a biologically-controlled
mineralization process. These structures, called magnetosomes, cause cells to
align along geomagnetic field lines as they swim and appear to work in
conjunction with aerotaxis in aiding cells in locating and maintaining an
optimal position in vertical chemical (e.g. oxygen)/redox gradients. Based on
their high cell numbers in natural habitats and the biogeochemical
transformations they catalyze, MB are a significant environmental bacterial
group that potentially have major roles in the biogeochemical cycling of Fe, S,
N, and C. When MB cells die and lyse, their magnetosome crystals are presumably
released into the surrounding environment and eventually end up in sediments
where they appear to be preserved for some time as putative "magnetofossils".
Magnetofossils have been found in a large number of recent marine and lacustrine
sediments as well as in some ancient sediments and meteorites (i.e., Mars
meteorite ALH84001) where they have also been used as evidence for the past
presence of MB, as indicators of life, and as indicators of recent/ancient
environmental conditions. The use of these crystals as magnetofossils is based
on a number of chemical, crystallographic, and magnetic criteria while their use
as environmental indicators is based on a small number physiological experiments
performed on only a few species. Little is known about the conditions under
which MB synthesize Fe3O4 and under which magnetosome Fe3O4 crystals are
dissoluted or transformed to other minerals when they are released into the
environment. It is presently clear, however, that high concentrations of O2
inhibit magnetite synthesis in MB and cause the oxidation of magnetite
magnetofossils and that Fe3O4 magnetosomes can be synthesized anaerobically by
some MB.&lt;br/&gt;The major goal of the research outlined in this proposal is
to determine whether different morphological types of Fe3O4 crystals can be
reliably used either as magnetofossils (evidence for life) or as environmental
indicators. To do this, we will: 1) examine the environmental conditions under
which a relatively large number of strains of MB that synthesize Fe3O4 of
different crystal morphologies; and 2) examine the conditions under which the
Fe3O4 crystals are supposedly dissoluted, transformed, and/or undergo reductive
diagenesis (e.g., investigate the effect of reducing agents, siderophores etc.).
Research results from this work should advance knowledge in Microbiology,
Geology, Chemistry, Environmental Sciences, and Astrobiology. They should also
advance discovery and learning for the general public who are somewhat familiar
with Martian meteorite ALH84001 and the evidence for life on ancient Mars. This
is especially important now: recent studies and debates, some viewed by the
public, involving meteorites and ancient rocks from Earth show that we need
clear unambiguous biomarkers as evidence for life in fossils on Earth and well
as in extraterrestrial habitats and materials. In addition, Fe is a key element
to life and is often a limiting nutrient particularly in marine systems. Results
from this research may reveal previously unknown aspects of Fe cycling (e.g.,
microbial Fe3O4 reduction and oxidation) in such habitats and the role of
specific bacteria in this cycling. &lt;br/&gt;