* 0311023
* Scanning Probe Microscopy and Molecular Modeling in the Undergraduate Chemistry Laboratory Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Leonard Fine, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 06/30/2006
* USD 142,911.00

Chemistry (12) The overarching goals of our project are: (i) to revitalize
undergraduate chemistry laboratory instruction by demonstrating the role of
underlying principles of experiments to areas of current scientific,
technological, and public interest; (ii) to allow students to relate the
relevance of atomic and molecular and phenomena in understanding macroscopic
phenomena; (iii) to adapt methods proven successful in lecture settings and
experiments from the research literature in the laboratory curriculum.. To
achieve these goals, we are adapting, implementing and developing experiments
for undergraduate chemistry laboratory courses at different levels. These
experiments combine the atomic and molecular resolution of Scanning Probe
Microscopy with molecular modeling to relate microscopic phenomena to
macroscopic applications. The experiments demonstrate the relevance of
fundamental principles of basic science to areas of applied science, such as
nanotechnology, where understanding atomic and molecular-level processes is
critical in designing the next generation electronic devices. Many of the
experiments are adaptations of experiments derived of the research literature,
demonstrating to students the process of science. By performing these
experiments, we expect that students will develop a greater understanding and
appreciation of the interdisciplinary nature of science and the interplay
between science, engineering, and technology. The project affect all science and
engineering undergraduate students at Columbia University, a diverse ethnic
population evenly mixed in terms of gender. To further broaden the population of
students involved, we are also collaborating with chemistry faculty at Norfolk
State University, a historically black institution.