* 0311145
* Course Restructuring and Laboratory Development in Power Electronics and Electric Drives
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Rajab Challoo, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 07/31/2005
* USD 75,918.00

The electrical engineering program at Texas A&amp;M University- Kingsville
(TAMUK) offers power electronics as an elective course and electric machinery as
a required course. Due to increased perception that these courses are old-
fashion and the materials covered in them are out-of-date, the credit hours of
electric machinery courses have been reduced, and there is evident from recent
years that shows a reduction in the number of students enrolling in these
courses. However, the power industry demand for trained power engineers
continues to grow! Hence, the objective of this project is to revitalize these
courses with the introduction of start-of-art laboratories using digital control
and digital signal processing (DSP). The goals of this restructuring include 1)
to provide the requisite information about power electronics and electric drives
in such a way by combining them with digital and DSP based control; 2) to make
the reconstructed courses appealing and exciting; 3) to ensure the highest
quality of education; and 4) to prepare students for industry as well as for
advanced courses. As a consequence of these course revisions, a larger supply of
trained power engineers is produced to meet modern power industry needs. The
course restructuring and laboratory development are based on the materials and
approaches developed at the University of Minnesota (UMN). The materials and
approaches have been demonstrated to be successful at UMN through the
significantly increased number of undergraduate students enrolled in the Power
Electronic and Electric Drives courses and in their performance in these
courses. This project is mainly targeting minority undergraduate students in
South Texas area but working professional engineers in the chemical process
industries and in the electric companies in this area can also benefit from
taking these courses.