* 0311838
* A Framework for Efficient Wireless Video Communication:     Dynamic Source/Channel Adaptation and Distortion Evaluation
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Randall Berry, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2007
* USD 355,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0311838&lt;br/&gt;Pappas, Thrasyvoulos&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern
U&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been much interest in supporting video
communication over wireless networks. This is&lt;br/&gt;not a simple task due to
the stringent Quality of Service (QoS) required by video applications
and&lt;br/&gt;the many impairments of wireless channels. Two important QoS
characteristics for video are the&lt;br/&gt;degree of signal distortion and the
transmission delay. Wireless channels are lossy, have a
timevarying&lt;br/&gt;response, and are subject to multi-user interference.
Furthermore, since users of a wireless&lt;br/&gt;network are mobile, e.ciently
utilizing the available energy is a key consideration.&lt;br/&gt;The di.culties
inherent in wireless video can be addressed at both the physical layer and
the&lt;br/&gt;source coding layer. We jointly consider a combination of these
approaches in a cross-layer framework.&lt;br/&gt;Speci.cally, we consider
jointly adapting source coding parameters, such as the
quantization&lt;br/&gt;step-size and prediction mode, along with physical layer
resources, such as the transmission rate and&lt;br/&gt;power. Our goal is to
provide acceptable QoS while taking into account system constraints such
as&lt;br/&gt;the available energy. We propose a general framework that allows a
number of resource/distortion&lt;br/&gt;optimal formulations for balancing the
requirements of di.erent applications.