* 0311307
* Incorporation of a Proteomics Laboratory Course Into the Undergraduate Biology Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Karin Sauer, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2005
* USD 140,300.00

The Biology Department at the State University of New York at Binghamton seeks
to enhance its undergraduate biology program in genomics and proteomics, which
currently consists of a computer-based problem-solving course in Genomics and
Proteomics. We are adapting the proteomics course from Vassar College. With
acquisition of proteomics equipment including an Ettan MALDI-Pro mass
spectrometer from Amersham, we are establishing a hands-on, interdisciplinary,
inquiry-based Proteomics Laboratory course. Students are learning standard tools
of proteomics: 2-D electrophoresis for protein separation and MALDI-ToF mass
spectrometry (MS) for protein identification by peptide mass fingerprinting and
peptide sequencing. Students are learning the techniques as they carry out
incrementally more complex exercises. This is being followed by an investigative
research project under the mentorship of faculty members from the biology,
chemistry, psychology and bioengineering departments. These faculty mentors are
enhancing the course instructors' efforts by providing research direction,
tutelage in sample preparation, assigned readings, and financial support to
cover supply costs. Students commit to an additional semester of independent
research in the faculty mentors' laboratory to ensure that they complete a high-
quality research project and develop proficiency with proteomics tools. Students
belonging to groups underrepresented in science are being strongly encouraged to
take the course. In addition, use of the mass spectrometer is being incorporated
in summer workshops for faculty and students from nearby colleges as well as in
8 other biology, chemistry, and bioengineering courses, with annual enrollments
of 771 students. We are disseminating results through a website, educational
journals, and presentations at the ASM and ASPB professional society meetings.