* 0311767
* Microbial Mediation of Manganese Cycling: Formation of Biogenic Mn Oxides, Oxide Scavenging of Toxic Metals, and Coupled Fates Subject to Predation by Protozoan Grazers
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* William Ghiorse, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2009
* USD 653,513.00

Lion/Ghiorse/Shuler Abstract This research is determining the coupled biological
and chemical controls on the rate of formation of biogenic Mn oxides using a
highly controlled laboratory system. The experimental system is using Leptothrix
discophora as a model Mn(II)-oxidizing bacterium and Tetrahymena pyriformis as a
model protozoan predator. Experimental control include the use of solutions in
which metal speciation can be determined, permitting a mechanistic
interpretation of the coupled fate of transition metals (Cu and Pb) added to the
experimental system and development of appropriate predictive models. The
research is employing a chemostat-type bioreactor system in which control is
maintained over physical conditions (e.g., Reynolds number, and hydraulic
retention time), chemical conditions (e.g., medium composition, toxic metal
speciation, pH, O2 level) and biological properties (via use of defined
cultures). The controlled laboratory conditions is facilitating the
investigation of a number of factors that are expected to influence Mn(II)
oxidation and metal bioaccumulation, including: 1) the rate of bacterial
production of the extracellular enzymes responsible for Mn(II) oxidation subject
to the constraints of nutrient concentrations and the concentration of essential
metal ions (e.g., Cu and possibly Fe) that may be required for formation of
active enzymes; 2) the influence of Mn oxide coatings on bacterial consumption
by predators and the fate of Mn oxides that are ingested; 3) the
bioaccumulation/ biomobilization ofMn oxide-bound Pb and extracellular Cu
associated with the multicopper oxidase enzymes thought to be responsible for
Mn(II) oxidation as well as the Cu adsorbed to the hydrous Mn oxides formed
through the activity of the enzyme.