* 0311616
* Creating An Integrated Modular Environment for the Modelling, Analysis and Verification of Embedded Hybrid Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* William Sanders, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 07/31/2006
* USD 255,000.00

Abstract

Embedded hybrid systems are ubiquitous throughout society: industrial machines,
automobiles, medical equipment, household appliances, airplanes, power grids,
and environmental monitoring systems all fall under their rubric. The mission-
critical nature of the applications in which embedded hybrid systems are used
demands high levels of efficiency, performance, reliability, safety, and
security. Furthermore, there is an increasingly critical need for the tight
integration of multiple applications developed using diverse design paradigms
such as periodic feedback control, human interfaces, information processing, and
intelligent autonomy to reduce system size, weight, and power consumption.

The safety and security of information differs vastly from the safety and
security of control. Most industrial control systems used to operate utilities
and factories are linked to the Internet, and have wireless sensor networks that
can be compromised with a laptop, wireless card, and directional antennae. In an
information technology system, security measures are designed around protecting
critical core servers, while security of individual remote terminals is not
prioritized. However, in the control of an actual physical hybrid system, remote
programmable logic controllers (PLCs), which remotely control a facility's
sensors and actuators via wireless means, play a key role: If the supervisory
control system is compromised, the threat is not as great as if a PLC is
attacked. Simply encrypting transmissions and passwords does not provide the
solution, and often compromises safety. Hence, an entirely different
architecture for designing, implementing, and verifying security in hybrid
control systems is necessary.

To address these challenges, a tightly integrated design, analysis,
verification, and implementation environment for real-time, safe, and security-
critical embedded hybrid systems is being created. It includes a formalism-
independent method for embedded hybrid system architectural specification with
attributes and semantics for verification and validation of properties such as
security and safety, along with mechanisms that allow for the composition of
models specified in different hybrid modeling languages in a secure and safe
manner. More specifically, an abstract functional interface will be created to
enhance modularity of the developed solution techniques and reward structures
will be used to perform directed searches of a state space to mitigate the state
explosion problem. In addition, backwards reachability techniques will be used
in order to find escape paths from hazardous states, thereby mitigating the
number of states that need to be explored, rendering the problem of verification
and validation more tractable. Meshing these two approaches promises to yield
groundbreaking results in the scale and complexity of hybrid systems that can be
modeled, analyzed, and verified.

The broader goal of the project is to produce an industrial-strength tool for
the modeling, analysis, and verification of hybrid systems for initial
distribution to research institutions, and, upon refinement, to interested
industrial partners, such as utilities and airlines. The project will also help
create a multidisciplinary base of students (both graduate and undergraduate)
from diverse fields such as computer science, operations management, and systems
engineering who are competent in the modeling, analysis, and verification of
large, complex systems. The result will be an enhanced safety and security
culture in academia and industry, which will create overt awareness of the field
in the students who will be tomorrow's engineers. It will thus lead to a
revolution in the way that complex systems are designed.