* 0311808
* Collaborative Research:     Automated and Adaptive Diversity for Improving Computer Systems Security
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,05/31/2008
* Dawn Song, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Levitt
* 05/31/2008
* USD 514,997.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: NSF Collaborative Proposals CCR-0311808
and&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0311686&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Title: Automated and Adaptive
Diversity for Improving Computer System&lt;br/&gt;Security&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;PI: Dawn Song&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Abstract: Diversity is an
important source of robustness in biological systems. Because each individual
has slightly different properties, it is unlikely that any single pathogen will
eliminate or escape the entire population. By contrast, today's computer systems
are largely homogeneous, being overwhelmingly dominated by one or two operating
systems and a few common applications from a handful of software vendors. This
fact is routinely exploited by attackers via Internet worms such as Code Red,
which infected over 250,000 systems in just nine hours using a single buffer
overflow vulnerability.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will develop methods
for diversifying computer systems automatically and systematically -- exploring
diversity at various levels of a system and for various purposes, e.g., to make
a system more difficult to compromise, to make a system more difficult to damage
even after a successful compromise, and to make it more difficult for a
successful compromise to evade detection. In order to succeed, many of the
mechanisms explored in this work must hide or disguise information about system
specifics from an attacker, and this theme will underlie several of the
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;