* 0311437
* Scheduling in High-Performance Internet Routers
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Laxmi Bhuyan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

Scheduling in High-Performance Internet
Routers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the Internet
expands, the demand on routers for more bandwidth and better quality of service
(QoS) increases exponentially. Current routers employ input-queued crossbar
switches that require sophisticated scheduling techniques for packet
transmission. In this project, new packet-based scheduling algorithms are
developed and tested for high-performance Internet router operation. Fair
scheduling algorithms are also incorporated in the crossbar to allocate
bandwidths proportional to the request reservations of the packets. Both flow-
based and port-based fair scheduling algorithms are designed similar to the
deficit round-robin technique. To scale these routers to terabit bandwidth,
architectures for fully connected crossbar switches and router topologies are
also developed based on scalable networks. Scheduling and routing algorithms for
these networks are investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intrinsic merit of the
proposed research lies in the development of new scheduling techniques for
different switch organizations of an IP router that perform optimally for the
Internet traffic. The algorithms are tested both through network simulation and
hardware experiments. A trace-driven configurable simulation test-bed is
developed, where publicly available Internet traces can be fed as the input
workload. The crossbar switch and scheduling algorithms are implemented in
hardware using field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) and SRAMs. Such an
implementation produces an accurate analysis of the proposed algorithms and
their hardware complexities. The broader impact of the work is evident through
quality publication, industrial collaboration, and student education funded
through this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;