* 0311309
* An Inquiry-based Cell Biology Laboratory in which Student Research Teams Investigate the Heat Schock Response Using a Cell Culture Model
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* Jane DeLuca, Stonehill College
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2004
* USD 102,378.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological Sciences (61) This project is establishing an
inquiry-based undergraduate Cell Biology Laboratory at Stonehill College to
accompany the required lecture course. The laboratory course is modeled on two
previously funded CCLI projects (0088185, 9952672). The theme of inquiry-based
learning through team projects is adapted from the first project (0088085), and
the unifying theme of heat shock response is our implementation of a similar
theme on green fluorescent protein from the second project (9952672). The first
of two modules instructs students in fundamental cell and molecular biology
techniques, while the second allows the students to demonstrate their
competencies with the techniques by working in collaborative research teams to
investigate the effects of an experimental condition on the expression of heat
shock proteins in CHO cells. Student results are communicated in the form of lab
reports written in the style of a scientific article, a poster, and an oral
presentation at a mini-symposium open to the College community, and each is
peer- and faculty-reviewed. The objectives of the proposed project are (1) to
establish a laboratory with an open-ended discovery-based approach to
investigate a scientific question; (2) to develop and improve crucial
professional skills: hypotheses and protocol development, experimentation using
proper controls, collection, analysis, and interpretation of data, and formation
of conclusions; (3) to foster an atmosphere of cooperative learning; and (4) to
develop and improve students' analytical and oral and written communication
skills.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Activity: The Cell Biology
Laboratory introduces students to the basics of genomics and proteonomics, two
highly technical and challenging fields that will revolutionize our
understanding of life processes. Therefore, it is essential that undergraduate
Biochemistry and Biology majors obtain practical knowledge and hands-on
experiences with the research techniques of these fields and their
applications.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts Resulting from the Proposed Activity:
Stonehill undergraduates who complete the Cell Biology course and lab will
demonstrate strengthened research skills. Selected students will serve as
mentors, problem-solvers, and role models for academically-gifted, economically-
disadvantaged high school students conducting fulltime research at Stonehill as
part of the ACS's Project SEED (Summer Educational Experience for the
Disadvantaged).&lt;br/&gt;