* 0311252
* SD Class Prediction by Gene Expression Profiles
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Dechang Chen, Henry M Jackson Fdn for Advmt of Military Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 07/31/2008
* USD 100,000.00

DNA microarrays provide a very effective approach to monitor expression levels
of thousands of genes simultaneously. In microarray data analysis, class
prediction is a crucial task. The goal of class prediction is to classify and
predict the diagnostic category of a sample by its gene expression profile. This
project studies class prediction by gene expression profiles and contains four
main objectives. First, a new statistical method is proposed to select genes.
Second, stochastic discrimination (SD) is proposed to build class predictors.
The principle of SD is that it first generates many "weak" rules, each of which
can serve as a classification method usually with a "big" classification error,
and then combines these "weak rules" in a way to form a strong classifier having
a low classification error rate. Multi-class SD predictors will be established
by using the two-class technique. Theoretical results on the prediction
accuracies of SD predictors will be investigated. Geometric properties of SD
predictors will be explored. It is believed that these results will not only
significantly enhance understanding the predictors but also constitute the
important theoretical support for the application of predictors. Third, a novel
procedure is proposed to compare various class predictors. It will address
whether or not the true accuracies of predictors differ significantly by
statistics, and if such a difference is significant, what range is this
difference. Forth, an extensive evaluation of the proposed research work is
proposed to be conducted through simulation and by applying the predictors to
real life gene expression data sets and comparing the performance of SD
predictors with that from other competing algorithms