* 0311823
* Performance Modeling and Algorithm Design for Reconfigurable System-on-Chip Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Viktor Prasanna, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2008
* USD 306,000.00

Prasanna&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Performance Modeling and Algorithm
Design for Reconfigurable System-on-Chip
Architectures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will explore algorithmic techniques to optimize application performance
on reconfigurable System-on-Chip (RSoC) architectures based on a novel concept
of malleable algorithms. Malleable algorithms are architecture-platform aware
specification of alternate implementations of a given functionality, and form
the basis of a new methodology for performance modeling and algorithm design for
RSoC architectures. The proposed research will have the following main
thrusts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Domain-specific modeling: hybrid performance
modeling using high-level analytic performance models and low-level simulations.
&lt;br/&gt;2. Energy-efficient designs with malleable algorithms: design of
energy-efficient malleable algorithms for a set of embedded benchmarks and
applications. &lt;br/&gt;3. System-level optimization: combinatorial approaches
including formulations using interval arithmetic and generalized assignment
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort will lead to the development
of highly optimized portable and reusable solutions for implementing embedded
applications, and the definition of a new methodology for designing energy-
efficient soft-IP cores for hybrid architectures consisting of multiple tightly
integrated heterogeneous computing elements. The research will complement
ongoing advances in design automation, and bridge the gap between the
application developer and RSoC platform architectures.&lt;br/&gt;