* 0311996
* Collaborative Research:     Symbolic Computations in Algebra and Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Henry Schenck, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 85,427.00

Schenck&lt;br/&gt; This is a collaborative project between Henry Schenck
and&lt;br/&gt;Alexandru Suciu. The investigators study the interplay
between&lt;br/&gt;the topology of a manifold X and certain algebraic
structures&lt;br/&gt;related to X. From a theoretical standpoint, such an
undertaking&lt;br/&gt;involves a mainstream question of algebra, geometry,
and&lt;br/&gt;topology: how geometric, topological, or combinatorial aspects
of&lt;br/&gt;a manifold manifest in algebraic properties of objects such
as&lt;br/&gt;the cohomology ring, fundamental group, and resonance
varieties.&lt;br/&gt;The focus is on the case where X is the complement of
an&lt;br/&gt;arrangement of lines or rational curves in the projective
plane,&lt;br/&gt;or a configuration space. The investigators develop a
software&lt;br/&gt;package of algorithms to study the aforementioned
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;invariants of X. The software is used to generate tables
of&lt;br/&gt;arrangements (similar to the tables used in knot
theory),&lt;br/&gt;providing an extensive list of examples and invariants.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigators use these tables to search for counterexamples
to&lt;br/&gt;open conjectures, and to spot patterns leading to theorems.
The&lt;br/&gt;tables and code are a community resource, available online,
and&lt;br/&gt;generate considerable synergy between disparate
groups&lt;br/&gt;(algebraists, topologists, combinatorialists) involved in
MSRI's&lt;br/&gt;special semester on hyperplane arrangements (Fall
2004).&lt;br/&gt; There is also a practical benefit: hyperplane
arrangements&lt;br/&gt;and configuration spaces are ubiquitous in pure and
applied&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, arising in numerous areas including braid
groups,&lt;br/&gt;knot theory, robotics, approximation theory, and
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;modelling. For example, in approximation theory one
can&lt;br/&gt;approximate a function of several variables, say k of them in
a&lt;br/&gt;k-dimensional region, by dividing the region into pieces and
on&lt;br/&gt;each piece approximating the function by polynomials;
the&lt;br/&gt;resulting piecewise polynomials are called splines.
Technically,&lt;br/&gt;the region is divided into simplices using hyperplanes;
the set&lt;br/&gt;of splines on the resulting simplicial complex is an
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;object that depends strongly on the geometry of the
chosen&lt;br/&gt;hyperplanes. In robotics, arrangements arise in motion
planning&lt;br/&gt;(finding a collision-free motion between two placements of
a&lt;br/&gt;given robot among a set of objects). Configuration spaces show
up&lt;br/&gt;in multidimensional billiards (describing the
periodic&lt;br/&gt;trajectories of a mass-point in a domain in Euclidean
space).&lt;br/&gt;Information about the structure of the cohomology ring
translates&lt;br/&gt;into bounds on the complexity of the motion planning
problem, or&lt;br/&gt;bounds on the number of periodic trajectories. Thus,
finding fast&lt;br/&gt;algorithms to compute algebraic invariants associated
to&lt;br/&gt;arrangements and configuration spaces could have real
world&lt;br/&gt;applications. The problems the investigators study are also
well&lt;br/&gt;suited to introducing graduate (and undergraduate!) students
to&lt;br/&gt;research and the use of computational tools. Students
conduct&lt;br/&gt;computational experiments, discover patterns and the structure
of&lt;br/&gt;the problem, and thus have motivation to learn new
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;