* 0311848
* Stresses, Deformation, and Dislocations in Thin Films: Combining Modeling and Simulations with Experiments
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Shefford Baker, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 06/30/2008
* USD 420,000.00

Under this grant, dislocation dynamics simulations and transmission electron
microscopy will be used to study the behavior of dislocations in thin metal
films on substrates. A major objective of the program is to simulate meso-scale
behavior of ensembles of dislocation near boundaries and interfaces for
comparison with the overall mechanical behavior measured using substrate
curvature and x-ray methods. The program includes both a 'bottom-up' study in
which the configurations adopted by interacting pairs of dislocations and the
strength of those interactions are examined, and a 'top down' study in which the
behavior of many dislocations is simulated to search for controlling mechanisms.
This combination of experiments and modeling is expected to provide direct
evidence of mechanisms that lead to non-bulk-like behavior in thin films. The
goal of this work is to study the dislocation mechanisms that lead to high
stresses and non-bulk-like behavior in thin metal films in detail. Such films
are indispensable elements in a wide range of nanofabricated devices, but
typically suffer from very high stresses, which may lead to failure by
deformation, void formation, or fracture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanical
behavior of thin films is not like that of bulk materials and is not well
understood. In this program, dislocation dynamics simulations will be conducted
to study how the dimensional constraints of a thin film affect dislocation
behavior and mechanical properties. Dislocation configurations seen in
simulations will be compared with those observed experimentally using
transmission electron microscopy. This unique combination of experiments and
modeling will provide a better understanding of the mechanical behavior of thin
film metallizations. The project will support outreach efforts focused on high
school teachers and students, and will engage undergraduates in research.