* 0311042
* Adaptation of Operation Primary Physical Science Teacher Enhancement Material for Use with Preservice Teachers in Physical Science
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Paul Adams, Fort Hays State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2006
* USD 89,293.00

Physics (13) This project adapts and extends the NSF-developed teacher
enhancement materials, Operation Primary Physical Science (OPPS, ESI-9453926:
http://www.phys.lsu.edu/dept/opps), for use in a physical science course for
preservice elementary teachers. The project uses the OPPS model and materials to
develop curriculum that addresses physical science content, pedagogical
knowledge, and skills to learn science. This is accomplished through correlation
of the OPPS material with reading activities using college-level physical
science textbooks, incorporation of mathematical connections in support of the
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics Principles and Standards,
incorporation of content area reading strategies to strengthen comprehension of
science materials, and incorporation of WWW and data collection and analysis
technologies. The project develops, tests, and assesses the impact of these
materials locally. It also serves to revamp our elementary pre-service science
course moving it more effectively toward an activity-based course that helps
teachers experience rather than merely hear about how science is taught.

This project provides information on the utility and transferability of
excellent teacher enhancement materials to teacher preparation. Insight into the
incorporation of life-long learning strategies (i.e., content area reading) into
the teaching and learning experience of preservice teachers is also gained.
Research indicates that incorporation of reading strategies facilitate
comprehension in underrepresented groups in K-12. The project provides a test at
the college level. Information from the project provides a starting point for
similar innovations in other college science courses. Information from the
project is disseminated via a web site, and presentations at national meetings.