* 0312380
* Interactions between medial preoptic area, nucleus accumbens, and ventral pallidum in the control of mammalian maternal behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Michael Numan, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* john godwin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 469,354.00

The proposed research explores the interaction between specific and nonspecific
motivational systems in the control of maternal behavior in animals. It will
explore the interactions between the medial preoptic area (MPOA) of the
hypothalamus and the nucleus accumbens-ventral pallidal circuit [NA-VP circuit]
in maternal behavior. Previous research has shown the specific involvement of
MPOA neural circuits in the regulation of maternal behavior. In contrast, other
research has indicated that the NA-VP circuit is part of a nonspecific
motivational system: activity across this circuit appears to regulate an
organism's responsiveness to a wide variety of biologically significant stimuli.
It is proposed that when the output of the NA-VP is driven by MPOA neurons, the
organism's maternal motivation is increased [if output of the NA-VP circuit were
to be driven by another specific motivational system (hunger, for example), then
the type of behavioral reactivity would change accordingly]. The methods that
will be employed in the proposed study include: (a) intracranial injections of
drugs to alter activity within the NA-VP circuit; (b) the effects of disrupting
communication between MPOA and NA-VP on maternal behavior will be examined; (c)
neuroanatomical procedures to define the chemical makeup of the critical neural
circuits will be performed. It is predicted that connections from the MPOA to
NA-VP allow infant stimuli to activate VP neurons, and that those treatments
which increase VP activity will facilitate, and those that depress VP activity
will disrupt, maternal behavior. This type of basic research is important
because it takes a systems level approach to the neurobiology of motivation,
explaning how the brain operates to control a core social motivation - maternal
responsiveness. Importantly, recent fMRI work indicates that many of the brain
regions we emphasize that are important in lower animals are also active in
human mothers attending to infant cues.