* 0312861
* Shape Exploration for Medical Applications --- From Representation, Correspondence, Deformation to Image Segmentation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Toshiro Kubota, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Frank Olken
* 08/31/2007
* USD 388,904.00

Project Summary (Song Wang) &lt;br/&gt;EIA-0312861&lt;br/&gt;Song
Whang&lt;br/&gt;USC Research Foundation&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research is to develop an integrated and practical framework for shape modeling
and use it to achieve more reliable segmentation of medical images. This
research is motivated by the fact that reliable extraction, representation, and
incorporation of some prior shape information can greatly reduce the
segmentation error resulting from image noise. Three important problems will be
addressed and integrated to effectively explore shape information for medical
image segmentation: shape representation, shape correspondence, and shape
deformation. The shape representation is to compactly describe a shape in terms
of a set of landmark points. The shape correspondence is to establish landmark-
based correspondence among a set of shape samples. &lt;br/&gt;The shape
deformation is to first construct a shape template that captures representative
shape characteristics of a particular object class, and then use it to delineate
an object of the same class from a new image. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits:
This research studies the shape modeling method from a unique systematic
perspective. While previous researches usually focus on a particular problem in
shape modeling, we will investigate all three interrelated key problems, i.e.,
shape representation, shape correspondence, and shape deformation, in an
integrated and unified framework, specifically for medical image segmentation.
Under this unified framework, we develop novel methods to address most important
issues in each of these three problems. In the shape representation, we will
incorporate our resolution-independent feature extraction method to estimate key
shape parameters such as position, tangent direction, and curvature more
accurately. This will provide a representation format that is accurate, compact,
and flexible in describing a group of shape instances. In the shape
correspondence, we will develop global and local correspondence methods to
choose landmarks based on the following criteria: (1) simple shape
representation, (2) small representation error, and (3) optimal inter-shape
landmark correspondence. An advanced network-flow technique will be used to
integrate these three measures into a new unified formulation. In the shape
deformation, we will develop effective shape-learning techniques based on a
group of well-corresponded training samples. The techniques employ more general
and &lt;br/&gt;accurate probability distribution models than simple Gaussian
distributions. Based on the models, &lt;br/&gt;we will further develop our shape
deformation method to deal with important issues like &lt;br/&gt;algorithm
robustness and topology preservation. &lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts: Fast growth of
medical imaging industry provides us tremendous amount &lt;br/&gt;of data in
many forms like MRI, CT, PET, cryosection, microscopic, etc. It is urgent to
develop &lt;br/&gt;advanced information technology to convert those medical data
into useful information. Among &lt;br/&gt;them, geometric shape information is
of particular importance as they are widely used in clinical
&lt;br/&gt;diagnoses. The proposed research will greatly facilitate the shape
information exploration from &lt;br/&gt;medical images and provide physician and
radiologists new and powerful computational tools. In &lt;br/&gt;the long term,
this research will further intensify the current efforts to bridge the gap
between information technology and medical applications. Furthermore, the
proposed research can be applied to many other applications like video tracking
and biometrics that shares the same problems as in shape exploration from
medical images. This research also provides many educational contributions. We
will integrate the medical image processing into a series of image processing
and computer vision courses in the University of South Carolina (USC). This
research will also actively contribute to the K-12 education in the state by
assisting the NSF Bridges for Engineering Education Program awarded to the
University and participating in the summer mentor program by the South Carolina
Governor's School for Science and Mathematics. Biomedical engineering has been
selected as one of three main focus areas for research at USC. Thus, our
research effort will directly contribute to the university wide efforts. In
particular, our effort can be integrated with the neuro-imaging initiative at
the Psychology Department and the new Center for Colon Cancer Research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;