* 0312610
* ITR:   A Computational Framework for Observational Science:  Data Assimilation Methods and their Application for Understanding North Atlantic Zooplankton Dynamics.
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Andrew Pershing, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 04/30/2007
* USD 478,531.00

This project will develop a modular data assimilation system, investigate
several algorithms to make data assimilation more efficient, and will apply this
system to investigate zooplankton dynamics in the North Atlantic. The goal of
data assimilation is to find the value of the control variables (typically, the
initial conditions or boundary conditions or model parameters) producing the
best agreement between the model and the data. A data assimilation system
consists of a forward model representing known dynamics. This model is
integrated and the deviation between its predictions and available observations
are quantified by a cost function. An adjoint model, representing the inverse of
the known dynamics, is then run to determine the dependence of the cost function
on the control variables. From the results of the adjoint model, the control
variables are adjusted and the entire procedure repeats until the system
converges on an answer. Because of the many iterations of the forward/adjoint
system are required to find an answer, data assimilation is a computationally
intensive process. The proposed data assimilation system will attempt to improve
the effciency through parallelization and algorithmic improvements.
Specifically, this project will evaluate three standard minimization algorithms
and a new algorithm based on multigrid techniques. Using this system, data from
the Continous Plankton Recorder survey, the only ongoing basin-wide plankton
survey, will be assimilated to provide an accurate, quantitative description of
the seasonal and interannual changes of North Atlantic zooplankton populations
(especially, Calanus finmarchicus) in the Gulf of Maine and across the entire
North Atlantic. This description will provide a better mechanistic understanding
of the processes responsible for observed patterns in these populations. Such an
understanding is prerequisite for predicting the impact of climate variability
and change on zooplankton populations and the ecosystems they
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed data assimilation
system is a general model for many data assimilation problems including
operational oceanography and numerical weather prediction. This project's
association with the Cornell Theory Center (CTC) allows a unique opportunity to
share its data assimilation system to a wide audience. With the help of CTC
staff, a web interface to the system running on CTC's .NET cluster will be
built. This interface will allow researchers and students across the world to
access a high-performance data assimilation system. The development of the data
assimilation system will be integrated into a series of computational tools
courses offered at Cornell. This project will also provide research
opportunities for both graduate students and undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;