* 0312690
* ITR: Representation Learning: Transformations and Kernels for Collections of Tuples
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Tony Jebara, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2006
* USD 240,215.00

Statistical machine learning tools permit scientists and engineers to
automatically estimate computational models directly from real-world data for
making predictions, classifications and inferences. However, before learning can
take place, the practitioner needs to know how to properly represent data in a
consistent, invariant and well-behaved&lt;br/&gt;numerical form for processing
by the various techniques. This proposal reduces this burden and facilitates
applications of machine learning via novel algorithms that not only model data
but also automatically handle invariances and discover
appropriate&lt;br/&gt;representations of the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal formalizes a variety of potential transformations and embeds them
within a principled learning framework. This makes it possible to handle real
scenarios where data transforms, translates, changes nonlinearly and effectively
creates many difficulties for&lt;br/&gt;traditional tools. The set of
interesting transformations the proposal considers also includes permutations.
Handling permutation allows algorithms to learn when each data-point in the
dataset is a collection of tuples whose ordering is arbitrary. For example,
a&lt;br/&gt;digital color image can be represented as a bag of pixels whose
ordering is arbitrary. This project then develops the necessary algorithms for
invariance to permutations, re-orderings, translations, and many other
transformations affecting data in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
makes use of and extends state-of-the-art techniques in the machine learning
field including Bayesian networks, kernel methods and convex programming.
Primary applications include face recognition and surveillance. To recognize
human face identity from video, the proposed algorithms compensate for possible
transformations as faces translate, deform and rotate in real images.
Standardized and challenging face recognition datasets are used for evaluation.
The representation learning methods also facilitate machine learning in general,
promising potential impact in other applied fields where data undergoes
transformations including computational vision, speech, time&lt;br/&gt;series
analysis and bio-
informatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;