* 0312556
* ITR - Integrated Source of High-fidelity Entangled States for Quantum Information Processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Bahaa Saleh, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2007
* USD 159,997.00

0312556&lt;br/&gt;Sergienko&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Entanglement studies in quantum
physics have benefited greatly from the use of photon pairs generated via the
nonlinear optical process of spontaneous parametric down-conversion (SPDC).
Applications include distributed imaging, metrology, cryptography, and
computing. The integration of quantum cryptography into real-world
telecommunications networks, and making quantum-optical computing processors
scalable, can be fostered by reducing their size and developing an integrated
source of high-quality entangled photon states. A few initial implementations of
SPDC in periodically-poled nonlinear waveguides in the collinear copropagating
configuration have demonstrated several advantages. Both the rate of photon-pair
production and the single-mode fiber coupling efficiency are increased
substantially. However, the generated photons are usually correlated in time but
not entangled. Moreover, the spectral bandwidth is also rather large. This
precludes their use in a telecommunication environment where such states are
highly susceptible to chromatic and polarization-mode
dispersion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims at overcoming these problems
by developing a novel integrated source of high-fidelity entangled photons. The
new approach makes use of counterpropagating quasi-phase matching in
periodically poled nonlinear waveguides. The use of transverse pumping, and of a
type-II nonlinear interaction, allows the production of polarization-entangled
photon pairs that exit symmetrically from opposite sides of a nonlinear
waveguide, ready for coupling into single-mode optical fiber. The spectral
bandwidth of the photons generated in this configuration is reduced by more than
an order of magnitude, thereby allowing dispersion-insensitive quantum
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit. The use of an
integrated source of high-fidelity entangled photons will enhance real-world
scalable network performance by incorporating quantum technology into the
existing fabric of telecommunication systems. The development of such a device
will open a path toward the creation of a dense population of entangled sources
and elementary quantum-optical computing gates on a chip. This, in turn, will
hasten the appearance of the first compact quantum-optical
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. This program will provide
students with unique multidisciplinary experiences in the application of
cutting-edge quantum-optical techniques to a broad range of problems in modern
optics and telecommunications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research milestones. i)
investigation of physical effects and design specific geometries leading to
generation of quantum states entangled both in frequency and in polarization;
ii) production of miniature sources of high-intensity narrow bandwidth
polarization-entangled states using a counterpropagating interaction inside the
periodically poled nonlinear waveguide; iii) demonstration of enhanced
performance of quantum cryptography and entanglement swapping at
telecommunication wavelengths using new source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;