* 0312629
* ITR:A System for Data Integration and Pattern Discovery in Multimodal, Spatio-temporal Data: Lesion Analysis and Data Sharing
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2003,10/31/2007
* Andrew Saykin, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 10/31/2007
* USD 427,001.00

We propose a system, MS-Analyze, to analyze and detect patterns in Multiple
Sclerosis (MS), a brain disease that can lead to loss of motor and memory skills
and even death, as the disease progresses over time. Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI) is used to monitor brain changes at regular time intervals using different
imaging modalities, and subjects are also tested for their motor and cognitive
fitness, as different drug treatments are explored to slow the disease.
Effective correlation of patterns in pathology with drug treatments requires
access to large amounts of integrated data, which is usually not available to
any one given laboratory. MS-Analyze addresses both of these challenges by
combining data collection, data fusion, data analysis, and secure data sharing.
The proposed work will generate new methods of representing and managing
heterogeneous data streams. It will provide new mechanisms for data sharing and
research collaboration, fast pattern discovery and a testbed for developing
standards for sharing sensitive information. MS is a good application to
demonstrate the system because it offers rich data that challenge the system
development. Broader Impact: Aside from solving the immediate need for data,
this project also has a strong educational and training component as it is built
also to train users in dealing with complex data as in MS.

