* 0312619
* ITR: Automated Discovery and Proof in Arithmetic Based on Goedel's Class Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Johan Belinfante, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2007
* USD 200,719.00

Proposal: DMS-312619 PI: Johan G. Belinfante Institution: Georgia Tech Title:
ITR: Automated Discovery and Proof in Arithmetic Based on Goedel's Class Theory

ABSTRACT

Goedel's finite axiomatization of class theory permits the use of fast first-
order theorem-provers for automated reasoning in mathematics. The proposer's
Mathematica implementation of a modification of Goedel's algorithm for class
formation is routinely used to help automate the formulation of definitions and
assertions, and to discover new facts. The proposer is using McCune's program
Otter to obtain automated proofs of thousands of theorems in set theory,
including theorems about ordinal and cardinal numbers, and Zermelo's fixed-point
theorem. New insights are being obtained in the process, such as the discovery
of a unified theory of finite sets and regular sets, and a novel approach to the
theory of transitive closures, hereditarily finite sets, and the Zermelo-von
Neumann cumulative hierarchy. The specific focus of the research project is on
discovering reformulations of fundamental concepts and theorems in a form useful
for arithmetic, recursion, the theory of equivalence relations and other areas
of mathematics requiring set theory. Goedel's algorithm can be used to
automatically remove quantifiers over sets from assertions, allowing any
proposition in set theory to be recast as a single variable-free equation. By
moving toward an equational formulation of set theory, greater use can be made
of paramodulation and demodulation. Equational reasoning is potentially more
powerful than using UR resolution or binary resolution since it can be applied
at the term level.

Set theory provides a convenient basis for all mathematical reasoning. Although
some theorems in modern mathematics can be proved without set theory, doing
without set theory would place severe limitations on what problems could be
tackled. It is exciting that computers are already powerful enough to prove such
theorems as the transfinite induction theorem on a laptop computer in a few
seconds, and that computers are already being used to settle open questions in
mathematics. But it remains unlikely that machines will soon displace
mathematicians from their traditional role in proving theorems. Even the best
theorem proving programs today are not fully automated, but rather provide only
computer-assisted proofs. Considerable human guidance is still needed to help
steer the computer in the right direction. The proposer firmly believes that the
key to increasing the power and ease of automated reasoning programs is to
actively use them to solve hard problems.

