* 0312563
* ITR:     RAFONET - A Versatile and Scalable Approach for Optical Network Design and Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Weibo Gong, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 349,012.00

To address the lack of versatile and scalable tools in the relatively new
optical networking field, the research project proposes to conduct fundamental
research on developing a novel approach called RAFONET (Rational Approximation
For Optical Networks) for optical network design and analysis. RAFONET, which
integrates advanced analytic and numerical techniques, will make it possible to
evaluate many hard-to-measure yet crucial performance metrics in optical
networks with a large number of wavelengths, various switching paradigms and
associated protocols much faster and more accurate than before under a unified
framework.

In the application area, the PIs will apply the RAFONET approach to evaluate
optical networks with optical circuit-switching (OCS) e.g., wavelength routing,
or optical packet/burst switching (OPS/OBS). In addition, the proposed research
project will compare OCS and OPS/OBS to determine, for example, how much
resources is needed by OCS, and OPS/OBS to support a set of common input traffic
streams that include periodic (e.g., voice) and aperiodic (e.g., data) traffic.
In the algorithmic area, the PIs will study the effects of simulation errors on
the performance of the rational approximation algorithm, and obtain some
analytical results in bounding the interpolation errors when the sampling error
is bounded by a polynomial for example. The PIs will also develop new methods
based on, e.g., the combination of rational interpolation and cross entropy to
combat such errors. Finally, the PIs will research the applicable scope and
theoretic validation of the transformations applied in rational approximation
algorithm.

The ITR project will also develop course materials on numerical methods in
optical network analysis, as well as other related topics.

