* 0312695
* ITR:  Collaborative Research:  SPARTA:  Static Parametric Timing Analysis to Support Dynamic Decisions in Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Frank Mueller, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2008
* USD 130,000.00

Mueller Whalley Healy

Embedded systems with temporal constraints rely on timely scheduling and a
priori knowledge of worst-case execution times. Static timing analysis derives
safe bounds of WCETs but its applicability has been limited to hard real-time
systems and small code snippets.

This research addresses these limitations of timing analysis for embedded
systems. It contributes a novel approach to program analysis through parametric
techniques of static timing analysis and provides innovative methods for
exploiting them. The proposed techniques express worst-case execution time as a
formula with the following benefits. First, static timing analysis becomes
applicable to a wide class of embedded systems with variable loop bounds.
Second, the benefits of parametric timing analysis provide new opportunities for
dynamic and flexible scheduling decisions. Third, timing abstractions through
the parametric approach enable the analysis of much larger programs than in the
past. Finally, the techniques of static timing analysis, currently constrained
to hard real-time system, become applicable to a much wider range of embedded
systems with soft timing constraints. The broader impact is to increasingly
expose students to embedded systems and to provide essential temporal
assurances, which are a prerequisite for applying the results of hard and soft
real-time scheduling for reliable embedded systems of national and economic
importance.