* 0312613
* ITR--Benchmarking and Profiling Tools for Disk I/O and Networked Storage Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Qing Yang, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
*  Elliott Francis
* 07/31/2008
* USD 149,982.00

Yang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HELP: A Profiling Tool for Disk I/O and
Networked Storage
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major
goal of this proposed research is to design and implement a hardware environment
for low-overhead profiling/optimization, named HELP. HELP is a framework
consisting of a hardware embedded system board and a set of easy-to-use APIs to
allow system architects to develop their own efficient profiling and
optimization tools for storage operations. A HELP board can be directly plugged
into a server or storage system to speed up storage operations. Unlike most
existing profiling and optimization techniques, our approach minimizes profiling
overheads and data skews resulting in more accurate analysis of disk I/O
behavior. By offloading profiling/optimization functions from the host, HELP
makes it possible to do runtime monitoring, collecting, analyzing, and
optimizing disk I/O and data storage operations in a production system. A system
architect is able to explore more opportunities than ever in designing tools for
profiling and optimization, studying behavior of storage accesses, and inventing
new storage architectures using HELP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion
of the proposed research will result in an effective tool that will have great
impact on computer architecture research as well as broader IT community.
Researchers can benefit greatly from our HELP system in guiding their search for
new architectures and new algorithms for data storage. IT industries can also
benefit greatly from our tool in making design choices for storage systems and
solutions. It will also have significant impact on computer architecture
education by facilitating better understanding of detailed system
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;