* 0312693
* Collaborative Research: ITR:  A Robotics-Based Computational Environment to Simulate the Human Hand
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Peter Allen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 06/30/2006
* USD 249,998.00

This project develops an integrated Bayesian framework for vision based control
of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) through fundamental research in 1) model-
based nonlinear state and parameter estimation, 2) intelligent adaptive control,
and 3) image processing. We specifically address how real-time video data can be
processed with ground-based sensors (and on-board avionics) to extract spatial
and situational information (e.g., vehicle state and model parameters). Using
only stationary video cameras, information from the sequence of images are
integrated with an adaptive controller that transmits actuator commands directly
to the UAV. Our research infrastructure consist of an X-Cell-60 R/C helicopter
with custom avionics, video cameras on the ground, and a PC ground-station to
perform all necessary processing

A key aspect is to go beyond traditional vision based motion estimation and
tracking, utilizing new approaches to recursive Bayesian estimation allowing
full coupling with the control system. Heuristically, this involves the
propagation of probabilistic density estimates for the state (vehicle position,
attitude, and velocities) and model parameters (mass, moments of inertia,
aerodynamic forces, etc.). The vision components models the ``image likelihood''
and describes the probability of observing the image given the current state.
The estimation combines the vision measurements with the dynamic vehicle model
in a recursive filtering procedure using a Sigma-Point Filter (SPF) framework.
SPF methods are a recent development in machine learning, and are shown to be
far superior to standard EKF based estimation approaches.

The intellectual merit of the research contributes to both the individual
component areas as well as the integrated whole. The integration of the
different components in the proposed manner represents an interdisciplinary new
approach, providing new research opportunities and applications in integrated
sensing, information processing, and control. Beyond basic research, the broader
impact to technology includes the obvious commercial and military applications
that can be studied in this controlled environment (e.g. visually assisted
vertical take-off and landing for ship board helicopters, or agile maneuvering
through urban environments). The core technologies can also be extended to other
information technology areas from image tracking and detection, to control of
complex biological systems.

