* 0312913
* Nanostructured Organic-Inorganic Hybrids from AB Diblock and ABC Triblock Copolymers
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Ulrich Wiesner, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 11/30/2004
* USD 150,000.00

With a program on nanostructured organic-inorganic hybrid material from AB
diblock and ABC triblock copolymers, the PI proposes research in one of the most
promising and rapidly emerging research areas in materials science. Two areas of
research are described. First, studies on bicontinous cubic hybrid phases are
proposed which involve the formation of magnetic crystalline moieties within
confined environments. THis mimics a strategy of living organisms to build
skeletal parts through formation of polycrystalline assemblies inside self-
assembled matrices. The work will elucidate fundamental questions about the
stability of fascinating bicontinous cubic morphologies in organic-inorganic
hybrids. If successful, this part has the potential to lead to novel mesoporous
materials for the efficient separation of proteins. The targeted materials would
have large, easily accessible pores and supoerparamagnetic nanoparticles
embedded in the walls combining size exclusion and magnetic interactions for
separation. Second, the PI wants to explore how the polymer chemistry of AB
diblock and ABC triblock copolymers can be exploited to exert unprecedented
structure control on the molecular as well as the mesoscopic length scale of
organic-inorganic hybrids. If successful, this part of the proposed project
could lead to more benign chemistries towards nanostructured silica-type
materials that mimic natural systems (e.g., neutral pH and ambient
temperatures). It also has the potential to lead to dramatically improved
morphology control that currently can not be obtained in top-down approaches.
For example, if similar morphologies as observed in linear ABC triblock
copolymers could be realized, unique bulk mechanical properties are expected.
Furthermore, an expansion of the "tool-box" of nano-objects with controlled
shap, size, and composition towards rings or helices could be achieved. Both
have potential impact on the field of nanotechnology. The proposed program
builds on the progress made over the last two and a half years in the PI's
laboratory. A particular strength of this proposal derives from the continuation
of very fruitful interactions with several individuals at Cornell and abroad
(Max-Planck-Institute for Polymer Research Mainz, Germany) that have outstanding
reputation in their field. The proposed research program is highly
interdisciplinary. It is positioned at the interface of two traditional areas of
materials research, namely, polymer science and ceramics science. It will thus
provide student training and learning both in the fields of polymers science and
solid state chemistry while simultaneously advancing discovery and understanding
in the emerging field of nano-structured organic-inorganic hybrid materials.
Furthermore, the work is balanced between synthesis, characterization, and
property studies so that the students will gain knowledge in a broad spectrum of
techniques including anionic polymerization, sol-gel processing, small angle
x-ray scattering (SAXS), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and solid-state
NMR. The project allows effective use of the infrastructure provided at Cornell,
including work on a novel energy filtering electron microscope (EFTEM) enabling
elemental mapping and at Cornell's High Energy synchrotron Source (CHESS) for
high resolution x-ray studies. In parallel to the research program the PI
proposes in collaboration with the Educational Program Office of Cornell's
Center for Materials Research (CCMR) to expand the multifaceted outreach program
that has been constructed over the past two and a half yeats in his group.
Cornell is situated in one of the poorest and least developed regions of the US
posing a particular responsibility to Cornell faculty to help educate the public
in Cornell' region and beyond in issues related to the science and engineering
of materials. The program will include components of training and development of
human resources including the participation of underrepresented groups (training
of postdoctoral researchers and students, in volvement of undergraduates,
teacher programs, K-12 programs), efforts to enhance the infrastructure for
research and education through facilities and instrumentation, and industrial
outreach.