* 0312292
* Development of Efficient Algorithms for Computational Electromagnetism and Computerized Tomography
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Leonid Kunyansky, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 32,098.00

Kunyansky&lt;br/&gt; The first part of this project consists in developing
fast,&lt;br/&gt;high-order accurate algorithms for solving eigenvalue
and&lt;br/&gt;boundary value problems for certain elliptic partial
differential&lt;br/&gt;equations that describe electromagnetic wave scattering
by&lt;br/&gt;surfaces of objects and wave propagation in photonic
crystals.&lt;br/&gt;This work grows from a set of highly efficient
numerical&lt;br/&gt;techniques recently proposed by the author (in collaboration
with&lt;br/&gt;O. Bruno, Caltech) for problems of acoustic scattering.
Those&lt;br/&gt;methods, which permit computing of scattering fields
from&lt;br/&gt;hundred-wavelength-sized objects, with relative accuracies in
the&lt;br/&gt;range from 0.0001 to 0.000001, are not directly applicable to
the&lt;br/&gt;problems of the current project, due to a different structure
of&lt;br/&gt;hypersingular kernels in the scattering equations and a
different&lt;br/&gt;mathematical nature of the eigenproblems of photonics.
However,&lt;br/&gt;further development of this very promising general
approach&lt;br/&gt;promises new computational methods of the same
unprecedented&lt;br/&gt;accuracy and efficiency. The second part of the project
is&lt;br/&gt;devoted to the design of analytic (theoretically
exact)&lt;br/&gt;algorithms and search for new analytic inversion formulas
for&lt;br/&gt;Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT).
In&lt;br/&gt;particular, explicit inversion formulas recently discovered
by&lt;br/&gt;the author are used to develop an efficient algorithm for
3-D&lt;br/&gt;SPECT reconstruction from parallel beam measurements made
from&lt;br/&gt;non-planar directions. Also, an analytic solution is sought to
a&lt;br/&gt;practically important problem of 2-D SPECT reconstruction from
a&lt;br/&gt;reduced (collected in the 180 degree angular range) set
of&lt;br/&gt;measurements.&lt;br/&gt; The need for efficient computational
methods arises in&lt;br/&gt;several broad areas of application. For example,
non-invasive&lt;br/&gt;testing, remote sensing and, most importantly, radar and
radar&lt;br/&gt;evasion technologies require very accurate solution of
surface&lt;br/&gt;scattering problems. The investigator develops new, fast,
very&lt;br/&gt;accurate methods for computing solutions of such problems.
The&lt;br/&gt;new computational techniques find applications in the theory
and&lt;br/&gt;design of photonic bandgap structures (photonic crystals)
--&lt;br/&gt;artificial man-made materials that are anticipated to become
a&lt;br/&gt;main building block of devices for the next generation of
optical&lt;br/&gt;communication networks, and for optical and quantum
computing&lt;br/&gt;technologies of tomorrow. Finally, the novel analytic
methods and&lt;br/&gt;algorithms of SPECT that result from this project are
important&lt;br/&gt;for the theory and practice of functional medical
tomography,&lt;br/&gt;studying abnormalities of blood flow in
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;