* 0312814
* ITR: Machine Learning from Labeled and Unlabeled Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* John Lafferty, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Edwina L. Rissland
* 08/31/2006
* USD 395,000.00

This project investigates the basic question of how unlabeled data can be most
effectively used together with labeled data in machine learning. The goals of
this work are three-fold. First, the research aims to achieve a fundamental
understanding of this problem, including new methods for reasoning about the
kind of information unlabeled data can provide. Second, this research explores
new algorithms for using large amounts of unlabeled data together with small
amounts of labeled data and background knowledge, in order to achieve
performance that greatly exceeds that available using only labeled data and more
traditional methods today. The approaches used by the investigators include
graph algorithms and random fields, Monte Carlo sampling and spectral methods,
closely connected areas of computer science that have found application in
computer vision, but that have yet to be fully exploited in machine learning.
Finally, targeted applications, including text analysis, image classification,
and intrusion detection for computer security, will be investigated to validate
the theoretical principles that are developed, and to explore algorithms and
suggest new directions for investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of this research will be to help enable new technologies to use the
volumes of data that are being collected in so many new domains, and on such a
great scale. Advances in our understanding of the possibilities for, and
fundamental limits to, combining labeled and unlabeled data has the potential to
impact many scientific fields, allowing researchers to more easily use the vast
quantities of data that are available but not necessarily annotated for their
own specific needs. It also may ultimately influence the future data collection
initiatives that our society chooses to invest in.