* 0312656
* Arabidopsis 2010: Large Scale Analysis of Novel Arabidopsis Genes Predicted by Comparative Genomics
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Christopher Town, Institute for Genomic Research
* Continuing grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2006
* USD 2,023,270.00

The genome of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana has been annotated to show
the presence of close to 30,000 genes. Many of these genes are both predicted by
computer programs and supported by experimental evidence ' their similarity to
characterized genes from plants, animals and microbes. However, 15-20 % of the
gene annotations are based only on computer evidence. In addition, comparison of
the Arabidopsis genome sequence with its close relative Brassica oleracea (the
cabbage/cauliflower/Brussels sprouts family) reveals many regions of sequence
conservation that are not at present annotated as genes. Preliminary
experimental analysis of some of these regions indicates that a significant
fraction do encode genes that have so far been unrecognized by the annotation
process. Full-length cDNAs provide both the basis for greatly improved gene
structure annotation by alignment of their sequences with genomic DNA, and also
the reagents with which to analyze their function by expression and other kinds
of analysis. The objective of this research is to generate full-length cDNAs for
approximately 2,000 of these genes that represent the least well-understood
genes in the genome. We will use 5 and 3 RACE to define the precise structure of
each gene and then generate full-length cDNA clones for protein-coding genes
(ORFs) in a recombination vector suitable for functional studies by the research
community. We will generate clones and sequence at a rate of approximately 100
clones per month within three months of the start of the project with a goal of
producing 2,000 novel and previously uncharacterized clones over the period of
the project. Sequences of the clones will be submitted to GenBank as they are
generated and will also be available from the TIGR ftp site. The clones
themselves will be made freely available to the research community through the
Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (ABRC). Details of the project will be
maintained at a project-specific web site
http://www.tigr.org/tdb/e2k1/ath1/2010_cDNAs At the scientific level, this
project will enhance the Arabidopsis genome annotation by increasing the total
gene count in Arabidopsis by ~10% and will be a major step towards completing
the identification and validation of all the genes in the first fully sequenced
plant genome Arabidopsis thaliana. The cDNAs will be available as community
resources. Integrated into the proposed research is a curriculum development
component that will provide research experience to high school science educators
in which they will work on the project and use project materials for the
development of new curricular modules designed to provide exposure to
fundamental concepts in plant genomics to high school students.