* 0312029
* Social Differentiation in Early Village Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2008
* Marc Bermann, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2008
* USD 84,906.00

The development of sedentary, agricultural lifeways represents a widespread
evolutionary threshold in human prehistory. Exploring how and why populations
made this transition is important to understanding some of the most fundamental
aspects of human societal change. &lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation
support, Dr. Marc Bermann and colleagues will investigate the origins of village
life and societal inequality at the site of La Barca, an village mound belonging
to the Formative Period Wankarani Complex (2000 BC - AD 400), one of the
earliest cultures of highland Bolivia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A three-year
project of excavation at the well-preserved site will expose domestic
architecture (ranging from individual houses to distinct residential zones), and
previously unknown types of ceremonial architecture. Fieldwork will center on
broad excavation of a sequence of residential occupations dating from 2000 BC -
1300 BC. The excavation will generate data on changes through time in household
life, domestic economic patterns, trade, and social ranking. Research will focus
on addressing two questions: (1) what were the most important social units
(individual family, extended family, lineage) at different points in time at La
Barca? and (2) what activities (ceremonial, economic, social) served to
distinguish households of different social statuses? The research will make an
important contribution to the general issue of how the family unit acts to
express the ambitions and needs of its members, while also adapting to wider
social and environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
research lie in the documentation of an longstanding agropastoral way of life
(combining farming of native tubers with llama pastoralism) that has recently
all but vanished from Bolivia, and in conveying this information to Bolivian
students and public. Materials from the project will form the basis for exhibits
at the regional archaeological museum in La Joya. The project will be conducted
with the Bolivian national archaeology office (UNAR), and will assist in
maintaining collaborative ties between this institution and American
researchers. Because every American student on the project will have a Bolivian
counterpart, the project will make possible training in archaeological field,
laboratory, and curation techniques for roughly a dozen Bolivian students from
colleges in La Paz and Oruro. The excavated materials will also provide
collections for future Bolivian students to use for thesis
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;