* 0312004
* 15N Isotopomeric Site Preferences and Enrichment Factors for Nitrification and Denitrification:  A New Constraint to the N2O Global Budget
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Stanley Tyler, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2006
* USD 162,155.00

Nitrous oxide (N2O) is both an important greenhouse gas and as a source of NO in
the stratosphere. The amount of N2O in the atmosphere has increased during the
past century, though the reasons for that increase remain uncertain. Different
sources adding N2O to the atmosphere may be distinguished if they have different
stable isotope signatures. In soils, the largest natural source of N2O, we have
shown that the isotopic signature of N2O depends on both the availability of N
substrates and whether the main process producing N2O is nitrification or
denitrification. The microbial processes in turn are linked to soil moisture and
temperature conditions. Based on our previous work, we hypothesize that much of
the increase in N2O over the past few decades has been fueled by increased use
of nitrogen fertilizers in agriculture, which in turn stimulates the emission of
N2O, primarily through nitrification. This work will explore the role of
fertilizer addition to agricultural soils on N2O emissions, using the isotope
signatures of N2O and its precursor compounds in urea-amended soil to understand
which microbial pathways are responsible for producing N2O, and how those
pathways vary with soil moisture conditions. We will work in a temperate (North
Carolina) and a tropical (Venezuela) agricultural setting. Specific hypotheses
to be tested include: (1) nitrification and denitrification have very different
isotopic fractionation factors (including positional dependence of the 15N
within the N2O molecule), allowing us to quantify in a given soil what fraction
of the N2O emitted was produced by each process; (2) soils fertilized with urea
versus nitrate or organic nitrogen will have very different isotopic
fingerprints in emitted N2O, even from the same soil; (3) temperate and tropical
agricultural soils will differ in both the rate and isotopic signature of N2O
emissions following fertilizer use. To test these hypotheses, we will: (1)
develop and apply methods to determine the isotope fractionation factors
characteristic (15N and 18O contents, as well as the bond in the N2O molecule
which contains the 15N); (2) develop the method for measuring the positional
dependence of 15N in the N2O molecule at the stable isotope facility at UC
Irvine; and (3) make initial assessments of how the isotopic signatures of N2O
emitted from agricultural soils in temperate (North Carolina) and tropical
(Venezuela) sites differ when the same type of fertilizer is applied (urea).to
soils with different soil water content. Our results will provide a greater
understanding of the processes resulting in N2O emissions, and hence will be of
use for managing fertilizer application so as to minimize future N2O emissions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;