* 0312495
* Local Moment and Heavy Fermion Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2007
* Piers Coleman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2007
* USD 366,000.00

This theoretical research is in the area of heavy electron physics. This subject
occupies a modest yet vital corner in current research into correlated
materials. Many of the fundamental questions, such as how magnetism emerges and
the nature of the non-Fermi liquid metal that develops around quantum
criticality, are pressing problems to the field as a whole. Part of the work to
be undertaken is motivated by a new range of experiments that fine-tune heavy
fermion materials to a quantum phase transition. The development of new
techniques, models and concepts to understand heavy electron materials and their
critical behavior is a central element of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following subjects will be
studied:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field-tuned quantum criticality: The underscreened
Kondo impurity model provides an example of field-tuned quantum criticality,
with a Fermi temperature which can be driven continuously to zero. Using a
lattice generalization of this model as a starting point, we will model the
evolution of magnetically heavy electron systems in their approach to quantum
criticality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Frustrated heavy electron materials: We will
study the interplay of frustration and the Kondo effect in Hund's coupled
transition metal oxides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hidden order and nodal charge
density wave formation: We will study two band systems to develop a theory for
hidden order in URu2Si2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new Z2 Majorana approach to
local moment physics: This will allow us to read-off spin correlators from the
Majorana propagator, avoiding vertex correction difficulties encountered in
conventional schemes. This new method will be applied to the single impurity and
lattice Kondo model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Density of state correlations in
pseudogap systems: Inspired by the analogy with the Brown-Twiss interferometry
of astrophysics, we will develop a method to extract information order parameter
correlations from density of state fluctuations measured in scanning tunneling
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports theoretical research on
the physics of strongly correlated heavy electron systems. The research is at
the forefront of modern condensed matter physics and will contribute to the
foundations of fundamental physics. The participation of graduate students and
postdoctoral research associates will ensure that future generations of
theorists will be trained in these important areas. Like much of condensed
matter physics, the research also has the potential to influence the development
and applications of new
materials.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;