* 0312531
* ITR:  Collaborative Research:  SPARTA:   Static Parametric Timing Analysis to Support Dynamic Decisions in Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Christopher Healy, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2007
* USD 136,000.00

Mueller&lt;br/&gt;Whalley&lt;br/&gt;Healy &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Embedded systems
with temporal constraints rely on timely scheduling&lt;br/&gt;and a priori
knowledge of worst-case execution times. Static timing&lt;br/&gt;analysis
derives safe bounds of WCETs but its applicability has been&lt;br/&gt;limited to
hard real-time systems and small code snippets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research addresses these limitations of timing analysis for&lt;br/&gt;embedded
systems. It contributes a novel approach to program analysis&lt;br/&gt;through
parametric techniques of static timing analysis and
provides&lt;br/&gt;innovative methods for exploiting them. The proposed
techniques&lt;br/&gt;express worst-case execution time as a formula with the
following&lt;br/&gt;benefits. First, static timing analysis becomes applicable
to a wide&lt;br/&gt;class of embedded systems with variable loop bounds. Second,
the&lt;br/&gt;benefits of parametric timing analysis provide new opportunities
for&lt;br/&gt;dynamic and flexible scheduling decisions. Third, timing
abstractions&lt;br/&gt;through the parametric approach enable the analysis of
much larger&lt;br/&gt;programs than in the past. Finally, the techniques of
static timing&lt;br/&gt;analysis, currently constrained to hard real-time
system, become&lt;br/&gt;applicable to a much wider range of embedded systems
with soft timing&lt;br/&gt;constraints. The broader impact is to increasingly
expose students to&lt;br/&gt;embedded systems and to provide essential temporal
assurances, which&lt;br/&gt;are a prerequisite for applying the results of hard
and soft real-time&lt;br/&gt;scheduling for reliable embedded systems of
national and economic importance.