* 0312339
* ITR Collaborative Research:    Models. Algorithms, and Analyses for Clustering Data
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Santosh Vempala, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2006
* USD 90,000.00

The unprecedented explosion in the volume of readily accessible data in
&lt;br/&gt;recent years, although highly desirable, comes at a heavy price - it
is now &lt;br/&gt;considerably more difficult to locate the answer to a specific
question, or to &lt;br/&gt;find patterns and correlations that are central to a
phenomenon. The PI's &lt;br/&gt;propose to study general-purpose clustering as a
solution to the problem of &lt;br/&gt;locating relevant information and
organizing it in an intelligible way. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal falls
into two tracks. The first track is to develop measures &lt;br/&gt;and criteria
that accurately re the quality of a clustering. The PI's have
&lt;br/&gt;initiated work in this direction, and plan to build a theory of
clustering criteria firmly grounded in the intuition of practitioners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second track is the design of efficient algorithms to
find near-optimal &lt;br/&gt;clustering under the right measures. The PI's
propose to develop algorithms &lt;br/&gt;based on the so-called "spectral
methods" and other techniques. They plan &lt;br/&gt;to make them efficient by
the use of random (non-uniform) sampling. The &lt;br/&gt;PI's also plan to
implement some of the algorithms and empirically evaluate &lt;br/&gt;them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's propose to ensure that any positive impact from
their research &lt;br/&gt;is maximized by (a) widely disseminating the results
via conferences and &lt;br/&gt;also by inviting other researchers to discuss the
ideas, (b) by making the &lt;br/&gt;preliminary implementations of clustering
algorithms available.&lt;br/&gt;