* 0313618
* Development and Application of Generalized Ensemble Algorithms for Protein Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Ulrich Hansmann, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Raima Larter
* 08/31/2007
* USD 328,000.00

Professor Ulrich Hansmann is supported by the Theoretical Chemistry and
Molecular Biophysics Programs to develop, distribute and apply generalized
ensemble algorithms to the study of proteins. A primary emphasis of this work is
on complicated methodological developments and subsequent export of resulting
methodologies to other groups interested in large-scale simulation of biological
processes. Specifically, Hansmann develops new means for computationally
enhancing the frequency of transitions between interesting low-energy states. In
addition, observed transitions are analyzed to determine chemically relevant
reaction coordinates. Motivation is based on the need to increase simulation
efficiency by an order of magnitude. This will be accomplished by inclusion of
advanced physical concepts. In addition, an accurate means for accounting for
solvent-solute interactions is being developed. Applications concentrate on
investigating relative stabilities of and transitions between the helical and
sheet-like structures of the b-amyloid peptide. Formation and aggregation of the
sheet-like structures is a feature that is common to a number of neurological
diseases.

Proteins are a common yet important class of molecules in living systems. As
enzymes, proteins catalyze and regulate a cell's biochemical reactions. As
antibodies they contribute to the immune system. Since such functions are
closely related to their three-dimensional shapes, small defects can cause
misfolding which can cause a variety of diseases. Understanding these effects
from computer simulation requires additional levels of complexity in both the
theoretical models and in the computational approach employed to investigate the
manifestations of the models. In addition to addressing the theoretical and
computational issues for biochemical simulation, this work concentrates on
understanding how misfolded structures of the b-amyloid peptide form and
aggregate. The occurrence of such abnormal structures has been associated with
Alzheimer's disease.