* 0313154
* Accelerating Computer Science Education
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Curtis Hill, Valley City State University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet G. Taylor
* 09/30/2006
* USD 266,403.00

EIA-0313154 Curtis Hill Institution: Valley City State University

Title: Accelerating Computer Science Education

This ITR small award provides support to study computer science education and
learning using experimental curricular materials at a group of institutions in
North Dakota. IT develops and evaluates a multi-user virtual domain built on the
model of a virtual exploratorium of computing. The structure of the virtual
world conforms to the pedagogical hyper-structure of a computing curriculum.
However, the material is be organized in an organic fashion, held together by a
role-based theory of education. Hence, the normal course boundaries and
sequences are abandoned in favor of a goal-oriented structure. The target
audience is freshman/sophomore level students with special emphasis on workforce
training and outreach to under-represented groups. These materials are to be
suitable for use as a distance-education mechanism or as a supplement to a
traditional classroom course. The project includes a rigorous series of
evaluation studies exploring an innovative approach to the assessment of student
learning. It implements an interactive module for automatically evaluating
student programming assignments, and develops a graphical user interface for
algorithmic visualizations.

The intellectual merit of the project is derived from its focus on research and
education. The project has a good conceptual framework on which to build. It
extends a text-based prototype and provides rigorous, well-designed evaluation
to assess the impact of the model. It is a collaborative effort from a team with
the special expertise needed in both development, implementation in the
classroom, and assessment. It includes development of innovative assessment
methodologies that have promise.

This project includes several broader impacts. It develops materials and
methodologies that are suitable for delivery through both distance and
traditional methods. It tests these materials at a diverse set of institutions
and populations, including one with a significant Native American population.
Thus the project is both adaptable and transferable to other institutions and
settings.

This project investigates learning in a virtual context. It includes a formal
comparison of approaches, contrasting classroom instruction with an
anywhere/self-paced model, and a software tutored paradigm. It is a high-risk
project, but with a high potential pay-off in terms of changing the way computer
science is taught.

