* 0313031
* ITR--MHD Turbulence in Black Hole Accretion: A Testbed for Interactive Visualization of Large 3-d Datasets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Jonathan Cohen, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2008
* USD 499,520.00

AST-0313031 Krolik

The investigators intend to create the next generation of scientific
visualization systems, with particular application to the results of magneto-
hydrodynamic simulations of black hole accretion. Complex simulations of this
sort require an application which is more flexible and much more easily
manipulated by users who are not computer specialists than any existing
technique. The new system will emphasize speed and ease of use, and tying system
development to a specific scientific problem will ensure that it is
realistically designed and well tested. The PIs already have a prototype system,
but it requires significant enhancement to become a working tool for scientific
analysis, particularly in the areas of interactive data set combination,
hierarchical visualization of vector fields, and graphics-hardware-compatible
compression and decompression.

Using this interactive system will deepen our understanding of accretion, by
showing characteristic timescales and thus which process is dominating the
dynamics, by defining the topology of the magnetic field lines, and by enabling
investigation of quasi-periodic oscillations. It will also explore the
generation of stresses in accretion flows, how energy release is controlled, and
where energy is dissipated.

The research will provide a solid basis for user-guided visualization in many
other scientific fields, through public availability of the developed system. It
will train graduate students in both sophisticated data analysis and computer
systems development, and it will expose undergraduates to sophisticated
problems.