* 0313248
* Distributed Composition Services for Self-Organizing Sensor Network Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Alvin Lim, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2006
* USD 90,000.00

Development of self-organizing sensor network applications can be
&lt;br/&gt;simplified with distributed composition services that cooperate with
&lt;br/&gt;distributed adaptation and lookup services to enable sensor nodes
&lt;br/&gt;to be self-aware, self-configurable, and responsive to real-time
&lt;br/&gt;changes. This research focuses on developing novel concepts,
architecture &lt;br/&gt;and mechanisms for distributed composition services that
support &lt;br/&gt;continuous operation of self-organizing applications to meet
on-demand &lt;br/&gt;needs in spite of ad-hoc deployment, frequent node
failures, dynamic &lt;br/&gt;reconfiguration, and mobility. The utility of the
self-organizing &lt;br/&gt;services will be demonstrated in collaborative sensor
fusion &lt;br/&gt;applications for detecting, classifying and tracking moving
objects &lt;br/&gt;and distributed sensor-actuator control. The testbed is an
ad-hoc &lt;br/&gt;network of sensor nodes that are equipped with embedded
processors, &lt;br/&gt;RF communication, multi-mode sensors and actuators.
Sensors nodes &lt;br/&gt;are augmented as reconfigurable smart components with
capabilities &lt;br/&gt;for impromptu networking, self-assembly, dynamically
adaptation to &lt;br/&gt;device failure and degradation, node mobility, and
changes in task &lt;br/&gt;and network requirements. They use innovative
techniques including: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Services and mechanisms for self-organizing
sensor applications, &lt;br/&gt;(2) scalable hierarchical composition services,
(3) lightweight &lt;br/&gt;reconfigurable communication mechanisms, and (4)
implementation of &lt;br/&gt;distributed services over event-based data-centric
networks. Broader &lt;br/&gt;impacts of this research include the development of
advanced and &lt;br/&gt;introductory course curriculum and innovative sensor
network testbeds &lt;br/&gt;and laboratories for education and research training
of graduate and &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students including minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;