* 0313425
* SGER:    Laser-Layered Microfabrication of Tissue Engineering Scaffolds with Spatially Distributed Microenvironments
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2004
* Krishnendu Roy, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 04/30/2004
* USD 50,038.00

0313425&lt;br/&gt;Roy&lt;br/&gt;Tissue engineering remains one of the most
exciting promises of modern biomedical research. The concept of creating
functional cellular structures to augment or replace diseased tissue in the body
has being explored for almost a decade. The knowledge gained from fundamental
biological and animal research on the effects of various growth factors and
scaffold properties on adult and embryonic stem cells has opened new directions
in organ regeneration. However, one of the fundamental limitations of current
efforts has been the inability to produce hybrid tissue structures, in a pre-
designed fashion, inside a single scaffold environment. Currently, most
scaffolding techniques only allow incorporation of bio-factors "in bulk", i.e.
factors distributed randomly throughout the matrix. Complex spatial patterning
along with temporal distribution of multiple signaling molecules in the
immediate microenvironment of stem cells, a hallmark of native tissue
development has yet to be engineered and studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
exploratory project, the PI plans to test the feasibility of a versatile, laser-
based, layer-by-layer fabrication process to create precise spatio-temporal
distribution of bio-factors within 3D scaffolds and study their effects on stem
cell differentiation into multiple lineages. The long-term goal is to engineer
hybrid tissue structures. Aims for the one-year project are: 1) Develop a
computer-controlled laser-layered polymerization setup to micro-fabricate
complex, porous, hydrogel-like scaffold structures and 2) Study the ability of
this setup to create (a) scaffolds with defined and spatially varying porosities
and (b) spatial patterning of soluble bio-factors and polymer microparticles
within these scaffolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful development of 3D
scaffolds with pre-defined physical and biochemical properties would advance
tissue engineering by providing a platform technology applicable to a diverse
range of tissue engineering and organ regeneration problems.