* 0313949
* Infrastructure Management Research and Education Workshop
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Gerardo Flintsch, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 01/31/2005
* USD 10,972.00

The decline in the number of students interested in infrastructure management
experienced in the last decade has been identified as one potential impediment
for the development of this important sector. Efficient and well-maintained
infrastructure systems are essential for societal stability, economic growth,
and sustainable competitiveness. The objective of the Infrastructure Management
Education and Research Workshop is to develop a plan to facilitate the
strengthening of infrastructure management research and education by addressing
this problem. The strategic plan will identify: (1) areas of research focus, (2)
possible causes for the decline in infrastructure management student enrollment,
(3) strategies to increase the number of undergraduate and graduate students
interested in infrastructure management, and (4) potential solutions for the
impediments identified. The meeting may also facilitate long-term collaborative
efforts and networking among the participating scientists. &lt;br/&gt;The long-
term goal of the proposed initiative is to enhance infrastructure management
practices through research and education. The workshop is envisioned as a first
step towards the establishment of long-term collaborative efforts that will have
a broad impact by focusing on the following specific aims: (1) provide enhanced
learning opportunities in the area of infrastructure management for both
undergraduate and graduate students so that they may be motivated to pursue
careers in the infrastructure area; (2) increase the number of students
interested in infrastructure preservation and management; (3) perform research
and scholarship activities that enhance human welfare by advancing the state of
knowledge in infrastructure preservation, renovation, and management; and (4)
establish a network of infrastructure management scientists, educators, and
students who will promote the exchange of knowledge and ideas in this field.
These activities will contribute to the provision of a more reliable
infrastructure at a lower cost, thus increasing the competitiveness of our
industries and promoting sustainable development.&lt;br/&gt;