* 0313765
* Feeding and Digestion in Decapod Crustaceans During Low Salinity Exposure: Balancing the Demands of Physiological Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Iain McGaw, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 442,245.00

Feeding and digestion in decapod crustaceans during low salinity exposure:
Balancing the demands of physiological systems&lt;br/&gt;Iain. J.
McGaw&lt;br/&gt;University of Nevada, Las Vegas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All
organisms must feed in order to survive. The actual process of feeding and
subsequent digestion of food requires energy and also causes significant
increases in metabolism. Because this general effect of feeding is well known,
scientists usually take this into account and monitor animals under controlled
experimental conditions where feeding is carefully regimented. This ensures that
all animals are in a similar physiological state. Organisms are able to tolerate
changes in their environment (e.g. oxygen, temperature, salinity) by channeling
energy towards necessary physiological mechanisms. However, if the energetic
costs of digestion are large then they may have profound effects on these
physiological systems. Thus the digestive state of an animal may hamper its
ability to cope with changes in environmental parameters. Little is known how
animals balance the simultaneous demands of several systems and how the
physiological requirements of digestion, impact other physiological processes.
&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine aspects of both feeding behavior and
digestive physiology of a variety of decapod crustaceans (crabs shrimps,
lobsters) in response to low salinity exposure. Despite extensive knowledge of
many aspects of crustacean biology, few reports focus on how environmental
stress affects feeding, or how digestive processes compete with or compensate
other physiological processes. Five crab species of varying ability to tolerate
low salinity (and also of economic and ecological importance) will be studied.
They are, the blue crab Callinectes sapidus, and the green crab Carcinus maenas,
both of which have efficient physiological mechanisms that allow them to migrate
between marine and freshwater habitats; the spider crab Libinia emarginata,
which is largely confined to fully marine environments; and the Dungeness crab
Cancer magister, and red rock crab Cancer productus, both possessing
physiological mechanisms that allow them to tolerate marine to brackish water
environments. There are three objectives of this research. First, to determine
the trade-offs or gains associated with acquiring food versus expending energy
on physiological mechanisms required for survival in low salinity. Salinity
choice chamber experiments, in conjunction with remote tracking of animals in
the field, will be used to determine the salinity preference range of each
species. The underlying theme will be to determine whether this preference range
is altered by food availability or the hunger level of the animal. What are the
effects of salinity change on digestion rates of crabs? The second objective of
the project is to establish if salinity alters the time taken for digestion and
movement of food through the gut system, and if this differs with the salinity
tolerance of each species. This objective will be achieved by using barium
tracer in food provided to the crabs exposed to different salinities, and
tracking the movement of food through the gut with X-ray analysis. Dynamic X-ray
techniques will be used to study how low salinity changes gut contraction and
food passage through regions of the digestive system. The energy expenditures
involved with digestion and survival in low salinity regimes are compensated
for, in part, by adjustments in the cardiovascular and respiratory physiology.
The third goal of the project is to establish how respiratory and cardiovascular
function is modulated by the physiological changes associated with digestion. A
pulsed Doppler flow-meter will be used to measure cardiac parameters, and oxygen
uptake will be monitored in a flow through respirometer. While species of crabs
exhibit differential cardiovascular and respiratory responses to low salinity,
it is unknown if and how these are affected during feeding and
digestion.&lt;br/&gt;Most scientists starve experimental animals prior to and
during experiments. Because these control conditions rarely occur in nature, and
crabs may encounter low salinity at different times of the digestive cycle, this
work will demonstrate that, in addition to changes in the environment, the
nutritional state of the animal is important in modulating physiological
mechanisms. This work will expand our knowledge on the currently limited topic
of crustacean digestive physiology, and will increase our understanding of
invertebrate physiology in general.&lt;br/&gt;