* 0313354
* ITR: Reliable Distributed Programming with Speculations
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Jason Hickey, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2006
* USD 269,999.00

ITR: Reliable Distributed Programming with
Speculations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been well
established that the United States needs better&lt;br/&gt;programming technology
to assure the safety and reliability of the&lt;br/&gt;nation's software
infrastructure. The National Research Council, the&lt;br/&gt;President's
commission on critical infrastructure protection, and the&lt;br/&gt;PITAC report
reach similar conclusions: that the nation depends on&lt;br/&gt;fragile
software, and technologies for building reliable software
are&lt;br/&gt;inadequate. To address these problems, this research develops a
new&lt;br/&gt;programming model, called speculations, for ensuring
software&lt;br/&gt;reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A speculation is a
computation that depends on an assumption that may&lt;br/&gt;be difficult or
impossible to verify prior to evaluating the&lt;br/&gt;computation. If the
assumption is later found to be false, the&lt;br/&gt;computation is rolled back.
Speculations are especially useful in&lt;br/&gt;distributed systems, where
failures are inevitable: the network may&lt;br/&gt;fail, processors may fail,
and the code itself may have errors. In&lt;br/&gt;this new approach,
speculations are used to wrap potentially unsafe&lt;br/&gt;computations. If a
fault occurs, the program is restored to a&lt;br/&gt;well-known program state
where the fault can be easily resolved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
develops the theory and design automation tools for&lt;br/&gt;speculations in
three parts: first, the programming language theory is&lt;br/&gt;expanded to
provide a basis for speculation; second, the theory is&lt;br/&gt;used to
implement compiler and operating system extensions that&lt;br/&gt;automate the
support for speculations; and third, speculations are&lt;br/&gt;used to develop
new distributed communication protocols and&lt;br/&gt;algorithms. Speculations
conform to a widely-understood design model&lt;br/&gt;based on transactions,
easing deployment as a general-purpose&lt;br/&gt;programming tool. The results
of the research are open source and&lt;br/&gt;freely available.