* 0313370
* ITR: Analysis and Simulation of Interface Dynamics in Multiphase Fluids and Solids
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Steve Shkoller, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Hans G. Kaper
* 08/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator and his colleagues are concerned
with the development of new computational techniques for simulating interface
problems in fluids and solids that are founded on recent advances in the
analysis of the underlying mathematical models. The primary objectives of the
research are to: (1) develop novel computational algorithms for fluids with
moving interfaces governed by surface tension, with rigorous error bounds and
convergence proofs, based on mollifications and higher order regularizations of
boundary terms proposed by the investigator and his colleagues; (2) extend their
existing solid collision algorithms to include non-interpenetration invariants
and inexpensive energy approximations, allowing the efficient simulation of
thin-shell impact problems; (3) develop new phase-field schemes for multiphase
fluids with surface tensions effects based on their recent analytical proofs,
which can handle topological changes and provably converge; (4) prove the
existence of unique solutions for fluids with complex nonlinear surface
energies, including surfactant stress and elastic membrane energies; (5) use
these new analytical results for complex surface energies to develop convergent
algorithms for such problems, focusing on fluid flow in elastic structures, and
combine these methods with the existing solids collision code; (6) use the new
analytical results and computational tools to investigate the problem of the
existence and possible uniqueness of solutions to solids systems involving
collisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physical mechanisms of multiphase flows
that the investigator and his colleagues propose to model include droplet
formation and breakup, spray, coalescence, wave breaking, solid-body collisions,
fragmentation, and fracture. These phenomena are of primary importance in many
areas of science such as ocean-atmosphere dynamics, aircraft and hydrocraft
design and analysis, and many biological applications such as arterial blood
flows. There are a host of engineering applications such as the manufacturing of
advanced materials from nanotechnology to polymeric fluids. Solid body
collision, damage, and fracture are of paramount importance in host of areas
ranging from anti-ballistic design of armored vehicles and buildings to the
response of the earth's crust to the sliding of tectonic plates. The new
analytical and computational tools that are to be developed will be applicable
to these challenging physical problems. Having stable and convergent numerical
codes will greatly aid the investigation of such complex
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;