* 0313651
* Theory and Application of Panel Data Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Jinyong Hahn, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/2005
* USD 78,093.00

Nonlinear panel and social interaction models are increasingly being used in
empirical econometrics. However, solution to general nonlinear panel models with
fixed effects, as well as formal and empirical results for identification in
social interactions are not generally available in the literature. The
development of formal models as well as empirical implementation of these models
will be very useful to empirical economists.

The fixed effects model of panel data usually results in biased estimation due
to the incidental parameters problem. The estimators of the parameters of
interest will be inconsistent if the number of individuals goes to infinity with
the time periods held fixed. This occurs because only a finite number of
observations are available to estimate each individual effect; hence this
estimate is random, even in the limit. This research considers two approaches to
reducing the bias from fixed effects estimation in nonlinear models. The first
approach is an analytical bias correction model using the bias formula obtained
from an asymptotic expansion as T grows. The second approach is based on a
jacknife in the time series dimension of the panel that produces an estimator
with properties similar to the analytical approach without explicit computation
of the bias term.

The research also uses panel data method to pseudo-panel data that arise in
linear-in-means models of social interactions. Many individual outcomes, such as
earnings, criminal behavior, and unemployment, vary more between groups than
within them. This research develops an identification strategy that exploits the
differences in between-group and within-group variation in the panel data. The
between-group variation that contains information on the social multiplier is
identified utilizing Hausman and Taylor's (1981) idea developed for panel
models. Such quasi-panel formulation clarifies that identification requires
sources of exogenous within- and between- group variation in the models
covariate vector.

This research will have significant effect on empirical econometrics as well
other social sciences.