* 0313968
* Regulation of Gene Expression in Fungi for Breaching the Plant Host Barriers
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2002,12/31/2005
* P. Kolattukudy, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Gavin Thompson
* 12/31/2005
* USD 300,000.00

The plant cuticle, being the outermost barrier, is the first point of contact in
the interaction between plants and fungal pathogens. The cuticle is composed of
an insoluble biopolyester, cutin, and a complex mixture of soluble, non-polar
lipids collectively called waxes. Cutin is the first structural barrier that the
fungal infection peg must penetrate in order to infect the plant. Prior support
from NSF was primarily responsible for the basic information obtained about the
chemistry and biosynthesis of cutin, as well as the role of the cuticle in
plant-fungus interaction. Cutinase secreted by the invading fungus helps it to
attach to the host and penetrate the outer barrier. According to previously
obtained evidence, when fungal conidia contact a plant surface, the small amount
of constitutively expressed cutinase present on the conidia releases hydroxy
fatty acid monomers and oligomers from cutin, and these soluble products cause
induction of high levels of cutinase that helps the infection process. With
cloned cutinase genes and transcription factors, it has been shown that in
Nectria haematococca one transcription factor, CTF1b, regulates a constitutively
expressed cutinase gene (cut2), and another transcription factor, CTF1a, is
involved in cutin monomer induction of another cutinase gene, cut1. The
mechanism by which hydroxy fatty acids or their oligomers induce cut1 remains to
be elucidated. Cut1 induction involves a palindromic promoter element that
contains 2 overlapping palindromes. Palindrome 2 is required for cut1 induction
by cutin monomers. Palindrome binding protein (PBP) binds palindrome1 of cut1
and acts as a repressor that prevents CTF1a binding to palindrome 2. Since
palindrome 1 of cut2 has 2 nucleotide substitutions, PBP cannot bind to it and
suppress cut2 expression, and thus this gene is constitutively expressed. It is
postulated that ctf1a induction by cutin monomers allows CTF1a to outcompete
with PBP to bind cut1 promoter and cause cut1 induction. Cutin monomer or
oligomer-stimulated phosphorylation of this cutin response element binding
protein (CREBP) allows it to bind CRE and transcriptionally activate ctf1a gene.
It is also possible that phosphorylation of PBP might weaken its binding to
palindrome1 of cut1 and thus help relieve the suppression. This project will
test this hypothesis and define these regulatory processes at a molecular level.
Disruption of ctf1a gene drastically reduces virulence of N. haematococca, but
the drastic decrease in cutinase level resulting from this disruption cannot
explain the loss of virulence because supplementation of the inoculum with
cutinase or mechanical breaching of the cuticle does not recover virulence of
the disruptants. Obviously, this Cys6Zn2 binuclear protein (CTF1a) also
regulates other gene(s) required for virulence. This project will seek the
identity of these virulence genes. The results expected from this project will
elucidate novel molecular mechanisms involved in some of the fundamental
processes in plant-fungus interaction, possibly suggesting novel approaches to
control fungal diseases. Fungal infection causes by far the most damage to food
and fiber production. This project could make a significant contributions to an
understanding of this interaction that may help manage damaging fungal diseases
of plants.