* 0313952
* Isotopic Reconstructions of Prehistoric Diet from Burnt Bones
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Robert Hayes, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2006
* USD 25,000.00

The stable nitrogen- and carbon-isotope ratios of bone collagen are extremely
important sources of dietary information about ancient populations. They provide
quantitative estimates of individual diets and have therefore provided
remarkable insights into dietary variation both between and within ancient human
populations. However, they cannot be applied to charred or burned bones because
it is known that the isotopic ratios change upon heating at temperatures higher
than 150oC. This is a serious limitation because many cultures, such as those of
the European Bronze Age and ancient Rome, cremated their dead, leaving only
burned bones. And for certain types of very old sites, such as early hominid
ones, carbonized bones are the only type of bone preserved, and are thus not
usable with current technologies. Cooked animal bones, which could provide
information about diet, also cannot be used at present. Preliminary laboratory
data reveal a relation between the change of isotopic ratios of charred bone and
a property (the g-value) of the electron spin resonance (ESR) spectrum from
stable free radicals that are produced in the collagen by charring. With NSF
support, an interdisciplinary team of an archaeologist and a chemist will be
assisted by anthropology and chemistry undergraduates to further quantify this
relationship and critically evaluate its applicability to archaeological
problems. By comparing the isotope ratios and ESR g-values of laboratory
specimens and prehistoric bones from two unusual sites in eastern North America,
we will assess the whether it is possible to use ESR spectra to reconstruct the
original isotope ratios of burned bones. The Klunk and Yokem sites in the lower
Illinois Valley, USA have produced cremated and uncremated burials from
populations whose isotopic ecologies are well known. In many cases, the burials
were only partially cremated, leaving burned and unburned bones, and frequently
even bones that show a charring gradient, so that is possible to sample burned
and unburned portions of a single bone. The sites provide an opportunity to
investigate the effects of diagenetic (chemical) changes on burned bones after
burial from periods between 1,000 and 6,000 years ago. We will thus be able to
assess the effects of burial time and conditions on the reconstructions. If ESR
spectra could be used to reconstruct unheated isotope ratios, it would open up
entirely new areas where stable isotope analysis could be applied to the
reconstruction of prehistoric diet. In addition, the control samples will
provide information useful to forensic scientists who need to reconstruct the
thermal histories of victims of fires or explosions. The project will involve
eight undergraduate students in an inter-disciplinary research team combining
archaeology and chemistry.