* 0313938
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Greek, Phoenician, and Roman Colonization versus Holocene Climatic Change: Economic Implications on a Developing Indigenous Society, Western Sicily
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Jay Stravers, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2005
* USD 11,925.00

Under the direction of Dr. Michael Kolb and Dr. Jay Stravers, Mr. Chad Heinzel
will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will continue his
participation in archaeological excavations of the Sicilian-Scandinavian
Archaeological Project in western Sicily's Salemi Region. The project is
investigating the primary, social and environmental, factors leading to the rise
and fall of an indigenous society during Sicily's Late Bronze Age to Early Iron
Age (1100 to 600 BC) transition. The Salemi Region provides landscape sediment-
assemblages, fluvial and alluvial fan sedimentation that contains a well-
preserved geoarchaeological record. This record is especially significant
because it retains important indicators of past climatic, landscape, and social
changes. Preliminary excavations and survey have successfully revealed the
presence of a major hilltop settlement that includes, streets, walls,
fortification towers, nearby springs and streams, fossil land snail shells, and
adjacent agriculturally rich slopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
environmental factors responsible for landscape development in any geologic
setting is a critical step towards identifying natural versus human induced
landscape modifications. Mr. Heinzel's research will provided an important high-
resolution climatic data set for the past 15,000 years in western Sicily. Such
information will provide a physical context for on-going archaeological (Late
Bronze through Roman Age) excavations in the western Mediterranean region. These
data will provide a platform from which local and regional interpretations of
cultural development and landscape usage patterns will be made. Mr. Heinzel's
use of fossil snail shells will serve as an indicator of time (Carbon dating) of
deposition/occupation and past climate change (stable isotopic Carbon and Oxygen
geochemistry) is a first in Sicily. Well-preserved snail shells recovered from
the project's geologic and archaeological excavations will provide insightful
data regarding past changes in rainfall, temperature, and vegetative cover.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it contributes new
environmental information regarding past abrupt climatic changes and
agricultural developments in western Sicily that are essential unknown variables
in our current state of knowledge. These environmental data will provide insight
when interpreting the daily lives of Sicily's pre-historic and historic evolving
occupational phases. In addition, these data will be available for future
climate models in the Mediterranean region. Models that may predict the effects
of future climatic change and land use practices on our own developing society.
Mr. Heinzel's research also rescues and records information from contemporary
destructive agricultural practices and assists in the training of a promising
young scientist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;