* 0313862
* SGER: Environmental History of the White Nile Headwaters
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2004
* Kristina Beuning, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 02/29/2004
* USD 34,831.00

This award, under the auspices of the Small Grants for Exploratory Research
(SGER) program, will use funds to collect a series of cores from Lake Albert in
East Africa. The investigator and an undergraduate student will travel to Lake
Albert and collect a suite of Kullenberg piston cores from the deepest waters of
Lake Albert, ship the cores to the publicly accessible National Limnological
Research Center at the University of Minnesota, develop a chronology for the
cores, complete isotopic and morphological analyses of charred grass epidermis
in these cores to assess the relative contribution of C3 and C4 grass species in
the region, and examine shifts in grass species in conjunction with various
proxies of climatic and environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lake
Albert is located within the western Rift and is well sited to record shifts in
the relative contributions of Atlantic and Indian Ocean moisture sources to the
African monsoon as well as changes in the hydrologic input among the various
equatorial African lakes that feed the Nile River. Previous research has shown
East African lakes to be sensitive to abrupt decadal-scale variability in
climate and environmental conditions and unique recorders of such change. New
and well-dated sediment cores from Lake Albert could provide critical, yet
missing, details of this climatic behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a previous
award (i.e., ATM-9912052/0196564), Beuning was funded by the Paleoclimate
Program to analyze fossil grass cuticles from East African lakes to better
understand changes in the relative extent of C3 and C4 grass distribution in
tropical Africa over time. The award was made at a reduced budget and scope of
work to allow Beuning to hone her analytical techniques for the isotopic
analyses of cuticles. As a result, Beuning left Lake Albert off the list of
research sites. In the intervening years, however, Beuning has successfully
proved her isotopic techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As chance would have it, a
commercial seismic expedition is being conducted on Lake Albert in the spring of
2003. Beuning has been offered several days of ship time on the RV Kilindi to
core the lake. No local vessels on the lake are sufficient for coring so, the
commercial expedition is an opportunity to cost-effectively leverage private and
public funds to achieve a significant payoff for the international community of
paleoclimtic researchers. With a small financial investment, the wider
scientific community could benefit from a new and publicly accessible
paleoclimatic archive. &lt;br/&gt;