* 0313819
* Collaborative Research: Archaeological and Paleoenvironmental Investigation of the Initial Appearance of Domesticated Livestock in the Lake Ngami Region of Botswana and the LSA
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Lawrence Robbins, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2007
* USD 60,202.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Lawrence H. Robbins and
George A. Brook, together with colleagues and students will investigate the
initial spread of domesticated livestock into southern Africa. This project will
be the first collaborative interdisciplinary approach to the above problem
carried out in an area of northern Botswana that is believed to have served as a
gateway for the spread of livestock. The project will combine archaeological and
paleoclimatic research and will further international cooperation and training
because fieldwork will be carried out with personnel from the National Museum of
Botswana. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In southern Africa, domesticated cattle, sheep
and goats are of major importance in the food economies, social contexts and
environmental adaptations of many people, both past and present. However,
certain basic questions regarding the origins of livestock in the region remain
unanswered such as where and when did they first enter southern Africa? In
addition, there is considerable interest in whether variations in climate
influenced their arrival and dissemination. A cooler climate would have reduced
the extent of the Tsetse fly infested area just to the north of the research
area and made it easier for livestock to be introduced. Cattle cannot survive in
this area today. However, the role of climate change in the dissemination of
livestock has not yet been documented in the southern African region. This
research will investigate the above questions by conducting archaeological
excavations at sites near Lake Ngami in the Kalahari Desert. Historical
linguistic studies have revealed that the Lake Ngami area served as an important
point of entry, or gateway for the initial spread of livestock into southern
Africa. Archaeological research will verify whether the linguistic theory is
correct.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Preliminary archaeological work has demonstrated
that the sites selected for further excavation span the critical period from
when people subsisted entirely by hunting, fishing and foraging for wild foods
through the period when the first livestock appeared. The research will document
this transition in several innovative ways. The bones of domesticated livestock
will be dated by the AMS (accelerator mass spectrometry) method of radiocarbon
dating to develop a precise chronology for their first appearance. In addition,
an important type of pottery, known as Bambata Ware, that is believed to be a
marker of the earliest livestock herders in southern Africa will also be dated
by this technique for the first time. Some dated pottery will be subjected to
casein analysis in order to reveal whether the early stock herders practiced
milking. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The role of climate will be investigated in
several ways. The changing characteristics of sediments exposed by our
excavations, along with studies of variations in the level and extent of Lake
Ngami will provide information on climate changes near the archaeological sites
over the last several thousand years. A chronology for these changes will be
obtained using optically stimulated luminescence dating (OSL) which can date
sands and other clastic sediments. This record will be compared and augmented
with high-resolution climate data for the same time period from stalagmites
recovered from Drotsky's Cave located to the west of Lake Ngami. Resulting
rainfall and temperature records will be used to assess the role of climate in
the introduction of livestock to southern Africa. &lt;br/&gt;