* 0313807
* Symposium:  Transmission Electron Microscopy and Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2003,02/29/2004
* Raul Lobo, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 02/29/2004
* USD 3,000.00

This grant will partially support an international symposium on "Transmission
Electron Microscopy and Catalysis" to be held at the University of Delaware on
April 11, 2003. TEM instrumentation is undergoing dramatic changes that are
significantly enhancing the potential applications of this key technique in
catalysis research. Electron sources, lenses, sample stages and detectors have
been dramatically improved, and new approaches that couple imaging and
spectroscopy will permit structural and chemical composition information to be
obtained simultaneously. In situ experimentation using sub-atmosphere pressures
of reactive gases will bring TEM techniques closer to industrial catalytic
reactor conditions. The symposium will bring together a select group of highly
recognized microscopists to present the leading experimental capabilities for
TEM in heterogeneous catalysis research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference
will involve exchange of scientific information by the TEM experts and
participants from the heterogeneous catalysis community. Principal
investigators, graduate/undergraduate students, and industrial representatives
will share perspectives and future research directions, including networking
opportunities for collaboration. A web site will be created to disseminate the
symposium conclusions and presentations. &lt;br/&gt;