* 0313718
* Hudson Valley Ambient Meteorology Study
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* David Fitzjarrald, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew G. Detwiler
* 06/30/2006
* USD 661,272.00

This grant supports a study of the micrometeorology of the Hudson River Valley
based on an intensive program of field observations and data analysis. Phenomena
of interest include the channeling of winds by the valley, the structure and
thickness of the boundary layer as it evolves during the course of a day, the
formation and structure of low-level nocturnal jets, and the development of
atmospheric layers of strong directional wind shear. A goal is to characterize
these fine-scale features of the boundary layer in ways that will be useful for
understanding and predicting the dispersion of pollutants in the highly-
populated region upriver from New York City. The approach consists of (1)
integrating the information from existing surface and upper air observing
stations in the region into a single database; (2) conducting special field
observations during six weeks in the fall season of 2003 using local and
national meteorological facilities including a dense network of surface
meteorological stations, nine stations specially equipped for measuring the
vertical flux of heat and moisture, a radar wind profiler equipped with a radio-
acoustic sounding system for measuring temperature profiles, a tethered balloon
sounding system, and, for one month, the Wyoming King Air research aircraft
equipped for flux measurements. Major collaborators on the project are Dr.
Jeffrey Freedman of Atmospheric Information Services, and Dr. Kevin Knupp of the
University of Alabama. Results of the project will contribute to the
understanding of boundary-layer processes in moderately complex terrain and
provide guidance for pollution regulatory agencies.