* 0313472
* Arabidopsis 2010:  Arabidopsis Polyadenylation Factor Subunits - Mutants and Protein Interaction Networks
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Qingshun Li, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jo Ann Wise
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,720,000.00

The polyadenylation of messenger RNAs (mRNAs) is an important step in the
process of gene expression in plants. Polyadenylation adds an essential element
to the mRNA and helps to coordinate the synthesis of a messenger RNA with its
ultimate functioning in protein synthesis. Consequently, the protein subunits
that make up the polyadenylation machinery are expected to play important roles
in plant growth. The goals of this project are to determine the collective
function of the set of Arabidopsis genes that encode subunits of the
polyadenylation machinery (this set, including Arabidopsis genome identifiers,
can be found at http://www.uky.edu/~aghunt00/polyA2010.html and
http://www.users.muohio.edu/liq/arabidopsis2010.html). This will include a
documentation of the phenotypes of plants that have had one or more subunit
removed (by mutation or gene silencing) and a determination of the complete set
of protein-protein interactions involving the various subunits. The results will
be disseminated via peer-reviewed publication as well as through web pages
managed by the principal investigators
(http://www.uky.edu/~aghunt00/polyA2010.html and
http://www.users.muohio.edu/liq/arabidopsis2010.html). In addition, mutant
Arabidopsis stocks will be deposited with the appropriate stock center(s). The
research will contribute to a goal of the 2010 Project ("to determine the
function of all genes of a reference species within their cellular, organismal
and evolutionary contexts by the year 2010") by cataloguing mutant phenotypes,
by defining the network of interactions amongst Arabidopsis polyadenylation
factor subunits, and by identifying proteins of unknown function that interact
with the polyadenylation machinery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
greatly increase the current understanding of mRNA 3' end formation in higher
plants. As such, it will enhance the ability to tailor foreign genes for
expression in transgenic plants, and thereby develop improved crops (as well as
novel alternative economic opportunities) for farmers. It will also lend
significant insight into the evolution of mRNA polyadenylation. The research
products (cloned cDNA, antibodies, plant lines etc.) will be made available to
the research community at large. The research will contribute to the training of
two postdoctoral scholars, four graduate students, and as many as twelve
undergraduates. The latter will be drawn from highly-regarded and diverse
programs at the University of Kentucky and Miami University.