* 0313509
* Functional Identification of Genes for Pectin Biosynthetic Galacturonosyltransferases
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Debra Mohnen, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/2005
* USD 130,000.00

The enzyme activity of proteins encoded by putative pectin biosynthetic genes
will be determined. Pectin is a family of structurally complex cell wall
polysaccharides that has multiple roles in plant growth, development and disease
resistance. The pectic polysaccharides homogalacturonan (HGA),
rhamnogalacturonan-I (RG-I) and the substituted galacturonans rhamnogalacturonan
II (RG-II) and xylogalacturonan (XGA) and apiogalacturonan all contain
1,4-linked alpha-D-galactosyluronic acid. Thus, pectin synthesis is catalyzed in
part by galacturonosyltransferases that transfer galacturonic acid from UDP-GalA
onto pectic oligosaccharide/polysaccharide acceptors. Arabidopsis putative
galacturonosyltransferase (GalAT) genes were identified by trypsin cleavage of
partially purified detergent-solubilized Arabidopsis GalAT containing protein
fractions followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to obtain
amino acid sequences. Screening of the Arabidopsis gene/protein database with
the derived amino acid sequences identified two putative GalAT proteins/genes
based on the presence of predicted glycosyltransferase and membrane spanning
domains. Heterologous expression of one of these genes (GALAT1) in a mammalian
expression system in the presence of HGA yielded low levels of GalAT activity,
suggesting the gene encodes an Arabidopsis thaliana UDP-galacturonic acid: HGA
a-1,4-galacturonosyltransferase (GALAT1). Blast analysis of the Arabidopsis
genome identified additional genes with high sequence similarity to GALTA1. At
least 15 of these genes are proposed to be members of a putative GalAT gene
family. The goals of the project are to clone selected members of the proposed
GalAT gene family, heterologously express the cloned putative GalATs, and test
the expressed proteins for GalAT activity. The developmental phenotype and wall
pectin structure of plants mutated by T-DNA inserts in selected putative GalAT
genes will also be determined. The long-term goals are to identify and
characterize genes involved in pectin biosynthesis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
research will lead to the functional characterization of Arabidopsis genes that
catalyze pectin synthesis. The identification of genes encoding pectin
biosynthetic enzymes will allow the engineering of plants to produce pectins
with modified structures and properties, pectins with improved agricultural
value, and pectin-based neutraceutical and pharmacological products. The
participation of historically underrepresented groups in the research will be
achieved by recruiting undergraduate and graduate students through the
University of Georgia Summer Undergraduate Research Program (SURP)
(www.gradsch.uga.edu/rr/) and the new SURP-Bridge program, which draw in
minority students from across Georgia. The latter program offers incoming
graduate students from underrepresented groups research experience prior to
graduate school in an effort to develop the students' research skills and
increase their likelihood of success in graduate school. &lt;br/&gt;