* 0313588
* Slant-Path Sensing with Ground-Based Global Positioning System (GPS) for Atmospheric Research and Climate Monitoring
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Ying-Hwa Kuo, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 07/31/2008
* USD 810,014.00

Knowledge of the four dimensional distribution of water vapor is crucial for
diagnosis and prediction of the atmosphere. Over the last several years it was
discovered that, among other variables, atmospheric moisture affects the
propagation of Global Positioning System (GPS) signals in a predictable manner.
Currently, microwave signals transmitted by GPS satellites pervade the
atmosphere. Refractive delays induced in these signals by the moisture in the
atmosphere can be routinely measured and converted into accurate measurements of
a vertically integrated quantity known as precipitable water (PW). Under prior
support, the Principal Investigators established a university-based GPS system,
known as SuomiNet, to measure PW and provide this information to interested
users over the Internet for research and education.

Under the current award, a powerful augmentation to SuomiNet will be added. The
Principal Investigators will develop and validate techniques to determine the
slant delay of GPS signals from the satellite to the ground-based receivers.
Slant delays can be used to improve high-resolution, three-dimensional water
vapor and wind analyses, which is an important step in improving mesoscale
modeling and forecasting. The work includes development of slant delay GPS
computational methods and assimilation of slant delays into numerical weather
models.

If successful, the developed techniques will provide much improved resolution of
atmospheric variables, which can be used to advance short term forecasting. The
SuomiNet receivers will continue to be based primarily at universities and will
contribute to local educational efforts in atmospheric measurements.