* 0314038
* Dissertation Research: Analysis of Afro-Trinidadians and  Indo-Trinidadians, Ethnic Relations through Study of  Performances
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Ruth Behar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2005
* USD 9,637.00

This dissertation research project conducted by an anthropology student at the
University of Michigan investigates how the two dominant ethnic groups (peoples
of African and of South Asian Indian ancestry) in the nation-state of Trinidad
and Tobago interact with one another and shape this twin-island Caribbean
republic. The research contrasts two visions of a multicultural state: plural
society, with distinct and separate ethnic communities that exhibit a high
degree of segregation and polarity, and multicultural society in which the
various ethnic groups integrate freely, shaping creolized cultural forms and
traditions. In Trinidad and Tobago performance is a well-established means of
representing identities and engaging in social commentary, and serves in this
project as a significant context in which to understand interethnic social
relations. The project will analyze performance as individual activism and as
community engagement, and will also analyze performance practices, traditions
and symbolism.&lt;br/&gt; Intellectual Merit: Focusing on the intersection of
the Afro-Trinidadian and Indo-Trinidadian communities in Trinidad and Tobago
through reanalyzing the creole concept and its present exclusion of Indo-
Trinidadian culture, will contribute to Diaspora Studies, redirecting the focus
from relationships between European and non-European communities to
relationships between non-European diasporas.&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts: The
broader impacts of this research include creating new survey data on the ethnic
composition of Carnival masquerade bands, which will be made available to
scholars at the University of the West Indies to be used in further studies on
ethnicity and festivals. In addition the researcher is an African-American
woman, a member of a group historically underrepresented in the sciences, who
will receive training and assistance toward the completion of her doctoral
degree in anthropology.&lt;br/&gt;