* 0314385
* Regulation of the Cytoskeleton in the Early Drosophila Embryo
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Gerold Schubiger, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2006
* USD 270,280.00

0314385&lt;br/&gt;Schubiger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Scientific merit.
Investigations with many organisms and cell lines have identified proteins that
affect function and stability of microfilament and microtubule networks or both.
Mutations in these proteins can simultaneously weaken the microfilament network
and stabilize the microtubule network, indicating a dynamic balance between the
two. This balance is regulated by the mitotic cyclins because their increase
correlates with fewer microtubules. From this it is postulated that there are
dose-dependent negative interactions between microtubules, microfilaments, and
the mitotic cyclins. This clearly gives an entry point to understand how the
cell-cycle machinery regulates the two major cytoskeletal networks, specifically
how are proteins, which affect the stability of the cytoskeleton, activated in
specific phases of the cell cycle.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Early embryos are used
to study cell cycle and cytoskeleton interactions because the cell cycle only
has interphase and mitosis and lacks both gap phases (G1 and G2). The opacity of
early Drosophila embryos due to the abundance of yolk has, until recently, made
live analysis of the early cycles impossible. The advent of multi-photon
microscopy, used in conjunction with green fluorescent protein tagged histone,
now allows the precise four-dimensional live analysis of the earliest cycles,
their phases and nuclear movement in normal and mutant embryos.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Because development of the early embryo occurs without embryonic
transcription, the genome of the mother can be altered and the effect can be
assayed in the embryo. Increasing the gene copy number of cyclin B (cycB) from
two to six in the mother extends metaphase duration, reduces microtubule
configuration and changes many morphological aspects in the embryo without
affecting survival. Using this weakened genetic constitution, random mutations
in the genome were induced to either reduce "the six cycB phenotype" or worsen
it. The screen identified genes that regulate the activity of mitotic cyclins,
cytoskeleton dynamics and the onset of anaphase. Cyclin dependent kinase 1
(Cdk1) forms a complex with CycB. To enter mitosis, this complex has to be
modified: inhibitory phosphates have to be removed and activating phosphates
have to be added. Thus the genetic screen can also find specific kinases and
phosphatases that modulate the function of this complex.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Broader impacts. This project has promoted the
integration of research with undergraduate teaching and learning. The PI
regularly teaches formal courses at the University and provides opportunities
for students, especially those from underrepresented groups and from other
institutions. The "wet" data generated from the project have been incorporated
into lectures for undergraduate courses, and participation in the genetic screen
gives undergraduates easy access to independent research in genetics and
development. Undergraduates, graduate students, technicians and post-docs from
this lab have often presented their work at scientific meetings, are first
authors on published papers, and have pursued academic careers. This research
project has also promoted the infrastructure for research by establishing
collaborations with other academic institutions and by using the new technology
of two-photon microscopy to make live recordings of Drosophila development.
These recordings are a valuable learning tool and are available to the broader
public on the Fly Base website. Finally, the project's scientific discoveries
will benefit the advances of basic cancer research. The goal of the project is
to learn how cell cycle progression and cytoskeleton dynamics are coordinated
during the cell cycle so that chromosomes are faithfully transmitted. Loss or
gain of chromosomes- aneuploidy, can lead to unregulated cell growth or cell
death. In cancer, aneuploid cells can affect the progression of tumor malignancy
and resistance to therapy.&lt;br/&gt;