* 0314680
* Workshop on a Proposal to Establish and Operate a National Center for Airborne Laser Swath Mapping
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Ramesh Shrestha, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2004
* USD 38,606.00

0314680 Carter

This grant provides funding for a workshop to discuss research opportunities and
the potential operation and management of a National Center for Airborne Laser
Swath Mapping (ALSM). The workshop will be held on 25-26 April, 2003 in
Gainesville. FL at the University of Florida Hotel and Conference Center and
will bring together roughly 35-50 leading academic users of airborne laser
ranging technology and their students.

ALSM allows for acquisition of very high resolution (5-10 cm vertical accuracy,
15-20 cm horizontal accuracy) digital elevation models (DEMs) of the earth's
surface. High resolution DEMs provide crucial input for models of a multitude of
fundamental surficial processes including hillslope soil creep, drainage network
development, barrier beach dynamics, landslides, surface fault rupture, and
glacial dynamics. Modern ALSM systems such as the one already owned by the
University of Florida are also capable of mapping the vegetative canopy surface
as well as the ground surface below the canopy. The workshop will foster future
collaborations using ALSM and will improve plans to manage a National Center for
ALSM. The accessibility of ALSM technology to a broad range of academic geo- and
ecological scientists will initiate a revolution in our understanding of
fundamental earth processes at scales relevant to the problem. An improved
physical understanding of surficial processes is inherently societally relevant
and should improve mitigation of natural hazards and lead to advances in
resource management. ***