* 0314005
* Collisional Interactions in a Viscous Fluid
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2007
* Christopher Brennen, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marc S. Ingber
* 10/31/2007
* USD 378,972.00

COLLISIONAL INTERACTIONS IN A VISCOUS FLUID &lt;br/&gt;M.L. Hunt and C.E.
Brennen &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Abstract &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
investigates particulate flows in which both hydrodynamic effects and
collisional interactions are important. This research lies between suspension
flows and granular material flows and encompasses debris flows, slurry and
sludge transport, milling and mining applications, sediment transport, abrasive
machining, polishing and surface erosion technologies. These flows are
characterized by having fluid and solid phases of comparable density, solid
fractions approaching that of a packed bed, and particle Reynolds and Stokes
numbers greater than unity. The proposed work emphasizes a fundamental
understanding of the fluid and solid mechanics of collisional interactions,
including the development of models and computational tools, and the education
of students and scholar through research opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on the interactions of individual particles
colliding with a surface. To date, we have done extensive measurements of normal
particle collisions. These results demonstrated that below a critical Stokes
number, about 10, all of the particles kinetic energy is lost during the
compression of the lubrication film with no rebound of the particle. Above a
second Stokes number, about 2000, the particle rebounds with negligible effect
of the lubrication layer. The proposed work expands on these experiments by
measuring oblique collisions in which the particle may roll or slide.
&lt;br/&gt;Related experiments involve binary-particle collisions in a liquid,
which differs from the particle-wall collisions because the target particle may
move prior to the impact. Both of these experiments would be performed for
Stokes number from 10 to 3000, and include different material properties and
surface conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurements are also proposed of the
surface deformation and erosion during impact using controlled collisions with a
single particle in a viscous fluid. Both normal and oblique collisions will be
examined for different Stokes numbers and material properties. An analytical
study will accompany the measurements. The final subject involves exploratory
measurements of the fluid motion resulting from a particle collision. As a
particle approaches a wall, the fluid in the gap is forced radially outward, and
then the fluid reverses direction as the particle rebounds. These flow reversals
affect the wall shear stress in the single particle experiments and in dense
particulate flows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integral part of this research work
is the education students and scholars. The &lt;br/&gt;PIs have included
students in all aspects of their research, including the authoring of technical
papers and presentations at appropriate scientific meetings. In prior and
ongoing research, the PIs have placed a heavy emphasis on the inclusion of
student from underrepresented groups and extensive involvement of undergraduate
students. Some of these undergraduates have been recognized for their
outstanding research, and approximately half have gone on to engineering
graduate programs. The PIs have also presented their research to local schools
through community and campus programs. &lt;br/&gt;