* 0314914
* Math and Science Partnership of Southwest Pennsylvania
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2003,11/30/2010
* Mary Kostalos, Allegheny Intermediate Unit
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kathleen Bergin
* 11/30/2010
* USD 18,179,677.00

The Math and Science Partnership of Southwest Pennsylvania is a strong and
integrated collaboration linking broadly distributed suburban and rural school
districts with an assemblage of small to medium sized colleges and universities
in the region. Together they are committed to improving the understanding and
knowledge breadth of Mathematics and Science for all students in K-16. The
awardee and organizing principle for this Partnership is the Allegheny
Intermediate Unit (AIU) a publicly funded service agency intermediary between
local school districts and the State Department of Education. At the onset, the
Partnership will include AIU and three other Intermediate Units (collectively
encompassing 40 school districts) with four local institutions of higher
education (Carlow College, Chatham College, Robert Morris University, and Saint
Vincent College). In Years 4 and 5, the project will broaden by adding12 school
districts and replicate the intervention efforts in two more Intermediate Units;
in these latter two years a yet unselected college in the vicinity of these new
K-12 additions will also be included. There are three other involved partners 1)
the Biological Sciences Curriculum Study, a critical participant for development
of a Science Curriculum Framework as a counterpart to the existing Mathematics
Curriculum Framework for the State of Pennsylvania, 2) the Carnegie Science
Center, offering a staff member to serve as Science Project Director for the
Partnership and organizing/hosting regular large meetings planned for
partnership participants, and 3) the Rand Corporation, serving as an outside
evaluator of the Partnership's activities. Over five years this award will serve
134,000 K-12 students and more than 8,500 higher education students, including
pre-service teachers. Systems of different professional development
opportunities will be offered and encouraged for in-service teachers and
administrators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emphasis of this partnership is on
improving the quality of the Math and Science Educator workforce. Working in
concert, district and college level leadership cadres will develop a Science
Curriculum Framework to be disseminated to schools along with an already
developed Mathematics Curriculum Framework. For both curricula the intent is to
present challenging courses, which focus on 6-8 big ideas for each grade,
integrated in a coherent curriculum. In addition, data analysis tools and
assistance will be provided to promote 1) annual planning tailored to a
particular school district's needs and 2) tracking of developmental progress
from initiation through broad implementation and institutionalization of the
Partnership's intervention strategies to effect educational cultural
change.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Disaggregated, district-specific data analysis for
annual assessment and intervention planning, solidly developed benchmarking and
measures of outcomes, and a planned outside evaluation by the Rand Corporation
suggest that this partnership will make a strong contribution to the MSP
literature. Scalability and replication in broader contexts will be tested with
the addition of school districts and two more Intermediate Units in Years 4 and
5. This project may well prove to be an effective model for other states with
educational service units and, more generally, for regions with broadly
distributed school districts and local small to medium sized institutions of
higher education. &lt;br/&gt;