* 0314980
* LTREB: Experimental Studies of Alternative Community States on Rocky Intertidal Shores
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Peter Petraitis, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2009
* USD 285,811.00

Mussels, barnacles, and algae known as rockweeds are the major structural
components of natural communities that line the shore in the Gulf of Maine and
form the home for many species of fish and invertebrates. The long-term goal of
this project is to determine whether the factors that switch a rockweed
community into a mussel-barnacle bed are random (stochastic) or determined by
site-specific characteristics (deterministic). Ice scour, which removes
rockweed, mussels, and barnacles from the shore, has been suggested as the event
that can switch a rockweed stand into a mussel bed and vice versa. In ecology,
the idea that the same kinds of sites could be occupied by different types of
communities is commonly referred to as the 'theory of alternative stable
states.' If algal stands and barnacle-mussel beds are alternative states, then
removal of one or the other should initiate the switch. If local site-specific
differences are important, then communities should return to their original
state. To examine these possibilities experimentally, openings in rockweed
stands or mussel-barnacle beds, which mimic the effects of ice scour, will be
initiated and monitored. Experiments of this type that were started in 1996
provide one of the longest experimental studies of the theory of alternative
stable states, but the experimental sites are still changing and it is not clear
if the final communities will return to rockweed stands or become mussel beds.
LTREB support will provide funds to continue monitoring for additional five
years. This study has implications for the management of marine ecosystems; if
the natural communities found on the shores of the Gulf of Maine exist as
alternative states, then management strategies dealing with fisheries,
development and man-made disasters may need to account for the potential for
small environmental insults to cause large irreversible changes. Research will
also enhance the understanding of science and research by involving K-12
students and teachers, and undergraduates. Data collection, data entry, and some
basic analysis will be done with the help of middle school students from
Portland, ME and undergraduates from Philadelphia, PA. A high school science
teacher will be supported as a field assistant during the summers. A web page
will be developed K-12 students and aimed at introducing the students to
experimental marine ecology. The site will provide specific questions for
students, and data summaries will be available for the students to answer these
questions.