* 0314849
* REVSYS: Revisionary Systematics of the Andean Astroblepid Catfishes (Teleostei: Siluriformes)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Scott Schaefer, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 199,539.00

Abstract - DEB 0314849&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A grant has been awarded to Dr.
Scott Schaefer of the American Museum of Natural History to produce a revised
classification and analysis of geographic and taxonomic diversity of the Andean
catfishes of the family Astroblepidae. Astroblepids are one of very few native
groups of Andean fishes. The 54 species recognized to date are distributed in
moderate to high elevation streams of the tropical Andes from Panama to Bolivia
and occur in both the western Pacific and eastern Amazonian slope drainage
systems. Because they occur in headwater streams, astroblepids are important
indicators of the status of the diverse and economically important lowland
rivers, yet our knowledge of their diversity, ecology, and distribution is
rudimentary. This project will analyze all existing museum specimens and
document astroblepid and Andean fish diversity at three high priority regions of
South America. The research will produce a comprehensive synthesis of
astroblepid taxonomy and biodiversity, new species descriptions, identification
tools, and database of Andean fishes.&lt;br/&gt; The tropical Andes are the
richest of the world's hotspots for biological diversity and home to thousands
of plants and animals that are found nowhere else. The Andean fish fauna is
poorly known and locally endangered by habitat alteration. This project will
contribute important new information on the diversity and distribution of Andean
fishes in broader efforts to understand the processes responsible for producing
the highly diverse Andean biota and the assessment of priority areas for
conservation in the Neotropics. This project will also contribute to secondary
and undergraduate education in ichthyology and Andean biogeography via
laboratory training of urban high school minority youth and undergraduate
science students via educational outreach programs at the American
Museum.&lt;br/&gt;