* 0314543
* Workshop: The influence of cooperative bacteria on animal host biology
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2004
* Edward Ruby, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 06/30/2004
* USD 18,430.00

Workshop: The influence of cooperative bacteria on animal host
biology&lt;br/&gt;Edward G. Ruby and Margaret J. McFall-
Ngai&lt;br/&gt;University of Hawaii,
Manoa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the workshop is to
bring together an international group of biologists from a variety of
disciplines to consider (i) the extent to which cooperative bacteria influence
the biology of animals, and (ii) the mechanisms that underlie the complex
beneficial relationships that occur between animal hosts and their native
microbiota. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rigorous study of animal-bacterial
interactions is a technology-enabled area, the advance of which relies in large
part on the application of recently developed molecular tools. With high
throughput sequencing, microarray technology, and direct and indirect methods of
examining the genetics of the host and symbiont, we can now approach the study
of the persistent, cooperative relationships that animals form with microbial
communities. Because of the biomedical bias that stresses the importance of
pathogenic bacterial associations with animals, biologists know much more about
these unusual conditions than they do about the ubiquitous state of beneficial
bacterial colonization. Not surprisingly, this focus has clouded our ability to
recognize and characterize how bacteria have influenced the normal biology of
their hosts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 5-day workshop-conference will consist of
individual presentations and group discussions concerning frontiers in the study
of cooperative bacterial associations. The workshop will specifically focus on
the roles such associations play in the evolution, ecology, and biochemical
interactions of the host and its microbial symbionts. The participants will
target specific fields for discussion, look for ways to increase collaborative
investigations between these different fields of inquiry, and arrive at
recommendations for the further development of this emerging
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participants will also discuss specific
outreach projects that will introduce the importance of beneficial bacterial
associations to other biologists, students and the general public. The
conclusions reached at the workshop will be disseminated to the scientific
community through the publication by Cambridge University Press of a book that
covers both the scientific proceedings and their broader implications. This
volume is specifically devoted to summarizing the present state of our
understanding, and the future directions that integrated research should take.
Together these activities will contribute to raising the awareness of the
current generation of undergraduate, graduate and medical students, as well as
the general public, about the vital role played in animal biology by beneficial
bacteria interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;