* 0314745
* RUI: Vector Correlation in the Photodissociation of NO-Containing Organometallic and Aromatic Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Jeffrey Bartz, Kalamazoo College
* Standard Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 07/31/2007
* USD 174,790.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Bartz of Kalamazoo College will conduct a research
program on the photodissociation of organometallic nitrosyl and N-O containing
aromatic compounds. Recent advances in ion imaging and polarized multiphoton
ionization techniques will be used to measure the velocity distribution of
nitric oxide (NO) photoproducts. Analysis of the velocity images will reveal
vector correlations, especially correlations between angular momentum and
velocity, and between the transition dipole and velocity. The results of this
work will give new insights into the role of Jahn-Teller distortions in excited
organometallic nitrosyl compounds, and into the dynamics of NO dissociation in
aromatic species.

This project is conducted in an undergraduate institution in which undergraduate
students are partners in the research enterprise. The project is among the
forefront topics of current research in physical chemistry and the undergraduate
students are uniquely placed in participating in an advanced research effort.
The PI of this project collaborates closely with another expert in the field,
and this interaction will further enrich the learning experience of the
students. Through participation in this project students will be admirably
prepared to engage in advanced studies in physical chemistry.