* 0314512
* Seabird Habitat Patch Dynamics: Connecting Mathematical Models and Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* James Hayward, Andrews University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2007
* USD 304,000.00

Henson, Hayward&lt;br/&gt; Understanding and predicting fluctuations in numbers
of&lt;br/&gt;organisms in time and space is a fundamental issue in
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;The ability to accurately forecast the state of ecosystems
with&lt;br/&gt;mathematical models would enable, for example,
rigorous&lt;br/&gt;hypothesis testing, prediction of threshold phenomena,
and&lt;br/&gt;investigation of system response to disturbance. As in
physics,&lt;br/&gt;the primary challenges include the identification of scales
at&lt;br/&gt;which asynchronous individual-level activities form
patterns,&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms behind pattern formation, and appropriate methods
of&lt;br/&gt;data collection. During the last few decades, enormous
progress&lt;br/&gt;has been made in ecology through the integration of
mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;statistics, and laboratory experiments. The hypothesis
that&lt;br/&gt;fluctuations in animal abundance are explainable largely
by&lt;br/&gt;simple rules has been rigorously and successfully tested
in&lt;br/&gt;controlled laboratory studies. Robust qualitative
and&lt;br/&gt;quantitative prediction has become possible for
several&lt;br/&gt;laboratory systems, but this success has not been duplicated
in&lt;br/&gt;the field. The investigators wish to extend this success to
the&lt;br/&gt;field. The existence of a predictive mathematical model for
a&lt;br/&gt;field system, and a successful test of nonlinear dynamics
theory&lt;br/&gt;in the field, would constitute a major advance in ecology.
In&lt;br/&gt;preliminary work the investigators used the techniques
of&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems theory to explain and predict the dynamics
of&lt;br/&gt;patch occupancy by seabirds at three temporal scales. Based
on&lt;br/&gt;this success, they now 1) develop an accurate
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;predictive model of the spatial distribution dynamics of
seabirds&lt;br/&gt;in a heterogeneous system of habitat patches, 2) rigorously
test&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear dynamics theory in the field, and 3) reduce the
schism&lt;br/&gt;between mathematics and biology by developing a paradigm of
tight&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary vertical integration. Integration of
activities&lt;br/&gt;is three-tiered, including interdisciplinary
research,&lt;br/&gt;substantial undergraduate participation, and development of
a&lt;br/&gt;quantitative literacy program for undergraduates.
Collaboration&lt;br/&gt;of undergraduates in a research team with the
investigators is&lt;br/&gt;expected to lead to publication and presentations by
the&lt;br/&gt;students. Courses in both mathematics and biology train
students&lt;br/&gt;in basic mathematical techniques applicable to
biology.&lt;br/&gt; The ability to predict how many plants or animals
will&lt;br/&gt;occupy a certain habitat at a given time could help solve
many&lt;br/&gt;pressing world problems related to the spread of disease,
food&lt;br/&gt;production, biological control, environmental protection,
species&lt;br/&gt;conservation, interference between national defense
activities&lt;br/&gt;and wildlife, and human population growth. Mathematical
equations&lt;br/&gt;have been used to accurately predict numbers of organisms in
the&lt;br/&gt;laboratory, but such successes have not been extended
to&lt;br/&gt;populations outside the laboratory. In preliminary work,
the&lt;br/&gt;researchers devised a mathematical equation that
accurately&lt;br/&gt;predicts fluctuations in the number of seabirds occupying
a&lt;br/&gt;specific habitat on Protection Island National Wildlife
Refuge,&lt;br/&gt;Washington. Given the day of the year, the height of the
tide,&lt;br/&gt;and the solar elevation for some specific time in the future,
the&lt;br/&gt;equation predicts the number of seabirds that will occupy
the&lt;br/&gt;habitat at that time. The ability of the equation to
predict&lt;br/&gt;several months into the future was tested and validated.
The&lt;br/&gt;researchers expand this technique to predict fluctuations
within&lt;br/&gt;an entire network of connected habitats. The birds are
not&lt;br/&gt;disturbed in any way; they are counted through a scope from
a&lt;br/&gt;33-m-high observation point on a bluff more than 100 m west
of&lt;br/&gt;the seabird colony. The research involves 1)
collaboration&lt;br/&gt;between mathematicians and biologists, 2) extensive
research&lt;br/&gt;participation by undergraduate students, and 3) development
of a&lt;br/&gt;biomathematics literacy program for both mathematics and
biology&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;