* 0314371
* Alternative Pathways to Behavioral Modernity
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Paola Villa, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2005
* USD 36,351.00

&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation support Paola Villa and her
colleagues will conduct detailed technological analyses of several lithic
assemblages in South Africa and France dated to the period of transition from
the Middle to the Later Stone Age (MSA/LSA) and from the Middle to the Upper
Paleolithic (MP/UP) between 90 and 26 ka. This is an international collaborative
effort; two South African and five French archaeologists are project associates.
The MSA assemblages to be studied are from Sibudu (a new site under current
excavation by Lyn Wadley) Rose Cottage Cave and Klasies River Main. The French
assemblages include five Middle Paleolithic, two Chatelperronian (made by the
last Neanderthals) and two Aurignacian (UP) assemblages.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is widely believed that the transition from archaic to
modern behavior occurred first in sub-Saharan Africa and that many behavioral
and technological innovations facilitated the expansion of modern humans out of
Africa. However the period of transition from MSA to LSA in Southern Africa is
not very well known and there is wide disagreement about the timing and process
of transition. The early appearance in South Africa of many innovations, such as
sophisticated knapping techniques, composite tools, microliths and bladelet
technologies, remains to be verified by technological analyses supported by
experimental replication. The project will address the following questions: 1.
Do these innovative technologies appear earlier in South Africa than in France?
2. Do they show persistence through time and were they part of a behavioral
package later exported to Europe? 3. Was the MSA/LSA transition in South Africa
a slow process that was not completed until at least 25 ka or was it a rapid
change that took place at about 50-40 ka? 4. Were time-restricted patterning and
regional variations present in the MSA but not in Western Europe before 50-40
ka? 5. Are these patterns comparable to the LSA and Upper Paleolithic patterns
or are they of a different nature? 6. Are similarities between the two regions
stronger after 50-40 ka? (this is to be expected if modern behavior spread to
Europe as a result of migration out of Africa). 7. How strong are technological
discontinuities at the MP/UP transition in France and are there antecedents to
Aurignacian technical behaviors?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolution of human
technologies is one aspect of the debate about the origins of modern behavior
and more empirical data are needed to resolve these issues. The goal of this
project is to model changes in lithic technology that may be associated with
changes in cognition and symbolizing abilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major
reason for this project is to promote a stronger connection between Western
European and Africanist approaches by focusing on a concrete program of research
that will enable a productive interchange between the two scientific
communities. The meeting and blending of approaches and interpretative
principles of different research traditions and the resulting publications and
presentations at international meetings will have a strong impact on the way
Paleolithic research is conducted. Both European and Africanist archeologists
stand to gain from this cooperative effort. &lt;br/&gt;