* 0314637
* REVSYS:  Biodiversity of Deep-sea Anglerfishes (Lophiiformes:  Ceratioidei) of the World
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Theodore Pietsch, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2008
* USD 386,954.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Theodore W. Pietsch of the University of
Washington to conduct studies of deep-sea anglerfishes of the world. A
morphologically diverse assemblage of 157 species, deep-sea anglerfishes are
among the most intriguing of all animals, displaying a host of spectacular
morphological, behavioral, and physiological innovations found nowhere else.
They share with shallow-water relatives a unique mode of feeding in which the
first dorsal-fin spine, placed out on the tip of the snout, is modified to serve
as a luring apparatus, but they differ in attracting prey with light produced by
symbiotic luminescent bacteria. In further contrast, they employ a unique mode
of reproduction in which males are dwarfed and attach themselves to relatively
gigantic females. Attachment is followed by fusion of tissues and a connection
of the circulatory systems so that the male becomes permanently dependent on the
female for blood-transported nutrients, while the female becomes a kind of self-
fertilizing hermaphrodite. Despite these and other unique aspects of great
biological interest, ceratioids remain very poorly known. The work proposed here
will bring together all known specimens of these animals in natural history
collections around the world and compile a full synthesis of knowledge about
their biology, making the information known to the scientific and lay community
through hardcopy publication as well as by electronic presentation on the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The work has great potential for the discovery
and understanding of new biological phenomena ranging from reproductive
processes to the evolution of deep-sea light-organ symbiosis. At the same time,
the results will form a foundation for future examination of a host of
intriguing evolutionary questions relative to oceanic biology in general: their
abundance, high species diversity, and position in the food chain as top primary
carnivores in deep-sea ecosystems make them important ecologically; and their
unique mode of reproduction has significant biomedical implications to the
fields of endocrinology and immunology. Finally, while contributing
significantly to education and the development of human resources in science at
the undergraduate and graduate levels, the results, broadly disseminated, will
enhance scientific and technological understanding among students, scientists,
and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;