* 0314312
* Identification and Empirical Inference
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Charles Manski, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 261,055.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Econometricians have long found it productive to study
identification and statistical inference sequentially. One first analyzes
identification of a population distribution and then considers induction from
finite samples to the population, assuming that the finite sample properties are
the same as that of the population. The PI has developed a major research
program on partial identification of probability distributions. The research
described here will extend this research program in two important directions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Policy makers make treatment choices based on a finite
sample of data, knowing that different individuals should receive different
treatments because of different responses to treatment. The first direction of
extension is to use statistical decision theory to integrate the study of
identification and statistical inference in the analysis of treatment response.
The traditional way to cope with sampling processes that partially identify
population parameters has been to combine the available data with strong
assumptions to yield point identification. Such assumptions often are not well
motivated, and empirical researchers often debate their validity. The approach
proposed here allows researchers to learn from the available data without
imposing untenable assumptions. Providing a framework for statistical treatment
rules for treatment choices and parametric prediction with missing data, this
research will help solve one of the major problems in econometrics and
statistical inference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second direction of extension
is the computation of estimates of identification regions for parametric best
predictors when data are missing. Many persistent public policy controversies
reflect divergent beliefs about the effects of government policy on society.
Such divergent beliefs are often manifested in competing policy studies that use
different analytical approaches or data sources to reach different policy
conclusions. However, there may be no way to determine which study (if either)
makes realistic conjectures and which (if either) draws empirically correct
conclusions. The research outlined here provides an innovative approach to
empirical inference that enables the public to better evaluate the credibility
of existing policy studies and can enhance the credibility of future policy
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research may not only have a
strong impact on economic science, it is likely to have a strong impact on
public policy formulation and evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;