* 0314378
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Modeling and Control of Robotic Manipulators with Flexible Links and Joints
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Ahmed Shabana, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2008
* USD 30,000.00

0314378&lt;br/&gt;Shabana&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a cooperative research project between Dr. Ahmed Shabana, Department of
Mechanical Engineering, University of Illinois, Chicago (UIC), Illinois and Dr.
Said Megahed, Department of Mechanical Design and Production, Cairo University,
Cairo, Egypt. The research goal is to improve the current design methodologies
of robotic manipulators using modern control techniques. A lightweight robot
with smart control strategies eliminates the robot vibrations and achieves high-
speed operations. This goal may be achieved with the development of a reliable
dynamic model of a robotic manipulator without and/or with flexible links and
joints. Different control strategies will be evaluated in order to make the
robot TCP follow a desired trajectory. The performance of these control
strategies will be compared in order to determine the optimum control system.
The control effort is to accurately position the robot endpoint TCP and to
dampen the robot oscillations. DC-motors and/or piezoelectric actuators may be
used and tested for accurate control. Experimental verification of the
performance and robustness of the robot with the developed control system will
be carried out. The dynamic simulation for the very flexible robot will be
obtained using the finite element absolute nodal coordinate formulation. In this
formulation global position and slope coordinates are used as the nodal
coordinates. The absolute nodal coordinate formulation leads to a constant mass
matrix, and as a consequence, the centrifugal and Coriolis inertia forces are
identically equal to zero. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The collaboration in
this project will involve the Egyptian group focusing on the experimental
studies, while the group at the University of Illinois at Chicago will be
focused on the analytical and computational studies related to the small and
large deformation problems. A graduate student at UIC will participate in this
international collaboration. Several Egyptian students will participate in the
experimental work at Cairo University. This project is being supported under the
US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers
in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities.&lt;br/&gt;