* 0314004
* Tracking Control for Nonlinear Systems Distributed over Communication Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,04/30/2007
* Christopher Byrnes, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2007
* USD 185,000.00

Modern engineering systems are very complex and comprise a high number of
interconnected sub-components which, thanks to the remarkable development of
communications and electronics, can be spread over broad areas and linked
through data networks. The control of those complex sys- tems can only be
achieved in a decentralized mode, by appropriately designing local controllers
for each individual component or small group of components. Control and
computational capabilities being distributed over the system, a steady exchange
of data among the components is required, in order for the system to behave
properly. While control, information theory and communication are to some extent
mature disciplines, little effort has been put so far in understanding how
issues in information theory and communication constraints affect the
performance of a large-scale control system distributed over a communication
network. The simplest case in which this situation may occur is when the control
functions are performed by a local (decentralized) controller, situated at the
same physical location of the controlled plant, and by a remote (centralized)
controller, situated at a different location. Typical, in this scenario, is the
situation in which a subsystem is required to perform a task which depends on
the state of a system residing at a remote physical location. In this case, the
local controller must embed some mechanism of prediction of the tasks to be
performed which, depending on the states of remote subsystems, may be quite
uncertain. The ability of successfully handle large uncertainties is one of the
main, if not the single most important, reasons of being of automatic control.
Little attention, though, has been paid so far to the fact that uncertainties
may also affect the task that the control system is asked to accomplish. One of
the main intellectual purposes of the proposed research activity is to show how
problems in which control tasks are uncertain can be successfully addresses by
embedding, into the controller itself, a tunable internal model of the systems
on which the tasks to be performed may depend. The other main intellectual
purpose is to show how this design philosophy is particularly suited to the
control of large complex systems distributed over communication networks. In
fact, the role of an internal model is that of generating, in real time, the
precise feed-forward input which would be required to perform the actual control
task. If the local controller contains an internal model of those tasks, the
role of the remote controller would only be that of resetting (once in a while,
possibly using little amount of information) the state of the internal model on
the basis of the actual value of the regulated variable. This would provide a
design philosophy which would much better cope with restrictions typical of a
control system distributed over a communication network, such as bandwidth
constraints, delays, loss of packets. Progresses in internal-model-based control
design are expected to have a broad impact in var- ious areas of control
technology. Experimental results have already shown, for instance, how self a
tuned internal-model-based controller can automatically compensate for faults
occurring in a ro- tating electrical machine, and the benefits which may derive
to manufacturing industry from this specific application are quite clear.
Another broad area of interest is that of satellite control for
telecommunications. Typical problems occurring in this area are to have a
communication satellite tracking a smaller, beacon satellite at a fixed distance
in a circular orbit, or to have networks of small satellites ying in coordinated
motion. Another application, in which preliminary simulations have shown
impressive results, is the design of an autopilot to assist the landing of a
rescue heli- copter on a ship in distress in high seas. Similar applications are
automatic ship loading/unloading in adverse atmospheric conditions or remote
control of submarine vehicles for automatic undersea cable or pipeline
inspection.