* 0314407
* Decentralized Societies and the Development of Secondary States
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2007
* Timothy Chevral, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2007
* USD 197,420.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Tina Thurston will conduct three
seasons of fieldwork in the Thy region of Denmark, where she studies the Iron
Age period during which a state level society first emerged. Most archaeological
studies focus on 'Primary' states, which develop spontaneously from less
politically complex societies. Dr. Thurston is interested in a different
process: states that develop from contact with and response to already existing
states. Called 'Secondary' states, they usually arise from several pre-existing
groups brought together by political leaders to create a single entity. Much
less is known about this process, although it is more common, and parallels can
be observed in historic times as empires and 'super-powers' interact with
peripheral groups, spawning social, economic and political shifts. Through
comparison of such individual cases, insight is gained into the social processes
underlying emergent political complexity. The early Danish state is also unusual
because of its 'corporate' nature, in which a type of primitive democracy was
favored, and extreme differentiation between leaders and followers was
suppressed while labor, food production, social groups and even rulership were
controlled through broad integrative ritual and ideological means. Denmark's
corporate nature means that palaces, monuments, temples and other markers of
political power are unavailable for use in studying state development. Thus,
with prior NSF support, Dr. Thurston developed a methodology for reconstructing
the organization of such differently-organized states, which relies not on
examining one site, but on determining trends and processes in regions to
understand who controlled important institutional structures: market economy,
networks of central places, agrarian production, military command, and religious
practice. During state-building, control of these will ultimately shift from
local, pre-state leaders to central rulers. How this occurs -- peacefully or
violently, quickly or slowly, for example -- gives insight into central rulers'
strategies and the level of cooperation or resistance they receive from those
incorporated into a new polity.

To this end, Dr. Thurston has been studying a sub-region that during the state-
building era underwent changes typifying processes seen in the greater nation.
During four previous seasons of NSF supported fieldwork, full coverage survey
identified over 250 sites using soil phosphate testing and associated surface
artifact distribution (indicators of human occupation), and 106 test excavations
were conducted at 36 locales to date and reconstruct forms of settlement,
determine village social organization and economic activity, and how this
changed over time. Based on data collected at a military levy site, economic
centers, elite compounds, and villages with evidence of unusual agrarian
expansion and forced migration, a number of marked changes in institutional
control are indicated, accompanied by violent opposition to growing state
dominion over local affairs. Dr. Thurston will now excavate several sites to
answer the questions of when, how, and under what circumstances state
intervention in local systems occurred. At the same time, she will continue to
train both undergraduate and graduate students, and hopes to enhance discourse
on the modern era, where the making/breaking of states and the forced
resettlement of populations has become a common occurrence.

