* 0315122
* Protein Phosphorylation in the Archaea
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Peter Kennelly, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* John C. Rogers
* 08/31/2007
* USD 408,000.00

Within every living cell, proteins called enzymes catalyze the thousands of
individual chemical reactions that make life possible. These enzyme-catalyzed
reactions break down nutrients to generate energy; assemble proteins and DNA
from smaller molecules such as amino acids and nucleic acids; defend the cell
against pathogens, etc. Cells must carefully coordinate these individual
processes so that they combine together, like the steps in an assembly line, to
efficiently produce what is needed when it is needed. These processes must be
adjusted, or regulated, to respond to changes in the cell's surrounding
environment. One of the most versatile mechanisms for regulating the activity of
enzymes is protein phosphorylation. When a protein kinase attaches a phosphate
group to a target protein, the phosphate acts as a switch that turns "on" or
"off" that protein's function. Protein phosphatases remove the phosphate group
(dephosphorylation) when needed to turn the phosphate switch back to its
original position. Cells possess a number of proteins containing phosphate
switches that enable them to exert very comprehensive control. The objective of
this project is to determine the origins and development of this switching
mechanism in order to understand the fundamental principles upon which it
operates. A simple model organism from the Archaea, Sulfolobus solfataricus,
will be used in this study because the Archaea represent living fossils that
preserve many of the properties of the earliest living organisms. They also
carry out potentially useful chemical processes such as the generation of
methane. In the future, the knowledge generated concerning phosphate switches
can be exploited to engineer these organisms to perform functions of benefit to
humanity. Using mass spectroscopy and molecular biology, the proteins that are
phosphorylated in Sulfolobus solfataricus and the enzymes that phosphorylate and
dephosphorylate them, will be identified and the functional relationships
between them mapped. Students will be trained and a much needed website on the
subject will be provided