* 0315647
* Pollen-Pistil Interactions in Nicotiana
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2003,11/30/2006
* Bruce McClure, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Banks
* 11/30/2006
* USD 420,000.00

IBN-0315647&lt;br/&gt;McClure&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because plants are sessile,
they rely on external agents such as wind or insects to disperse pollen and
effect fertilization. Thus, pollen dispersal is relatively non-specific, and
plants have evolved elaborate pollen-pistil interactions to control mating. The
overall goal of this research is to understand the molecular basis for these
interactions. The experimental system is S-RNase-based pollen recognition and
rejection in Nicotiana. S-RNase determines the specificity of pollen recognition
in this system. The model is that S-RNase is secreted into the extracellular
matrix of the pistil where it forms complexes with glycoproteins known to
interact with pollen tubes. Binding to the glycoproteins facilitates S-RNase
uptake by pollen tubes. Once inside the pollen tube, a newly identified pistil
factor (i.e., 4936-factor) is required for S-RNase to cause pollen rejection.
Pollen factors also contribute. Some bind directly to the glycoproteins present
in S-RNase complexes. Others directly determine compatibility either by
inhibiting S-RNase's cytotoxic activity or by preventing such inhibition. This
project has three objectives designed to test aspects of this model. First, a
comprehensive screen for pistil-expressed sequences will be used to identify
candidates for 4936-factor. Candidates will be sequenced, and their expression
patterns will be examined by RNA blot analysis. Antibodies will be raised to
test for uptake into pollen tubes. The model predicts that 4936-factor will
activate S-RNase after uptake into pollen tubes. Second, a yeast two-hybrid
screen for pollen and pistil factors that interact with S-RNase binding
glycoproteins will be conducted. The model predicts that pollen expresses
proteins that will bind to these glycoproteins. Third, immunolocalization
experiments will be performed to determine whether RNase uptake occurs normally
in plants with a variety of different pollen rejection responses. These
experiments may reveal new steps in the model or may help define when factors
act during pollen recognition and rejection. This project is linked to
undergraduate teaching. Using the arrayed cDNA libraries produced to screen for
4936-factor, students will conduct an EST project to identify sequences
expressed in mature pistils. Students will pick clones, analyze sequences, and
pool their data to make an EST list. These activities will better prepare them
for later research experiences. &lt;br/&gt;