* 0315799
* International Workshop on Structural Health Monitoring; September 15-17, 2003; Stanford, CA
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Fu-Kuo Chang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 03/31/2004
* USD 20,000.00

This project is to organize and hold an International Workshop on Structural
Health Monitoring at Stanford University, Sept. 15-17, 2003. Structural health
monitoring is an emerging technology, which combines advanced sensing technology
with knowledge of material/structural response and damage characteristics to
monitor the integrity of structures, in real time, while in service for
sustaining their reliability and performance, minimizing catastrophe and human
loss in addition to the reduction of maintenance cost. It is, therefore,
particularly important for civil infrastructures such as public transportation
systems, buildings, highways, tunnels, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
of the Workshop are to review the progress of the current rapid development in
the technologies related to the field, identify key and emerging issues in
research and development, and promote exchanges and cross-fertilization across
diverse disciplines: such as sensors, sensor systems, networking, computing,
data mining, diagnostics, prognostics, signal processing, and multifunctional
materials. The workshop will also address issues involved in practical
application for civil infrastructures, ground/air/space transportation vehicles,
and marine structures, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distinguished individuals from
industry, academe, and government will be invited to deliver keynote lectures
and presentations. Product and technology demonstrations will also be exhibited.
The workshop will conclude with panel discussions on key issues and concerns
identified during the workshop. The workshop will produce volumes of proceedings
of the technical presentations. A technical committee consisting of key
personnel from government, industry, and academe will be formed to guide the
future development in the field. The committee will be responsible for
developing appropriate guidelines and recommendations for government agencies
and industry to promote structural health monitoring technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;