* 0315796
* Do Genetic Differences in Growth and Defense Contribute to the Success of an Invasive Plant Species?  Experimental Tests
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Evan Siemann, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 07/31/2007
* USD 397,775.00

Chinese Tallow Tree (Sapium sebiferum) is a major invader in the Gulf Coast that
aggressively displaces native plants and forms monospecific stands. Experiments
in Texas and Hawaii have shown that invasive ecotypes of Sapium have higher
growth rates but lower defense abilities than Asian (native) ecotypes, and
suffer higher damage from introduced Asian herbivores in Hawaii. We propose to
use a series of experiments to answer the following questions: (1) How important
is the combination of high growth, low defense and low herbivore attack for
Sapium's invasion success? (2) How important are differences in its growth and
defense in determining the severity of Sapium invasion in different conditions?
(3) Are the same Sapium ecotypes that are invasive in North America also
successful when grown in Asia in similar conditions? These experiments will be
replicated across field sites that differ in Sapium status and insect herbivore
assemblages. In Texas, Sapium is invasive and experiences low herbivore pressure
with no documented specialists; in Hawaii, Sapium is a 'casual alien' that
experiences very high generalist herbivore pressure with no documented
specialists; and in China, where Sapium is native, it experiences high herbivore
pressure from Sapium specialists. Our experiments will investigate the
performance and competitive ability of native and invasive ecotypes of Sapium
with resource manipulations, insect herbivore suppressions and density
manipulations and simulated herbivore defoliation. These experiments represent a
unique investigation into the interactions of invasive plants and herbivores
that will elucidate the mechanisms by which exotic species successfully invade
native communities. The broader impacts of the study are twofold. It will
promote collaboration with Chinese scientists and train both Chinese and U.S.
graduate students. It also will provide practical information for the prediction
of future invasive species and help guide the management of current problem
species.