* 0315860
* QEIB:  Spatial Spread of Invasive Carduus Thistles:  Linking Demography and Dispersal
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Katriona Shea, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2007
* USD 162,069.00

This study proposes to examine the spatial spread of two noxious weeds: musk and
plumeless thistle. Based on field-collected data, a suite of mathematical models
of increasing complexity will be developed to assess the rate of spread of these
species under different assumptions about the population structure and the
spatial heterogeneity of the landscape. This will allow the assessment of which
species and environmental characteristics contribute most to invasive
spread.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both these thistles are major noxious weeds in the
US. Thus, there will be important management implications of such work. The
models will be used to ask several applied questions: Are local control
strategies also the best for reducing regional spread? What can reduce the rate
of spatial spread of these invaders? Do optimal management strategies for each
species differ, and if so, why? This project links concepts in population and
community ecology and thereby facilitates integration of different modeling
approaches for spatial spread. The empirical work will allow improvement of
designs for the measurement of dispersal, in particular long distance dispersal.
Importantly, this study will improve our understanding of the applicability of
different modeling techniques for assessing spread of invasive
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;