* 0315353
* Atmospheric Pressure Plasma Processing of Polymers: Plasma Dynamics and Nanoscale Plasma-Surface Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Mark Kushner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Linda G. Blevins
* 04/30/2005
* USD 220,131.00

Project Summary

Atmospheric Pressure Plasma Processing of Polymers: Plasma Dynamics and
Nanoscale Plasma Surface Interactions

This is a computational research program that investigates fundamentals of
atmospheric-pressure plasma (APP) transport and plasma-surface interactions in
the context of APP processing of polymers. The goals of this program are an
integrated, multi-scale modeling hierarchy, spanning scales of nanometers to
centimeters, and its use to determine the limiting plasma transport processes
and upside potential of APP processing of high-value materials. These goals are
met by developing a comprehensive, 3-dimensional plasma-dynamics model for
atmospheric-pressure corona and glow discharges that is capable of investigating
complex plasma chemistries; developing 3-d plasma-surface interaction algorithms
capable of addressing the nanoscale spatial structures typically found on
polymers; adapting feature-profile models (originally developed for
semiconductor processing) to address plasma-initiated chemistry on polymer
surfaces; and integrating these modules into a centimeter-to-nanometer
hierarchy.

The use of plasmas to produce desired surface properties of a polymer, such as
hydrophobicity or hydrophilicity, is a topic both of current scientific
investigation and of commercial interest. There are two pathways to achieve this
functionalization: deposition and modification. In plasma deposition, polymeric
surfaces with specific characteristics are obtained by depositing materials from
a plasma. These processes are usually performed at low pressures in systems not
unlike those used for microelectronics fabrication. As a consequence, such
processing is usually limited to high-value-added materials, such as for
biologically compatible coatings. In plasma modification, a conventionally
manufactured inexpensive polymer is treated with a plasma to change its surface
properties. These processes are typically conducted at atmospheric pressure
using corona discharge devices in a "web" arrangement. Unlike low-pressure
plasma deposition, APP (atmospheric pressure plasma) processing of polymers is
usually a low-value-added process. Polymers and plastics such as polypropylene
and polyethylene are processed to improve their adhesion and wettability. In
spite of the commercial use of APPs for treating polymers, there are few first
order, fundamentals-based models describing the plasma-surface interactions that
modify polymer surfaces. As a consequence, the development and optimization of
APPs for polymer processing has been, for all practical purposes, an empirical
undertaking

Broader Impacts

The economic and societal benefits of being able to adapt inexpensive and high-
volume APP methods for modifying polymers to produce high-value films is
staggering. For example, biocompatible artificial skin for treatment of burn
patients could be produced for $1/m2 as opposed to $1,000's to $10,000's per m2
which is typical of newly FDA-approved products. The current knowledge base is
inadequate to make these advances and improving that knowledge base will help
determine the practicality of achieving these goals. The computational
techniques and improvements in the knowledge base produced in this project are
applicable to a variety of APP applications, including lighting, toxic gas
remediation, sterilization of surfaces, bioremediation, and microdischarges. .

