* 0315930
* Floristic Exploration and Survey of Four High-Priority Areas in New Guinea
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Wayne Takeuchi, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 12/31/2008
* USD 300,000.00

The research supported by this project will consist of intensive botanical
exploration and collecting in four of New Guinea's principal floristic
environments. The exploration targets have been selected for their institutional
linkages, presumed biodiversity values, comparative lack of existing
information, and the existence of imminent development threats likely to result
in harmful impacts on environmental quality. Divided equally between Indonesian
Papua and Papua New Guinea (PNG), the survey tracts include the Sepik and Kikori
basins in PNG, and the Asmat foothills and Raja Ampat islands in Papua (formerly
Irian Jaya). The selected localities are believed to contain substantial numbers
of unknown plant species because of the unique geophysical characteristics of
the respective areas. Although a wide range of vegetation types is included in
the proposed inventory, premontane and high rainfall habitats are favored in the
sampling due to the known relationship between such sites and floristic
diversity. The botanical collecting will focus on mosses and vascular plants
within the targeted territories. In addition to substantial participation by
indigenous organizations, planning agencies, and personnel, the survey plan is
underpinned by extensive connections to international researchers and
conservation groups. One of the study's principal objectives is to develop
synthetical and electronically-accessible databases of the botanical assets in
the focal areas. Digital photography will be a valuable adjunct product to the
large number of herbarium specimens which are to be acquired and distributed by
the exploration program, to such institutions as the Harvard Herbaria, the
Smithsonian's Natural History Museum, and the Missouri Botanical
Garden.&lt;br/&gt;The impacts and benefits of the proposed project will be
manifold. The study will materially improve the comprehensiveness and quality of
ongoing monographic revisions in the Flora Malesiana program, by involving the
major international centers for plant taxonomic research and ca. 40 leading
taxonomic authorities on the regional flora. The improved understanding of
Papuasian plant life will facilitate conservation efforts in New Guinea along a
broad front, first by enabling managers to properly evaluate the relative value
of suspected hotspots, and secondly, because the close involvement of indigenous
organizations will promote the implementation of current conservation
initiatives within the targeted sites. The Principal Investigator's students and
colleagues include senior New Guinean science administrators working in both the
government and nongovernmental sectors. Their participation in the research
itinerary will form the basis for their academic studies and is part of a
conscious strategy for developing an effective cadre of local counterparts.
&lt;br/&gt;