* 0315614
* Computer Simulation of Chemical Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2003,02/29/2004
* William Hase, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Raima Larter
* 02/29/2004
* USD 375,000.00

William Hase is supported by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program
to perform research in the area of computer simulation of chemical dynamics. The
research proceeds by development of accurate theoretical models for simulations
of intramolecular dynamics, energy transfer, and chemical dynamics and kinetics.
Both quantum mechanical and classical treatments of the nuclei are considered.
Further, simulations are based on both classical potential energy surfaces and
those determined from quantum mechanical treatments of the electrons. The latter
technique, referred to as direct dynamics, is being developed in a way that
allows for direct and systematic interfacing with other off-the-shelf electronic
structure codes. Problems currently being studied include surface induced
dissociation of protonated peptide ions, reaction of ozone on unsaturated
hydrocarbon surfaces and the theory of intramolecular and unimolecular dynamics
for approaching transition states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
understand and control chemical reactions impacts practically every aspect of
daily life, the economy and our understanding of life itself. Chemical reactions
occur during synthesis of materials and during refinement of crude oil.
Understanding how to make such reactions proceed with minimal intervention
directly limits the ultimate cost of the product and the amount of unwanted
waste materials and/or heat that are generated during synthesis. Understanding
gleaned from simulation of ozone interactions with unsaturated hydrocarbon
surfaces will be directly transferable to analogous processes that occur in the
troposphere. In the troposphere, such processes lead to ozone depletion and also
chemically alter oceanic organic aerosols that directly affect the formation of
clouds and the transfer of sunlight to the surface of the earth. The
computational methods developed here rely on accurate potential energy surfaces
and are therefore coupled directly to relevant quantum-mechanical methods for
such purposes. Students and postdoctoral scientists are trained in the
classroom, via the web, and by direct participation with researchers.&lt;br/&gt;