* 0315274
* SGER: Characterization of Hermaphroditism in Rana Pipiens
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Tyrone Hayes, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 01/31/2005
* USD 99,999.00

Previous laboratory studies showed that the herbicide, atrazine, induced sexual
abnormalities in both African clawed frogs (Xenopus laevis) and American leopard
frogs (Rana pipiens). Hermaphroditism (animals with both testes and ovaries or
testes with developing eggs) was the most severe abnormality observed. Later
studies showed that similar abnormalities were found in the wild in populations
exposed to atrazine via agricultural runoff. Although the cause-effect
hypothesis is supported by laboratory data, it is possible that hermaphroditism
occurs naturally and that the correlation with atrazine contamination in the
wild may be coincidental. The current study will address the possibility in two
ways: 1) Animals from populations in the wild that show hermaphroditism will be
reared in the laboratory to determine if hermaphroditism occurs in the absence
of exposure to atrazine-contaminated water. Development of animals from these
populations will be compared with animals from populations that do not show
hermaphroditism in the wild. 2) Animals from populations that do not show
hermaphroditism in the wild will be reared in atrazine-contaminated water
collected from areas where hermaphroditism was observed in the wild to determine
if it will induce hermaphroditism in animals that do not normally show this
developmental pattern.

The two aims outlined above will determine if hermaphroditism occurs naturally,
or is the result of contaminant exposure. These studies are important for
several reasons: 1) atrazine is the most common contaminant in ground and
drinking water; 2) laboratory studies showed that atrazine is active at levels
as low as 0.1 parts per billion, a level that can be exceeded even in rain
water; 3) atrazine and other pesticides may be involved in amphibian declines;
4) the proposed endocrine mechanisms by which atrazine affects amphibians have
been documented in fish, reptiles, and mammals; 5) the same mechanisms may be
responsible for cancers produced in rats by atrazine and observed in humans
occupationally exposed to atrazine (breast and prostate cancer).