* 0315523
* Acquisition and Development of Fast Confocal Polarizing Microscope for Liquid Crystal Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Oleg Lavrentovich, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 05/31/2005
* USD 190,000.00

This grant provides support for the acquisition and development of a fast
confocal polarizing microscope for liquid crystal (LC) materials research and
education at Kent State University. The goal of this project is to expand the
recently developed technique of three-dimensional (3D) non-destructive imaging
of orientational order into the time domain of real-time scanning to study
processes at the millisecond time scale with spatial resolution of 1 micrometer.
This new microscope will significantly sharpen the insight of researchers and
educators into the complex word of molecular arrangements and their collective
dynamics in modern materials and is of great fundamental and applied interest.
With high speed imaging it will be indispensable in characterization of
structure, properties, and performance of new materials such as LC-colloidal and
LC-polymer composites, photonic crystals, biosensors, as well as the traditional
materials in complex geometries (for example, LCs with 3D director defects). As
many of these materials are new and not well studied, the instrument will bring
discoveries of fundamental properties. It will be of great help in development
of practical devices such as LC displays, beam steering devices and optical
switches. Using this microscope in the development of real-time bacterial
detection would be a contribution to the safety and health of the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will be installed at the Liquid Crystal
Institute (LCI), Kent State &lt;br/&gt;University (KSU), a recognized center
with well-developed infrastructure combining fundamental and applied research
with strong industrial partnership program and with strong educational programs
at all levels. Graduate and undergraduate students in physics, chemistry,
biology and interdisciplinary programs will benefit, as will undergraduate
summer students and K-12 students involved in outreach programs. This new
capability will allow the educators to demonstrate the physical essence of
fundamental phenomena in modern materials and devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;