* 0315851
* SBIR Phase I:     Composite Structural Damage Self-Sensing via Electrical Resistance Measurement
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Jaycee Chung, GLOBAL CONTOUR LTD
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,827.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project is an in-situ and real-
time composite self-sensing and structural health monitoring (SHM)
system/technique development with application of the multifunctional properties
of composite structural carbon (graphite) fibers. Composite structural damage
sensing and SHM are accomplished by measuring electrical resistance
(conductivity) changes in the carbon fiber structural composites the way they
are designed and manufactured. Unlike embedded sensor applications such as
piezo-ceramic (PZT), fiber-optic (FO) and micro-electro mechanical system
(MEMS), this self-sensing composite SHM system/technique is applicable to
fielded (currently in service) composite structures as well as new composite
structures to be manufactured. The embedded sensor application presents sensor
installation difficulties (applicable only to new composite structures to be
manufactured), material (fatigue) property degradation due to foreign object
material embedment in laminae, sensor repair-ability and reliability problems.
Surface mounting sensor application also presents its own unique problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercial applications include structural health
monitoring/tracking technology for diagnosis and prognosis of the conditions of
the mission/function critical composite structures in order to prevent
catastrophic failures and to extend the lives of the critical composite
structures. The technology will save substantial time and effort in maintaining
the composite structures used in space station structures, spacecraft, aircraft
and rotorcraft, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV), rocket boosters, submarine
composite structural components, pressure vessels, and civil composite
infrastructures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;