* 0315290
* Acquisition/Development of Equipment for Processing and Characterization of Functionally Graded Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Ron Kline, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 114,515.00

This grant supports the acquisition and development of equipment for sintering
and in-sintering non-destructive characterization of functionally graded
materials (FGM) at San Diego State University. The new instrumentation will
augment modeling efforts in the area of the continuum theory of sintering. This
theory is becoming the basis for macroscopic analysis of technological processes
of sintering including both conventional powder thermo-processing and novel
areas such as microwave sintering. The continuum approach enables the prediction
of shape distortions and density distributions under sintering which are
critical in modeling net-shape processing of powder materials. Thereby one of
the most important problems of powder treatment - dimension control can be
successfully resolved. In processing of FGM, sintering rates differ with
position and uneven shrinkage may lead to defect formation and damage of a
powder specimen. Without advances in the predictive modeling and
experimentation, the cost of FGM may remain too high. The new instrumentation
will enable the utilization and comparative assessment of two main approaches
for the sintering of FGM: conventional sintering by external heating and
microwave sintering. While conventional sintering by external heating is usually
applied to already graded green specimens, in microwave sintering, porosity
gradients appear due to a non-uniform temperature distribution within powder
specimens. In sintering of FGM, shape distortions and damage are two most
significant known problems. We will also develop a unique dilatometric-
ultrasonic testing device. This device will incorporate both dilatometry and
nondestructive ultrasonic characterization of powder materials during the
sintering process. For this system, we will acquire a Confocal Fabry-Perot
Interferometer. This is an innovative experimental technique that will enable a
comprehensive integrated and comparative examination of both conventional and
microwave sintering kinetics (including shrinkage and surface area reduction)
and damage detection. Integration of modeling and experiments should provide the
basis for on-line process control for a wide range of sintering operations.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the project include the growing
industrial importance of the functionally graded materials, which are used in
joining of dissimilar materials, in micro-electronic devices, bioimplants, etc.
Furthermore, the acquired and developed equipment will contribute to the
research programs of multiple San Diego State University faculty members.
Currently active research programs in powder processing and non-destructive
materials evaluation will benefit. The new instrumentation will also contribute
to the research program in the area of fabrication and in-processing
characterization of magnetic materials. The development part of this project
assumes considerable involvement of undergraduate students who will be able to
explore new experimental capabilities in the framework of their senior design
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;