* 0315211
* LTREB: Hydrologic-Nutrient Cycle Interaction in Small Undisturbed and Human-Manipulated Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2010
* Gene Likens, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2010
* USD 481,000.00

The goal of this study is to continue to collect data to add to the unique,
long-term (39 years) record of the chemistry of atmospheric deposition
(including rain, snow, dry deposition) of the stream, lake and ground water in
the Hubbard Brook Valley, New Hampshire. These data will be used to evaluate the
biological and chemical response to, and recovery from, disturbances such as
acid rain, forest cutting, ice storms, and experimental manipulations of entire
watersheds. The long-term record of duration of ice-cover on Mirror Lake
provides an important monitor of global climate change. Questions that will be
addressed with these data over the next 5 years fall into two major categories:
1) how does the Hubbard Brook forest and ecosystem respond to disturbances
including acid deposition, climate change, and road salt pollution?, and 2) how
quickly to different aspects of this ecosystem respond to, and recover from,
these disturbances? Broader impacts of this study extend to education, outreach,
and the formulation of national environmental policy. The long-term records
generated provide a necessary perspective to decision makers wrestling with
solutions to major environmental issues. This long-term research program also
provides a unique education and training opportunity for undergraduate students.
Local middle-school classes use data from this study, and the interaction with
wider school groups will be facilitated by the 'Education Resources' site on the
Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study web page.