* 0315815
* Discovery and Characterization of Bacterial Endosymbiont Diversity in Drosophila
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2003,05/31/2009
* Therese Markow, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Scott D. Snyder
* 05/31/2009
* USD 510,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;DEB-0315815 (Abstract)&lt;br/&gt;"Discovery and Characterization of
Bacterial Endosymbiont Diversity in
Drosophila"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Dr Nancy
Moran and Dr. Therese Markow of the University&lt;br/&gt;of Arizona to use
molecular methods to document the diversity of bacterial symbionts that form
chronic infections in species of fruitflies (genus Drosophila and relatives). A
primary aim is to use DNA sequences as well as microscopy to characterize the
diversity and distributions of bacteria infecting an evolutionarily related set
of host species. Such information is so far not available for any animal group.
Results will illuminate how genetic divergence, geographic separation, or
ecological differences of hosts affect infection by particular bacterial types.
The data will be made widely available to researchers on a website and also
through public DNA sequence databases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing evidence
shows that bacterial infection is usual even in healthy individuals of all
animal species, from insects to humans, but the diversity of bacteria associated
with particular host species or groups of related species is unexplored. This
project will provide such information for fruitfly species, for which there
exists a wealth of information on genetics and evolutionary relationships,
including a completed genome sequence. Knowledge of the bacteria infecting
fruitflies will provide study systems for a large community of researchers
spanning the fields of genetics, infectious disease, and ecology. Once
characterized, these symbiotic bacteria will be useful for addressing such
questions as how chronic infections interact with host defenses at the molecular
level and how infectious agents move between host species, sometimes resulting
in the emergence of new diseases in humans and other species. Insects, including
crop pests and disease vectors, frequently harbor symbionts, which have been
shown to affect reproduction and vectoring capabilities of their hosts. Results
of this research will aid attempts to control insect pests by manipulating
symbiont associations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;