* 0315657
* Modification of the Egg Extracellular Matrix at Fertilization
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Gary Wessel, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2006
* USD 360,000.00

0315657&lt;br/&gt;Wessel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success at fertilization requires
both sperm-egg fusion and blockage of excess sperm fusions, or polyspermy.
Polyspermy is lethal in most animals, and oocytes have evolved mechanisms to
minimize its occurrence. The most conserved mechanism throughout phylogeny
involves a rapid remodeling of the egg extracellular matrix following
fertilization by secretion of cortical granules, which are stimulus-dependent
secretory vesicles unique to eggs and oocytes. Cortical granule contents modify
the nascent egg extracellular matrix to form both a permanent block to
polyspermy and to provide protection for early embryonic development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general question addressed in this application is: How
do eggs so rapidly and efficiently construct their new extracellular matrix? We
will use sea urchin eggs for this project because: 1) we can obtain, on average,
106 eggs per female, enabling large-scale biochemical approaches; 2) each of the
constituents of this process - the cortical granules, the fertilization
envelope, and the vitelline layer, can be isolated en masse in a functional
form; 3) cDNA clones have been isolated that represent each major functional
protein of this process; and 4) sea urchin eggs undergo one of the most extreme
modifications at fertilization. They invest 6% of their protein mass and nearly
20% of their mRNA to this transformation of the nascent extracellular, vitelline
layer into an impervious fertilization envelope within 60
seconds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader implications of this project are that
undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in diverse contemporary
methods of cell, molecular, and developmental biology, and that general
principles of fertilization and extracellular matrix biology will be integrated
in a classically described, tractable system for educational purposes. In
addition, project results and other educational material for K-16 will be
continually updated on the Educational Resources page of our lab web site
(http://www.brown.edu/Research/Wessel_Lab/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three Specific
Research Aims are proposed:&lt;br/&gt;1. Identify the vitelline layer proteins
essential for fertilization envelope construction. &lt;br/&gt;2. Determine the
domains in cortical granule proteins required for construction of the
extracellular matrix and block to polyspermy at fertilization. &lt;br/&gt;3.
Identify the peroxide-generating mechanism essential for envelope cross-
linking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;