* 0315203
* Dendrimers and Molecular Imprinting: A Means to Nano-Architectured Heterogeneous Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Michel Gagne, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 11/30/2007
* USD 396,397.00

The focus of this research is to explore the use of "smart polymers" as supports
for transition metal catalysis. This work addresses the synthesis of catalysts
that operate in an "active site" in the same way that enzymes provide outer-
sphere structure and functionality to help control the energetics of catalyzed
reactions. The emphasis of this research is the design and implementation of a
new strategy for maximizing active site homogeneity, while also providing new
tools for controlling the molecular architecture and composition of imprinted
polymers. Guiding this research is the hypothesis that copolymerizing dendritic
metallomonomers into highly crosslinked organic polymers will lead to active
sites wherein the dendritic arms provide a well-defined (and variable) interface
between the bulk polymer and the cavity of the active
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this Renewal award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research and educational
efforts of Dr. Michel R. Gagne. Professor Gagne will focus his work on the use
of new environments for catalytic metals in order to guide their reactivity. The
new methods being developed will permit the creation of new catalysts, which are
expected to have an impact on the way in which pharmaceutical companies
manufacture drugs, and on the methods used by the chemical industry to produce a
variety of important chemical compounds. &lt;br/&gt;