* 0315767
* Control of Cell Movements During Gastrulation in Xenopus
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Jeffrey Miller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 06/30/2007
* USD 360,000.00

0315767&lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The control of morphogenetic
movements during gastrulation is critical for the viability of the organism and,
therefore, determining the molecular pathways that regulate cell activities
during gastrulation is of fundamental importance. Recent work from Xenopus and
zebrafish provide evidence that polarized cell motility and shape changes during
gastrulation are regulated by the Wnt/PCP pathway. These studies have defined a
critical role for the signaling protein Dishevelled (Dsh) and suggest that Dsh
controls cell polarity through regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. Preliminary
studies from Dr. Miller's laboratory provide support for the hypothesis that the
signaling protein Eps8 interacts with Dsh providing a potential link between
extracellular signals and the actin cytoskeleton during gastrulation. The
objective of the current research project is to determine the mechanisms by
which Eps8 controls morphogenetic movements during gastrulation, using embryos
of the clawed frog, Xenopus laevis, as a model system. This proposal will seek
to answer the following questions: (1) What is the requirement for Eps8 during
development? The function of Eps8 in Xenopus development will be investigated
using gene-knockdown strategies and expression of dominant-negative forms of
Eps8. The resulting phenotypes will be examined using morphological,
histological, and gene expression analyses. (2) What morphogenetic events does
Eps8 regulate during gastrulation? Gain- and loss-of-function approaches will be
combined with a detailed analysis of (i) cell polarity, shape, and protrusive
activity, (ii) actin organization, and (iii) cell-cell adhesion to investigate
the mechanism by which Eps8 regulates morphogenesis. They will also characterize
the subcellular distribution of Eps8 during gastrulation. (3) What signals
regulate Eps8 function during gastrulation? They will utilize biochemical and
cell biological assays to examine whether Eps8 function and/or its interaction
with Dsh is regulated by PDGF or Wnt signals. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impact of the
proposed research: By exploiting their expertise in using classical
embryological approaches and modern imaging tools for the analysis of cell
movements and protein localization in vivo, the Miller laboratory will gain
important insights into the mechanisms that control morphogenetic movements
during gastrulation in vertebrates. Since convergent extension movements are a
fundamental process employed throughout the animal kingdom, their studies in
Xenopus will lead to a greater understanding of the how cell movements are
coordinated to control tissue patterning in other systems. In addition, a
graduate student, and an undergraduate student will work extensively on this
project. They will receive extensive training in microscopy, biochemistry,
experimental embryology, and cell biology as part of this project.&lt;br/&gt;