* 0315793
* Location and Neuroendocrine Function of Putative Encephalic Photoreceptors
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Wayne Kuenzel, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Martha Flanders
* 08/31/2007
* USD 219,501.00

Lay Abstract&lt;br/&gt; Many vertebrates, including various species of birds
anticipate seasonal changes each year and an environmental cue utilized to
predict the occurrence of seasons is day length or photoperiod. For many years
scientists have hypothesized that avian species have photoreceptors and neural
systems designed to register day length and this information to determine the
opportune time to migrate or to reproduce and raise young successfully. A
question that remains unanswered is, where are the photoreceptors utilized for
seasonal information located and how do they work? Photoreceptors have been
localized in the eyes, pineal gland, and brain. Scientists refer to
photoreceptors in the brain as encephalic photoreceptors (EPRs). One of the most
robust, seasonal events displayed by several avian species is rapid development
of the reproductive system when day length has increased. Therefore it is
important to evaluate each set of receptors that could play a role in this
phenomenon. A combination of techniques that rapidly stimulate development of
the gonads coupled with microsurgical techniques directed to anatomical sites
where photoreceptors are known to occur, will be utilized to determine which
group of receptors play a role in seasonal growth of the reproductive system,
such as development of the gonads. In the present studies a cell culture
procedure will be utilized to keep photoreceptors viable for hours, to determine
whether cells respond to direct flashes of light with a significant reduction in
calcium concentration. These experiments should (1) establish whether or not
EPRs are solely responsible for development of the reproductive system in
chicks, and (2) positive research experience to both undergraduate and graduate
students.. These results provide important information for geneticists
responsible for monitoring domestic or wild breeder flocks. Avian geneticists
could selectively choose breeder flocks that exhibit increased numbers or
responses of EPRs to light to maximize the response of maturing chicks to
photoperiodic manipulation thereby increasing reproductive
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;