* 0315412
* In situ Studies of Model Automotive Exhaust Catalysts with High Spatial and Spectroscopic Resolution
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Ernst Bauer, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2008
* USD 331,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CHE-0315412&lt;br/&gt;Bauer/Arizona
State&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The improvement of the operation of three way
catalytic converters for automobile exhaust remediation is the goal of the work
carried out by Professor Bauer and his colleagues at Arizona State University.
With the support of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, he is applying
low energy electron microscopy and x-ray photoemission microscopy to the study
of model three way catalysts. In the presence of CO, O2, NO and SO2 reactants,
oxide supported noble metal catalysts undergo morphological and compositional
changes on the nanometer scale that can be monitored using these methods.
Results of these surface kinetic and dynamic studies provide understanding for
the improved design of these catalytic systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order
to continually reduce the emissions from automobile exhaust, improvements in
catalytic converter technology must be made. This research project, supported by
the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, addresses the detailed dynamics of
operation of the commonly used three way catalytic converter. Using state of the
art microscopic methods, in situ studies of the reaction process, and direct
monitoring of the operational catalyst, Professor Bauer and his coworkers are
developing the fundamental understanding needed to improve catalyst design.
&lt;br/&gt;