* 0315685
* Acquisition of a Comprehensive High Temperature and High Purity Glove Box Materials Processing Facility for Education and Research
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Xiaoli Tan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 200,000.00

This grant provides support for the acquisition of a comprehensive high
temperature and high purity glove box materials processing facility for
education and research at Iowa State University. One of the most significant
changes in the development of new materials is the sophistication in the
processing of the materials. Modern materials are now being designed at the
atomic level and precise control of the composition, structure, and impurities
are allowing new materials to be fabricated with exceptional properties and
performance. Several current projects critically depend upon the clean, dry, and
oxygen-free environment afforded by a high quality glove box system. This new
state-of-the-art glove box preparation system will dramatically improve the
quality, purity, and structure of the materials. This project has significant
intellectual merit in that the new glove box system will be used by ~ 8
different research groups across the Midwest on a wide variety of projects. This
multi-purpose glove box will enable new fast ion conducting glasses to be
prepared that have exceptional conductivities, new photonic band gap materials
will be processed with never before possible structures, new transparent
conducting oxides will be prepared with exceptionally purity, new ferroelectric
materials will be processed at exceptional purity so that the details of the
micro-failure can be examined, new ultraphosphate glasses will be prepared that
will enable new insights into the frequency dependence of the ionic
conductivity, and finally a new class of polymeric materials will be processed
with unprecedented levels of functionality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has significant broader impact due to the high level of undergraduate and
graduate student use of the glove box processing system. Nearly all students in
Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) at ISU will use the glove box system and
it will form a core research facility. Undergraduate research groups at nearby
undergraduate institutions, Coe College and Creighton University, and as a
Midwest Regional Facility by research groups at the University of Indiana and
the University of Missouri-Rolla, will benefit, among others&lt;br/&gt;