* 0315425
* Mechanical Engineering Curriculum Enhancement to Introduce Product Development with Bio-Inspired Concepts
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Satyandra Gupta, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/2007
* USD 411,043.00

Curriculum Enhancement to Introduce&lt;br/&gt;Product Development with Bio-
Inspired Concepts&lt;br/&gt;Hugh Bruck, Satyandra Gupta, Edward Magrab, and
Elisabeth Smela&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical Engineering
Department&lt;br/&gt;University of Maryland, College Park,
Maryland&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bio-inspired products and devices take their
inspiration from nature. Current mechanical engineering curricula do not cover
design concepts or manufacturing techniques needed to develop such products and
devices. We propose to enhance the mechanical engineering undergraduate
curriculum by integrating recent advances in the design, analysis, and
manufacturing of bio-inspired products and devices through the following
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1. Insert a new sequence of instructional materials on
bio-inspired concepts into the mechanical&lt;br/&gt;engineering
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;2. Develop a new senior elective entitled Product
Development Using Bio-inspired Concepts.&lt;br/&gt;3. Revise two senior
electives in micro-electromechanical systems area to include more
complete&lt;br/&gt;treatments of special manufacturing processes that can be
used to realize bio-inspired products.&lt;br/&gt;4. Assess the projects of the
undergraduate mechanical engineering students in their capstone
design&lt;br/&gt;course to evaluate their retention and utilization of the new
material.&lt;br/&gt;5. Conduct one workshop to transfer the new materials and
establish a feedback mechanism for&lt;br/&gt;enhancing the
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;6. Disseminate the materials developed for the new modules
and the course notes for the new senior&lt;br/&gt;elective through a dedicated
web site.&lt;br/&gt;7. Present a summary of our experiences at two
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The result of the proposed curriculum
enhancement will be a new generation of mechanical engineers who can develop
products and conduct research for a wide variety of applications utilizing bio-
inspired concepts. The proposed project will (1) integrate emerging
manufacturing technologies and new design analyses based on biological
principles into the Mechanical Engineering curriculum, (2) utilize multi-media
technology for disseminating course content, and (3) train graduate students and
faculty participating in its implementation in an emerging technology and
thereby contribute to faculty development.&lt;br/&gt;