* 0315491
* Acquisition of an FTIR-Raman Spectrometer System to Probe Intermediate Phases in Disordered Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Punit Boolchand, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 120,000.00

This grant provides support for the acquisition of a Fourier Transform Infrared
Raman (FTIR) spectrometer system to probe intermediate phases in disordered
systems at the University of Cincinnati. Network glasses have served as a
paradigm of disordered systems. Raman scattering and modulated-differential-
scanning-calorimetry experiments have shown that the onset of stressed rigidity
in glasses involves two elastic phase transitions as a function of increasing
cross-linking: transition-1 from an easily deformable network (floppy phase) to
an isostatically rigid network (intermediate phase), and transition-2 from an
intermediate phase to a stressed rigid phase. The term isostatic connotes
absence of redundant bonds that would create stress. Intermediate phases
represent self-organized phases of disordered systems in which stress (energy)
is globally minimized. These ideas on self-organization of disordered molecular
networks may extend to biological ones (protein folding) and electronic ones
(high-T superconductors). The FTIR spectrometer acquisition will make possible,
for the first time, the probing of IR-active modes. Furthermore, the FT-Raman
module will permit probing glasses with optical gaps to include some of the
technologically more important materials systems. From an educational point of
view, the instrument acquisition will permit materials research of superhard
thin-films, zeolites, nanoscale polarized light-emitting diodes, clays,
ferroelectrics and silicon based structures in addition to glasses.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will impact directly the graduate thesis
of more than 30 graduate students working on these materials across several
departments in the Colleges of Engineering, and Arts and Sciences at the
University of Cincinnati. In addition, the instrument will provide hands on
experience to students in graduate courses. Undergraduate students at UC and at
Northern Kentucky University will benefit from use of the facility in seniors
and undergraduate research projects. Furthermore, the faculty will work with
select groups of minority undergraduates, as part of a program established to
interest these students into available research opportunities. Minority high
school students will be recruited to participate in laboratory work during
summer recess. The faculty will also give presentations to 4th through 7th
graders and their parents, as part of the Family Science Academy outreach effort
to interest children in the role of Science and Engineering in our
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;