* 0315746
* Sequence Specific Targeting of Nucleic Acids Using Intramolecular Triplexes: Energetics and Hydration
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,11/30/2006
* Luis Marky, University of Nebraska Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 11/30/2006
* USD 443,868.00

This project focuses on the thermodynamics of nucleic acid triple helices, which
have been implicated in the control of cellular processes by endogenous or
exogenous mechanisms. The long-term goal is to understand the role of nucleotide
sequence, strand composition, cations, pH, and hydration on the stability of
intramolecular and intermolecular triplexes. A combination of spectroscopic,
calorimetric, density and acoustical techniques is used to obtain complete
thermodynamic profiles of triplex formation as a function of duplex
conformation, pH, salt concentration, and incorporation of mismatches and
bulges. Specifically, phase diagrams of the stability of triplexes will be
measured as a function of salt concentration and pH; then, pressure-perturbation
calorimetric and osmotic-stress techniques will be used to probe their unfolding
and hydration changes. The results will be compared with their acoustical and
volume measurements, allowing obtaining their hydration properties and the
hydration effects in the targeting of nucleic acid single strands or duplexes
via duplex and triplex formation, respectively. A comprehensive database will be
produced for designing useful triplex reagents for targeting specific nucleic
acid sequences and for energy predictions of sequence-specific local
conformational rearrangements.

The role of hydration in macromolecular recognition is an important understudied
research area in molecular biosciences. Water plays a crucial role in the
overall properties of biological macromolecules. A quantitative description of
macromolecular hydration is important for correlating sequence with structure,
energetics, dynamics and function. The results will improve our current
understanding of how hydration controls the stability, conformation and melting
behavior of nucleic acid triplexes, providing an insight into global water in
solution, useful in molecular modeling and theoretical calculations.

Broader impact: The educational significance of the project is in the mentoring
of students; the project will involve training in sophisticated methodology and
analysis in biophysical chemistry of nucleic acids and of their interactions
with ligands. Furthermore, the research findings will be incorporated into
lectures of undergraduate and graduate courses. The database generated in this
project will be useful to other investigators for interpreting and analyzing
results from many types of structural and biophysical experiments.