* 0315565
* Development and Acquisition of Surface Sensitive Electrochemical Instrumentation using Evanescent Wave and Nonlinear-Optical Techniques for Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Rigoberto Advincula, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 432,000.00

This grant supports the development and acquisition of surface sensitive
electrochemical instrumentation using evanescent wave and nonlinear-optical
techniques for research and education at the University of Houston. The
development of new surface sensitive spectroscopic and microscopic
electrochemical instrumentation will be accomplished by simultaneously: 1)
combining scanning probe microscopy (SPM) and surface plasmon spectroscopy (SPS)
with electrochemical methods, and 2) combining sum-frequency generation (SFG)
and scanning near-field optical microscopy (SNOM) with electrochemical methods.
These two unique systems will give in-situ linear and nonlinear optical and
spectroscopic information in electrochemical phenomena simultaneous with
morphological and nanoscale imaging from atomic force microscopy (AFM) and SNOM.
These instruments will impact the study of electrode/electrolyte interfaces and
the synthesis and investigation of materials by electrochemical methods. A focus
is on applying the two instruments and methods on established electrochemical
investigative methods, e.g. cyclic voltammetry, potentiostatic, amperometric
experiments, etc. By simultaneously coupling optical evanescent spectroscopies
and scanning probe microscopies, unique characterization of temporal and spatial
properties at each stage of an electrochemical cycle can be accomplished. This
will also advance the state of the art in nanometer-scale measurement and
analysis especially with increasing SPM resolution methods. By conducting SFG on
surfaces simultaneous with the electrochemistry experiment, orientational and
tensor parameters of molecules directly at the solid-liquid interface can be
determined. All these studies are likewise applicable to nanoscale materials at
the interface, e.g. nanoparticles, nanolithographic patterns, and nanoscale
hybrid materials systems. These two complementary capabilities will create a
unique optical, electrochemical, and SPM system with wide applications in
interface electrochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Houston has a
strong materials research program and faculty that will greatly benefit from
these instruments. These instruments will be transitioned to the broader
scientific community after development and optimization. This will be done
through various collaborations with university, government, and industrial
research centers of excellence. Two graduate students experienced in
instrumentation development and an undergraduate will participate in configuring
and developing the new instruments at various stages. They will greatly benefit
from the unique research and education opportunities these instruments will
provide. They will also serve as expert trainers in disseminating the use of the
instrumentation to other students and collaborators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;