* 0315150
* Collaborative Research: Direct Sampling of the Oceanic Sub-surface Biosphere at Old and Young Seamounts
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2003,01/31/2004
* Matthew McCarthy, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/2004
* USD 40,262.00

COLLABORATIVE LEXEN RESEARCH: DIRECT SAMPLING OF THE OCEANIC SUB-SURFACE
BIOSPHERE AT OLD AND YOUNG SEAMOUNTS Oceanic crust is a plausible but unproven
habitat for a microbial biosphere of planetary proportions. The upper 500 meters
of igneous basement is warm, porous and permeable, forming a global-scale
aquifer hosting the circulation of nutrient-rich hydrothermal fluids. Heat from
the lower intrusive crustal rocks drives fluid convection cells within this
aquifer, even in crust many tens of millions of years old. This thermal
convection is strongly modulated by tidal forces, increasing fluid velocities
and stirring the sub-surface incubator more vigorously than previously believed.
Two unique methods will be used for sampling uncompromised crustal fluids from
two contrasting hydrothermal areas on the Juan de Fuca Ridge. Axial Seamount is
currently forming directly on the ridge axis, with recent eruptions on the
summit and flanks, and has considerable geological and surface biological
variability with periods of less than a year. At Axial caldera a sampling
facility with a re-entry cone was cemented directly to the seafloor in 1998,
providing uncontaminated access to a 50 degrees C diffuse vent. In contrast,
Baby Bare (BB) Seamount sits on 3.5 My crust east of the ridge axis, with a
small exposed summit of altered rock completely surrounded by low permeability
sediments. This project will sample Baby Bare fluids (40 degrees C) below the
water/rock interface, using a newly developed break-away coring instrument to
insert a 3-meter long titanium tube into the sub-surface, below the biologically
active surface zone. The samples obtained from both Axial and Baby Bare will be
studied for the entire spectrum of bacteria and archea populations, the fluids
will be analyzed for their inorganic and organic chemistry, and the data placed
in their full environmental context using temperature and fluid flow
measurements. This project attempts to integrate for the first time inorganic
and organic chemistry with geophysical parameters including porosity and fluid
flow rates, so as to better understand the microbial ecology of these sub-
surface biotopes. By examining the chemical and microbial ecology and energetics
of the sub-surface, and particularly the sub-surface associated with
hydrothermal systems, a framework for studying the prospects of extraterrestrial
life may be developed.