* 0315504
* REVSYS: Revisionary Systematics of Hawaiian Mecyclothorax Beetles (Coleoptera: Carabidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* James Liebherr, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 194,377.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. James Liebherr at Cornell University to
taxonomically revise Hawaiian carabid beetle species in the genus Mecyclothorax.
This group demonstrates extremely rapid speciation; current estimates suggest
that the nearly 200 species have evolved from a single ancestor that colonized
either Maui or Molokai less than 2 million years ago, a speciation rate 16-40
times more rapid that related mainland species. More than half of these species
are undescribed, many having been newly collected by the PI and colleagues
during field work over the past 12 years. Two field expeditions to five
previously unstudied wet-forest areas will improve geographic coverage for
species sampling of the group. Morphological characters will be studied in order
to produce a phylogenetic hypothesis of the species. The analysis will include
numerous Mecyclothorax species from across the southwest Pacific Ocean, allowing
the source for the Hawaiian radiation to be discovered. This hypothesis will
serve as the framework within which evolutionary forces driving rapid speciation
will be studied. These characters will also form the basis for identification
keys-both web-based and print-published-that will enable scientists and resource
managers to identify individual specimens.

Because Mecyclothorax species exhibit habitat specificity-e.g., restriction to
particular plant species, microhabitats, or life zones-accurate identification
will enhance the ability to monitor such ecological situations in the face of
ever-increasing alien species introductions. The PI will compare phylogenetic
patterns in Mecyclothorax with those in an independent Hawaiian carabid beetle
radiation-the 131-species of Blackburnia-to test the validity of the cladistic
biogeographic paradigm. Known ages of the Hawaiian Islands provide powerful
chronological constraints in this test, making the Hawaiian system an ideal
venue for carrying out this investigation. The phylogenetic hypothesis will also
permit elucidation of how ecological preferences have changed during evolution
of this radiation.