* 0315037
* The Inefficient Use of Power: Costly Conflict with Complete Information
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Robert Powell, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2006
* USD 135,603.00

Much work on the causes and conduct of war see it as a kind of bargaining
process. As such, a central puzzle is explaining why bargaining ever breaks down
in costly fighting. That is, fighting typically destroys resources, and,
consequently, the "pie" to be divided after the fighting has begun is smaller
than it was before the fighting started. This means that there generally are
divisions of the larger pie that would have given each bargainer more than it
will have after any fighting. Fighting, in other words, leads to Pareto
inefficient outcomes. Why, then, do the bargainers fail to reach a Pareto
superior agreement prior to any fighting and thereby avoid war? International
relations theory offers two broad types of rationalist explanation:
informational problems and commitment problems. The former arise when (1) the
bargainers have private information about, for example, their payoffs to
prevailing or about their military capabilities, and (2) the bargainers have
incentives to misrepresent their private information. Commitment problems arise
if the bargainers are unable to commit themselves to following through on an
agreement and have incentives to renege on it. Recent formal work on the causes
of war has focused almost exclusively on informational problems. But
informational explanations and the models underlying them have at least two
major limitations. They often provide a poor account of prolonged and protracted
conflict, and they also offer a bizarre reading of the history of some cases.
This project investigates two types of commitment problem. The first appears to
happen if there are large and rapid shifts in the distribution of power.
Preliminary work indicates that this mechanism underlies and unifies several
recent and substantively diverse studies in American, comparative, and
international politics. The second type of commitment problem results from the
fact that states must expend resources to maintain the status quo (i.e., deter
an attack). If this cost is too high, states may prefer to fight. These kinds of
mechanism seem to provide a better account of the origins and continuation of
some conflicts than informational accounts do. Broader Merit In addition to
contributing to the development of international relations theory, this project
makes three broader contributions. First, the application includes a request for
a graduate student research assistant. When the researcher takes on a research
assistant for an NSF grant, he views this as taking on the role of faculty
mentor and of trying to help that person develop his or her scholarship to the
fullest extent possible both during and after the grant. This promotes teaching,
training, and learning. Second, the investigator will communicate findings
broadly to a wider audience than the small group of scholars using game theory
to study conflict. The investigator did this in his previous NSF project by
publishing more accessible treatments in the journal International Security.
This journal speaks to a wider policy audience than most political science
journals do. Finally, war is a hugely important social issue, and helping to
develop a better understanding of its causes contributes to society.

