* 0315596
* Genetic Analysis of Indole-3-Butyric Acid Functions in Plants
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Bonnie Bartel, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Michael L. Mishkind
* 07/31/2007
* USD 462,000.00



This proposal outlines experiments to elucidate the function of indole-3-butyric
acid (IBA) in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Although IBA is a naturally
occurring form of the plant growth hormone auxin and is used commercially to
promote rooting in many species, the molecular mechanisms by which it acts are
only beginning to be understood. A set of IBA-response mutants has been
isolated, including mutants with b?oxidation and peroxisome biogenesis defects.
Analysis of these mutants suggests that IBA is converted into indole-3-acetic
acid (IAA) using reactions analogous to those of fatty acid catabolism
(b?oxidation), a largely peroxisomal process in plants. Other IBA-response
mutants have apparently normal peroxisome function and may have defects in IBA
perception or transport. The proposed experiments will use these IBA-response
mutants for the chemical, molecular, and physiological elucidation of the roles
of IBA in plant development. The mutants with normal b?oxidation phenotypes will
be used to uncover aspects of IBA function independent of its conversion to IAA,
such as transport, metabolism, and regulation of gene expression. The proposal
has five specific objectives. 1) The IBA-response mutants will be characterized
to determine the roles of the IAA generated from IBA during seedling growth and
lateral root development. 2) IBA levels and IBA metabolism will be compared
between wild type and the IBA-response mutants. 3) Global gene expression
analysis using mutants blocked in IBA to IAA conversion will be used to find
genes directly regulated by IBA. 4) Mutant screens will be continued to saturate
the IBA-response pathway, including screens for new mutants, enhancers of
existing mutants, and reverse genetic screens for null alleles of IBR genes and
IBA-regulated genes. 5) The genes defective in the mutants will be identified
and the encoded proteins characterized biochemically. To understand auxin
action, the functional significance of the endogenous auxins must be determined.
Identifying genes involved in converting IBA to IAA is a prerequisite to
understanding the regulation and importance of this conversion. This knowledge
is essential to determine the contributions of IBA relative to other inputs to
the active auxin pool, including de novo synthesis and conjugate hydrolysis. In
addition, elucidating the molecular mechanisms of IBA action in a genetically
tractable plant may provide insights for agricultural IBA uses. For example,
identifying and characterizing the specific isozymes that convert IBA to IAA may
facilitate their modification in difficult-to-root cultivars where IBA
application is normally ineffective. In addition to increasing knowledge of
auxin metabolism and peroxisomal function in plant development, this research
will provide students with broad interdisciplinary training bridging genomics,
molecular genetics, and biochemistry that will be essential to the next
generation of scientists.

