* 0315324
* Society for Developmental Biology 62nd Annual Meeting; Summer 2003; Boston, MA
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Ruth Lehmann, Society For Developmental Biol
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/2004
* USD 20,000.00

0315324 Lehmann

Funds are requested for partial support of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the
Society for Developmental Biology, to be held July 30 - August 3, 2003 at Boston
Marriott Copley Place. This is the major meeting in the subject of Developmental
Biology. In 2003, the international participation will be enhanced by the
presence of the International Society of Developmental Biologists. 1. What is
the intellectual merit of the proposed activity? Participants will be presenting
their most significant and current data, many still to be published,
contributing to advancement of knowledge in the area. As it has become a
successful tradition, the scientific sessions encompass work on diverse
organisms including plants, invertebrates and vertebrates. Two Nobel laureates,
Dr. Sydney Brenner and Dr. Eric Kandel, are among the 63 speakers who have
already accepted the invitation to tell us about some of their latest findings
in the following areas: Regulation of cell proliferation and size control,
Migration and guidance, Stem cells in development and medicine, From neuron to
brain, Life and death as means of patterning, Molecular mechanisms of cell-cell
signaling, Integrating signals, Organogenesis, Sex and the genome, Long range
signaling and morphogen gradients, Asymmetry: From cell to organisms,
Regeneration, Gene regulation- RNA, Development and evolution, and From synapse
to behavior. Additional 30 speakers will be chosen from submitted abstracts for
short talks, allowing the inclusion of the latest results and providing an
opportunity for postdoctoral fellows and graduate students to address a large
audience. 2. What are the broader impacts of the proposed activity? The
Education Symposium and the Panel Discussion will offer an opportunity for
scientists to learn how to be more effective communicators to all, K-16 and
public levels, as well as to evaluate potential societal effects resulting from
scientific advances. The Education Symposium will center on how to teach
developmental biology in different environments, at large universities, teaching
colleges, pre-college and to the public at large. A panel discussion on the very
current topic of Stem cells and Cloning will provide a unique opportunity for
exchange of ideas among the scientists and ethicists, audience and panelists. We
expect an attendance of over 900 people, and most of them will present their new
data in the poster sessions each day. This format provides a forum to bring
together junior and senior investigators, and to allow them to exchange ideas on
science, education and the role of science in today's society. Travel awards
will be available to bring underrepresented minorities, students and
postdoctoral fellows, as well as Latin American faculty and students to attend
the meeting.