* 0315638
* An Experimental Pedagogy in Sustainable Building Technologies: Integrating Teaching, Research and Public Scholarship
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Jelena Srebric, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2006
* USD 381,485.00

This project will to support and enhance an experimental course series at Penn
State that joins innovations in research and pedagogy with social priority and
public scholarship. Combining hands-on experimentation of emerging green
building technologies with integrative working processes in the utilization of
those technologies, course work addresses the chronic housing crisis on American
Indian reservations. This course series was developed out of Penn States
participation in the American Indian Housing Initiative (AIHI), a national
collaboration between faculty at Penn State, the University of Washington, and
Chief Dull Knife College on the Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation, Lame Deer,
Montana. The goal of AIHI is to improve living conditions on American Indian
reservations through the development and creative deployment of high-efficiency
green building technologies and community-built housing strategies. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;As a mechanism to draw together students and faculty of many
disciplines in support of AIHI goals, this course series allows students to
collaborate with faculty and tribal members in the design and construction of
much-needed homes and community facilities on the reservation. Recognized by
both tribal and university communities for its potential to succeed as a
collaborative educational model, this course series is now being proposed as a
permanent addition to Architectural Engineering, Architecture, and Landscape
Architecture curricula at Penn State. NSF support is requested to help
facilitate pedagogical improvements to this course series that will improve the
technical rigor of the students' experience, integrate valuable research
elements into the courses, and, as a result, better position the program for
permanent institutional stature at Penn State. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project has innovative educational objectives: 1)
Introduce students to issues of green technologies through small-scale
experimentation, seeking ultimately to explore the integration and relationship
of these technologies in concert; 2) Through applied research and hands-on field
experiences, enable students. abilities to manage technological uncertainty of
developing green technologies and related issues of integrated and collaborative
design; and 3) Further students' collaborative research and design skills
through active participation in interdisciplinary teams. &lt;br/&gt;