* 0315226
* Photochemical Generation, Kinetics and Chemistry of Transition Metal Nitrosyl Linkage Isomers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Thomas Bitterwolf, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2006
* USD 410,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Dr. Thomas Bitterwolf, Chemistry Department, University of
Idaho, to study metal bound nitrosyl ligands and their linkage isomers using
both frozen matrix methods and time-resolved infrared (IR) techniques. For many
years the NO ligand has been known to bind metals through either the nitrogen or
oxygen. Recently its ability bind a metal in a side-on fashion has been
demonstrated. In addition, time resolved crystallographic and infrared studies
have shown that nitrosyl ligands in organometallic and coordination compounds
can undergo photochemical linkage isomerizations. This study will build an
understanding of the factors that lead to the formation and stabilization of
nitrosyl linkage isomers by examining several classes of compounds representing
a range of ligand types and electron counts. These include: [CpMn(CO)2NO]
cation; [Fe(CO)3NO] anion; salts of Roussin's red, [Fe2(NO)4(S)2] dianion, and
black, [Fe3(NO)7(S )] anion; Co(II)(salen)(NO) and Co(II)(acacen)(NO);
Fe(S2CNR2)2(NO); and CpM(NO)2X, where M = Cr, Mo or W and X is a variety of
anionic species. Frozen organic matrix methods will be used to identify those
classes of compounds for which side bonded linkage isomers are formed upon
photolysis and time-resolved IR spectroscopy will be used to study the kinetics
of relaxation of the linkage isomers back to the terminal nitrosyl form. From
these data, the thermodynamic activation parameters will be derived. The final
portion of the project will utilize time-resolved IR and other flash kinetics
methods to examine several reactions in which side bonded linkage isomers may be
involved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen oxide plays a mediating role in
intercellular communication, smooth muscle relaxation, and cytotoxic immune
response. There is a great interest in identifying compounds that will liberate
nitrogen oxide in biological systems. Optimization of these materials requires a
more detailed understanding of the mechanism of nitrogen oxide liberation. This
study will determine the details of the release of NO groups that are attached
to metals. The studies will be carried out in partnership with the Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory. This will give an excellent experience for the
postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate students who work on the project. High
school teachers and Native American high school students will be exposed to the
project through the PI's participation in the Murdock Foundation Partners in
Science Program. &lt;br/&gt;