* 0315521
* EF 03: Evolutionary Ecology of Male-Killing Wolbachia in Drosophila Innubila
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* John Jaenike, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 07/31/2007
* USD 452,734.00

Evolutionary ecology of male-killing Wolbachia in Drosophila
innubila&lt;br/&gt;Jaenike, John R.&lt;br/&gt;University of
Rochester&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wolbachia are intracellular, maternally
transmitted, bacterial parasites present in the majority of insect species;
their spread is accomplished by various means of manipulating host reproduction.
Despite the potential ecological and evolutionary importance of Wolbachia, there
has been very little research on Wolbachia dynamics and their effects on host
insect populations in the field. This project focuses on the ecology of
interactions between Drosophila innubila and the male-killing Wolbachia with
which it is infected. Drosophila innubila inhabit mid- to high elevation forests
in the sky islands of Arizona and New Mexico. Wolbachia cause almost 100%
mortality of infected male embryos and infect a substantial fraction of females
in these natural populations. This project will determine how the ecology of D.
innubila allows the spread of male-killing Wolbachia. A series of field
experiments will be carried out to assess whether infected flies suffer less
competition than do uninfected flies. The project will also explore three
mechanisms proposed to prevent fixation of male-killing Wolbachia within host
populations: stochastic loss via incomplete maternal transmission, curing of the
infection by antibiotic-containing mushrooms, and environmental temperature.
Because D. innubila is distributed as isolated sky island populations, this
species is ideal for investigating the effect of environmental gradients on
Wolbachia dynamics. Finally, the project will quantify the effects of Wolbachia
infections on the population-level sex ratio, mating frequencies, and sexual
selection in D. innubila. It will specifically test predictions that the
presence of male-killing Wolbachia at substantial infection frequencies results
in a female-biased sex ratio in the population, lower rates of female mating,
and selection on males to be discriminating in their choice of mates. The
ecological focus of this proposal will contribute to understanding the dynamics
of male-killing Wolbachia in natural populations and thus shed light on the
feasibility of using these endosymbionts for deliberate manipulation of insect
populations. &lt;br/&gt;