* 0315160
* REVSYS: Taxonomy and Phylogeny of the Trapdoor Spider Subfamily Euctenizinae (Araneae: Cyrtaucheniidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Jason Bond, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 200,029.00

ABSTRACT

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Jason E. Bond of East Carolina University to
taxonomically revise and study the evolutionary relationships of the trapdoor
spider subfamily Euctenizinae (Cyrtaucheniidae). Alpha-taxonomy is a field of
biology that provides the underlying foundation, and thus lies at the very core,
of almost every biological question; revisionary-systematic studies are one of
the more powerful tools we can apply to the study and conservation of our
planet's biodiversity. Although North America has a rich tarantula and trapdoor
spider fauna it is shocking that 50% of these species remain undescribed and
that much of this diversity, attributable to members of the Euctenizinae, is
distributed throughout the California Floristic Province, an evolutionary center
that is a biodiversity "hotspot". This project proposes to formally document
euctenizine diversity by completing exhaustive taxonomic revisions of all of its
genera and species (70 - 80) and by then reconstructing its species evolutionary
relationships using morphological, behavioral, and molecular data. Because this
project "utilizes modern information technology at all stages" (e.g., GIS,
digital imaging, sequence data generation and alignment, and phylogeny
reconstruction) it is ideal for training students in the methods and concepts
surrounding modern revisionary work. Students as full partners in research will
be trained to gather and analyze taxonomic and phylogenetic data, and will be
encouraged to present their results at meetings and as scientific journal
publications. Fieldwork conducted during the course of this project will result
in the acquisition of many rare specimens that will be deposited in major museum
collections for future study. Data generated from these specimens will be made
available on the World Wide Web as part of a project website. Additionally, this
project will make available interactive, fully illustrated taxonomic keys to all
of the known Euctenizinae species that can be then used by non-spider
specialists.