* 0315775
* Acquisition of a Surface Spectroscopy System for Nanomaterials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Robert Carpick, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2006
* USD 170,000.00

This grant supports the acquisition of an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) surface
spectroscopy system (SSS) for research and education in nano-scale materials at
the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The SSS will be coupled to an existing UHV
atomic force microscope (AFM) system to create a unique and powerful instrument
for major new research in several areas and for extensive training and education
of students. Research collaborations include government laboratories and
industry. The key complementary components of the SSS are: (1) high sensitivity
infrared spectroscopy to identify the chemistry and structure of surfaces,
films, and adsorbates; (2) Auger electron spectroscopy for surface chemical
characterization; (3) low energy electron diffraction for surface structure
determination; and (4) a variable temperature sample specimen stage to prepare
samples with controlled surface chemistry, and to perform experiments over a
range of temperatures. This equipment will support several research efforts
including: (1) the relationship between surface structure and tribological
performance of micromachine surfaces; (2) interfacial structure and sliding of
nano-scale components in ceramic nanocomposites; (3) the coupling of structural,
vibrational, and frictional properties of materials by using isotopic
engineering; (4) conducting polymer surfaces and interfaces; (5) surface
structures of molecular templates for nanomanipulation experiments; (6)
adsorbate effects on friction for hard ceramic coatings; (7) studies of
nanocrystalline diamond films for micromachine and biosensor applications; (8)
studies of negative stiffness inclusions for nano-scale composites with extreme
mechanical properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrumentation will have
broad impact by creating new opportunities to integrate research, education, and
training at UW-Madison. Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in
the use of cutting-edge vacuum/surface science technology. To highlight the
importance of scientific instrumentation to the public, hands-on and web-based
modules that demonstrate the function and use of the new instrumentation will be
developed and widely distributed through collaboration with an established
education program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;