* 0315579
* Acquisition of TEM Double Tilt Cooling Stage including Ultramicrotome for Specimen Preparation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Heike Gabrisch, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 95,000.00

This grant supports the tandem of a cryo ultramicrotome and a double tilt
cooling holder used in a study of phase transformations in LiCoO2, an electrode
material in Li-ion batteries. The strain acting in LiCoO2 particles between the
surface and the particle center is studied by CBED. This technique allows one to
obtain information on crystal symmetry and dimensions of the unit cell from
small regions. The results of systematic studies of lattice strains and lattice
symmetry aid in understanding the driving forces and mechanisms of observed
lattice transformation. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) specimens are
prepared in cross section by ultramicrotome. The research takes the approach of
investigating battery materials by TEM to the next level, crystallographic
details within single powder grains. While the application of TEM techniques to
battery materials is fairly recent, it has proven successful in the discovery of
the transformation from hexagonal to spinel phase that was not accessible by
conventional diffraction techniques (x-ray and neutron diffraction). The
instruments are of use in the development of new magnetic biological tracers for
virus detection. The goal of this research is to bind gold-coated Fe and Fe3O4
nanoparticles to various antibodies as biological tracers for MRI detection.
This research necessitates experiments to determine whether the tracer
antibodies are capable of penetrating cell membranes and capillary walls. Tissue
samples must be sectioned with a cryo-microtome. Another project involves the
coating of metallic nanoparticles with polymers. This is studied in the TEM at
liquid nitrogen temperatures to prevent beam damage of the coating layer.

The results of these activities benefit society over a broad range: batteries
are a substantial part of a technologically driven society. They operate lap top
computers, cell phones and pacemakers. Batteries for medical applications need
to be reliable and long lasting. In the immediate surrounding at UNO the new
techniques will enhance the spectrum of possible investigations by TEM. AMRI is
a joint project between the department of physics and chemistry. In many cases a
crossing over to biological and medical applications and materials occurs that
requires new investigation techniques. The facilities at AMRI are open to all
scientists and students interested in using them. The local student population
profits by working with state-of-the-art equipment on materials that stand at
the forefront of materials development. Sttudents obtain an education that makes
them highly qualified specialists. UNO is a university with a substantial
minority student body.



