* 0316326
* LTREB: Climatic and Biological Controls on the Carbon Gas Flux of a Temperate Peatland
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Patrick Crill, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 08/31/2008
* USD 293,838.00

The overarching goal of this long-term study is to contribute to our
understanding of processes that regulate atmospheric carbon and energy balance.
This goal is being accomplished by measuring carbon gas fluxes and ecosystem
level responses to climatic changes that control these fluxes. The project will
extend a long-term data set of methane gas and carbon dioxide measurements in a
northern peatland (New Hampshire) to quantify carbon dynamics and the controls
on the carbon cycle. Peatlands are the most significant natural source of
methane to the atmosphere, and the trace gas dynamics of peatlands are an
important component in the radiation balance of the atmosphere. Over the next 5
years, measurements of methane and carbon dioxide will be used to test the
hypothesis that changes in weather variability between years correlates with
measurable changes in the carbon gas flux from a natural peatland. Data sets
using the same sampling techniques at the same sites over long periods of time
provide the only way to assess how ecosystems respond to climate variability.
This study will have broader impacts for basic science, by contributing to the
development and testing of models that will be used to investigate how climate
change and ecosystem processes interact. The project also has a significant
training component, with support for graduate and undergraduate students.
Significantly, the latter comprise female undergraduates from Mt. Holyoke
College, providing them with a rigorous research experience.