* 0316448
* Carotenogenic Enzyme Complexes and Metabolic Channeling in Synechocystis PCC6803
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Elisabeth Gantt, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 08/31/2007
* USD 399,851.00

Carotenoids are essential constituents of the photosynthetic apparatus in plants
and cyanobacteria. These lipid-soluble yellow, orange and red pigments dissipate
excess light energy and protect against potentially lethal photo-oxidation
sensitized by excited state molecules of chlorophyll. The pathways leading to
carotenoids and chlorophylls are inextricably linked: wherever there is
chlorophyll, there must also be carotenoids. The mechanisms by which plants and
cyanobacteria determine the amounts and specify the identities of the various
carotenoids that accumulate in their photosynthetic membranes are being
investigated in this project. Metabolic "channeling" in putative enzyme
complexes of the carotenoid pathway will be examined in Synechocystis PCC6803, a
cyanobacterium for which the entire genome sequence has been determined. Several
Synechocystis carotenoid pathway enzymes have been "epitope tagged" at their C
terminal ends in order to facilitate their isolation and purification.
Polypeptides that comprise the purified carotenoid enzyme complexes will be
identified by mass spectrometry. Subcellular localization of the tagged enzymes
is being ascertained using an antiserum that recognizes the epitope tag. A
genetic approach will be employed to identify other polypeptides that interact
with carotenoid pathway enzymes. Changes in gene expression that result from an
insufficiency of carotenoids will be examined to define the regulatory circuits
involved in carotenogenesis. The long term goal of the investigators is to
achieve a comprehensive understanding of the architecture and function of
carotenoid enzyme complexes and the regulation of this pathway in Synechocystis
PCC6803, a model organism for carotenoid biosynthesis and photosynthesis in
higher plants and algae.&lt;br/&gt;An improved understanding of the mechanisms
by which plants and cyanobacteria regulate the carotenoid pathway is expected to
facilitate metabolic engineering of the carotenoid pathway to improve the
nutritional value of plant foods. In addition to their essential functions in
photosynthesis, carotenoid pigments impart an attractive yellow, orange or red
colors to fruits and flowers, provide the raw material for the production of
alluring fruit aromas and floral fragrances, and serve as the major source of
vitamin A in the human diet. A diverse combination of graduate and undergraduate
students, including minorities will participate and receive advanced training in
the course of this project.&lt;br/&gt;