* 0316012
* Self-conscious emotion and stress reactivity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Michael Lewis, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2006
* USD 207,174.00

By the end of the third year of life, children have begun to express the self-
conscious evaluative emotions including pride, shame, embarrassment, and guilt.
From the onset, children show large individual differences in their self-
conscious emotions. The major aim of this project is to examine the role of
cortisol response to stress and environmental factors involving maternal
behavior and family risk on children's self-conscious evaluative emotions. Of
particular interest are the self-conscious emotions of shame and embarrassment
that reflect the outcome of children's negative evaluation of their own
behavior. It is expected that high reactivity to stress and/or difficulty in
coping with stress will be related to greater expression of negative evaluation
emotions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental factors are also known to affect
children's self-conscious emotions as well as their ability to cope with stress.
For example, quality of maternal caregiving is associated with altered patterns
of pride and shame in children. Sensitive maternal caregiving plays a crucial
role in fostering or promoting children's adaptive reactions to stress.
Moreover, family context has an effect on both the mother and the child.
Socioeconomic disadvantage, parental life stress, daily hassles, inadequate
social support, and marital discord likely will lead to a deterioration in
maternal caregiving as well as to altered patterns of positive and negative
self-conscious emotions and less optimal reactions to stress in children. An
early proneness for negative self-evaluation is related to increased risk for
later internalizing problems. In older children, past work has found a high
cortisol response to stress to be associated with internalizing problems. Thus,
it is of interest to determine whether both a high cortisol response and
negative evaluation emotions are already related to internalizing behavior at
the point in development when the self-conscious evaluative emotions have just
emerged. In examining this possibility, the effects of maternal and family
factors on child internalizing need to be considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader implications of this project bear on child mental health and social
policy issues. Results will serve to identify resilience or vulnerability
factors that lead to more-or-less optimal patterns of emotional functioning.
Identifying these factors should prove helpful in designing successful
intervention strategies targeted for at-risk populations at early ages to
forestall or minimize negative outcomes. Understanding the relations between
these factors is critical for developing better screening and targeting of
children and families for public health education, outreach, and
intervention.&lt;br/&gt;