* 0316127
* Thermodynamics, Structure and Dynamics of Crystal-melt Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Brian Laird, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 07/31/2007
* USD 345,000.00

Professor Brian Laird, of the University of Kansas, is supported by the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to perform research on the
thermodynamics, structure and dynamics of crystal-melt interfaces. This work is
accomplished by both computational and theoretical modeling of growth of
crystals from the liquid state and by further development of these methods.
Particular emphasis is on determining how the structure of the liquid, details
of the molecular interactions, and presence of a second component influence the
anisotropy of the interface. In addition applications to the calculation of
structure, dynamics and interfacial free energies systems such as succinonitrile
or pivalic acid are performed to determine the applicability of such methods to
very complex systems. The work is performed by development and application of
computer simulation methods, such as Monte Carlo, and by the use of classical
density-functional theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nucleation and growth of
crystals from the melt impact many day-to-day occurrences and activities. These
include brazing, casting and welding in metallurgy, cryopreservation of organs
for medical purposes, weather conditions due to atmospheric events, and protein
crystallization for structural characterization. In this work, computer
algorithms and fundamental theories are advanced and applied to learn how the
underlying interactions, deviations in structures, and presence of other
molecules affect growth of crystals from the liquid. Learning how to control
crystallization will positively impact all of the above fields. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;