* 0316479
* Developing Supramolecular Synthesis: From Molecular Function to Supramolecular Assembly
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Christer Aakeroy, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/2006
* USD 409,343.00

&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research involves three goals. First, asymmetric
ditopic supramolecular reagents (SR's) will be designed, synthesized and used to
facilitate supramolecular coupling reactions between two different hydrogen-
bonding functional groups irrespective of the size and shape of the components.
Second, four different classes of SR's that can act as assembly sites for
quaternary and quinternary supermolecules will be designed and synthesized.
Third, the asymmetric ditopic SR's developed, as the first goal, will be used as
non-covalent coupling reagents of different bowl-shaped molecules and
macrocycles. The internal volume in the resulting hosts will be varied and
asymmetric molecular capsules that can incorporate two different guests within
the same cavity will be prepared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
research of Dr. Christer B. Aakeroy of the Department of Chemistry at Kansas
State University. Dr. Aakeroy will focus his work on developing libraries of
supramolecular reagents that are capable of constructing, in high yield,
supramolecular architectures with desirable and predictable connectivities The
project also provides an excellent venue for the interdisciplinary training of
undergraduate and graduate students and results from the project could have
broader impact for materials design and for the preparation of biological
mimics.&lt;br/&gt;