* 0316505
* Phylogenetic Analyses of Nymphalid Butterfly Subfamilies Morphinae, Brassolinae and Amathusiinae Using Extensive Taxon Sampling: Implications for Classification and Natural History
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2003,04/30/2005
* Philip DeVries, Milwaukee Public Museum
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 04/30/2005
* USD 200,124.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract DEB- 0316505&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has
been awarded to Dr. Carla Penz and Dr. Phil DeVries (Milwaukee Public Museum),
and Dr. Andre Freitas (UniCamp, Brazil) to study the phylogenetic history of the
butterfly subfamilies Morphinae, Brassolinae (Neotropical) and Amathusiinae
(Old-World tropics). These large showy butterflies are popular in butterfly
houses, and link two regions of the globe: the Neotropics and Old-World tropics.
Some of these butterflies are vertically stratified between forest canopy and
forest understory, many are active only at dawn and dusk, and most have complex
male scent organs and sexual displays. Despite their intriguing biological
characteristics, little is known about the evolutionary history of these
butterflies. This study combines fieldwork in Brazil, Malaysia and Papua New
Guinea, plus comparative morphology and natural history to reconstruct the
phylogeny (genealogical tree) of these butterfly groups. &lt;br/&gt;Phylogenetic
information provides a means of evaluating ecological and evolutionary patterns,
and serves as a crucial link among disciplines within biology. For example,
flight height in the canopy or understory is established for many species of
Morphinae and Brassolinae, and suspected in the Amathusiinae. Establishing the
genealogical relationships within these groups allows us to assess whether
canopy and understory habitats provided an ecological opportunity for species
diversification, to explore the flight physiology among species, and to evaluate
if these groups are informative for testing prevailing theories in ecology and
conservation biology. This project provides educational training in field
sampling methods, species identification, and conservation issues for local
colleagues and students in Brazil, Malaysia, and Papua New Guinea. The results
will be disseminated in scientific and popular journals and talks, and made
available to distance learning labs and museum exhibits.&lt;br/&gt;