* 0316856
* Theoretical Studies of Excited State Reaction Dynamics, Surface Chemistry, and Condensed Phase Processes
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* David Coker, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* raima larter
* 08/31/2006
* USD 403,000.00

David Coker, of Boston University, is supported by a grant from the Theoretical
and Computational Chemistry Program to perform theoretical studies of excited
state reaction dynamics, surface chemistry and condensed-phase processes. The
theoretical methods address a class of chemical problems in which there is
strong mixing between the electronic and vibrational degrees of freedom. In
these instances, the more common adiabatic approximation is insufficient. Coker
uses his new method for computing real-time correlation functions, which is
based on semi-classical expressions for the propagator. This approach enables a
consistent treatment of nuclear and electronic degrees of freedom and opens up
the possibility for treating problems of biochemical and environmental
significance and to address the role of the solvent on fundamental chemical
processes.

Many industrial, biochemical and environmental chemical reactions involve
multiple energy surfaces, which are due to different electronic configurations.
In the stratosphere a single-chlorine containing molecule can degrade numerous
ozone molecules before it is neutralized into a hydrogen-chloride molecule.
Understanding which chlorine-containing molecules are easily photolyzed to
reactive ClO containing species will aid in alleviating ozone depletion. Such
reactions reside in the class of chemical reactions amenable to study using the
methods developed under this grant.