* 0316504
* Phylogeny and Classification of World Hydropsychidae, with a Revision of Chinese Species and Description of Their Larvae
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Karl Kjer, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 299,999.00

With 1462 species in 52 genera, the cosmopolitan family Hydropsychidae is one of
the most-speciose families of caddisflies (Trichoptera). Although the Oriental
Region is one of the world's most unexplored, about one-third of all described
caddisfly species occur there. Hydropsychids are the most commonly encountered
caddisflies in Asian streams. In their role as predators and collecting-
filterers, larval hydropsychids are key components for the processing of
nutrients in stream ecosystems and they govern the densities of many prey, host,
and predator species in those ecosystems. Larvae of species in the family are
very important as subjects of biomonitoring efforts because they display a wider
range of tolerances for pollution than almost every other family of aquatic
insects and occur in samples of benthic organisms from all but the most polluted
streams. Poor water quality is a very serious problem in Southeast Asia. We will
organize the classification of the Hydropsychidae of China, reviewing the known
fauna and describing the many species awaiting description and those to be
captured on expeditions. It is important to be able to identify (associate)
larvae, because the immature stages are the ones that are exposed to pollution.
We will associate and describe larvae of Chinese hydropsychids. We will infer
the relationships among world genera and revise the family-group classification
of the family. This project will be accomplished primarily by a PhD student in
each of three laboratories: Mr. Sun Chianghai at Nanjing Agricultural
University, Mr. Zhou Xin at Rutgers University, and Ms. Christy Jo Geraci at
Clemson University. These three students will cooperate intensively. Mr. Sun
will review known Chinese species, describe the new species currently on hand,
and describe additional new species captured during two 30-day expeditions he
will lead to Guangdong, Guangxi, and Fujian Provinces in China. Using DNA
sequences from specimens collected on these expeditions and coordinated
projects, Mr. Zhou will associate yet-unidentifiable larvae with identifiable
adults and describe the associated larvae. Ms. Geraci will review previous and
new morphological characters of all world genera. Then, using DNA sequences from
specimens already in hand, together with sequences of specimens collected in
China and obtained with assistance of colleagues in Australia, Thailand, New
Zealand, New Caledonia, Malaysia, South Africa, and Brazil, she will infer
relationships among world hydropsychid genera (on which classification is based)
from combined-data.&lt;br/&gt;We expect at least to double the number of species
of hydropsychids in China known to science. By describing the yet-unknown larvae
of many hydropsychid species, we will lay the foundation for future ecological
research and biomonitoring refinement in and around China. Research globally in
this family will be facilitated conceptually by the phylogeny of world genera
and resulting revision of family-group taxa that we will accomplish in this
investigation. The proposed research advances discovery and understanding while
training three Ph.D. scientists, two of whom are Chinese, the other a U.S.
female. The research establishes partnerships between Rutgers and Clemson
Universities and Nanjing Agricultural Universities and extends a highly
productive 15-year partnership between Clemson and Nanjing that constitutes a
widely respected model of Sino-American cooperation. Results will be
disseminated broadly through professional publications and public media such as
the World Wide Web and GenBank. Especially notable will be the extension of US-
initiated technology to a rapidly deteriorating global problem of water
pollution: results of this research will go a long way toward enabling effective
biomonitoring of water pollution problems in China and refining understanding of
a pollution-sensitive group of animals distributed globally, including the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;