* 0316558
* New Mammals from Early Cretaceous and Their Implications for Deep Mammalian Phylogeny
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Zhe-Xi Luo, Carnegie Institute
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 09/30/2007
* USD 150,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Zhe-Xi Luo of Carnegie Museum of Natural History
in Pittsburgh to study some exquisitely preserved fossil mammals from China,
made available through an international collaboration with the Chinese
scientists. These fossil mammals from the Early Cretaceous Feathered Dinosaur
sites are about 125 million years old. They represent the earliest known
relatives to modern marsupials (such as opossums and kangaroos) and placentals
(such as whales, bats, dogs, and humans). Marsupials and placentals collectively
make up 99.9% of all living mammals; and they have dominated the world in the
Cenozoic (65 million years to the present). Dr. Luo plans to conduct an
extensive evolutionary study of the skull and skeleton of these fossil mammals
in order to establish the ancestral anatomical conditions from which modern
marsupials and placentals are derived. He will also attempt a reconstruction of
the family tree for major groups of mammals through the phylogenetic studies of
these fossils. The family tree and the pattern of anatomical evolution to be
established by Dr. Luo's planned studies will provide insight into the earliest
history of all mammals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans are primates; primates are
placentals; placentals are nested with a vast evolutionary bush of many extinct
mammals that existed in the Mesozoic. Because a better understanding of early
mammalian history can give meaning to our own existence, research findings in
the early mammalian history can generate strong public interest, and will be
useful for public science education. This research will be helpful for Dr. Luo
to popularize science as a museum curator and to educate the public about
evolution. The research findings will be disseminated by popular lectures and
popular scientific publications. Some newsworthy discoveries made through this
NSF-supported project can also be conveyed to a global audience through news
media. Research on Mesozoic mammals can also be incorporated into the Carnegie
Museum's new dinosaur exhibits scheduled for the next several years. This NSF
project will also enable Dr. Luo to train graduate and undergraduate students in
mammalian evolutionary biology, and to incorporate the latest research findings
in his teaching at the University of Pittsburgh. &lt;br/&gt;