* 0316025
* RUI:  Roles of Paracrine Factors in Formation of the Turtle Shell
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Scott Gilbert, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 07/31/2007
* USD 394,976.00

0316025 Gilbert

The turtle shell is a remarkable evolutionary novelty. No other extant
vertebrate has a casing made almost exclusively of bone, and no other vertebrate
has its limbs forming within its ribs. The turtle shell is composed of two main
parts, the dorsal carapace and the ventral plastron. Between them, on the
lateral sides, is a bridge. The carapace contains fifty bones and is supported
by the ribs, which grow dorsolaterally rather than ventrally. The major effort
of this project will expand earlier studies of carapace development. These
earlier studies found (1) that the costal bones that form the bony plate of the
carapace grow out from the ribs in both directions, (2) that the costal bones
begin to form after the endochondral ossification front of the rib has passed
that region of the dermis, and (3) that the bones around the anterior ribs form
earlier than those of the posterior ribs. The current project seeks to test
whether the ribs induce the ossification of the carapacial dermis and the
formation of the bony plate of the carapace. Specifically, it tests the
hypothesis that the ossification of the turtle dermis is a by-product of
paracrine factors secreted by the ribs as they undergo endochondral
ossification. The first part of this developmental scenario contends that as the
ribs undergo their normal endochondral ossification, the Indian hedgehog that
they secrete during this process would induce the dermal cells around them to
express and secrete BMP2/4/7. The second part of this scheme is that the Bone
Morphogenetic Proteins would act in both paracrine and autocrine fashions to
ossify the dermis, causing a progressive front of intramembranous ossification
in the dorsal dermis of the developing turtle. To test this, the turtle
homologues for the msx2, ihh, bmp2, bmp4, bmp7, fgf8, and noggin genes would be
cloned and their expression analyzed by in situ hybridization. Second, beads or
cells secreting the BMP-inhibitory protein, Noggin, would be implanted into
hatchling carapaces to see if this inhibition would prevent turtle shell
formation. Conversely, BMP-containing beads would be implanted into the dorsal
dermis to see if they could induce precocious bone development in other parts of
the carapacial dermis. If this hypothesis is validated, this research has wide-
ranging implications. First, it would go very far to explaining the "age-old"
question of "how the turtle got its shell." Second, this research would show
that the developmental program used to form the turtle carapace is a consequence
of putting rib cartilage into new positions in the body. Third, the results of
this research will aid in the reconstruction of the phylogenetic path leading to
the "sudden" emergence of turtles in the late Triassic. The data would provide a
mechanism for the rapid development of the carapace (as inferred by the fossil
record). Pedagogically, if this hypothesis were correct, this research would
provide an excellent and readily understood example of developmental co-option
in vertebrates. This work is especially relevant for the training of biology
students and the integration of teaching and research. During the past two
years, the project has benefited from the talents of ten undergraduates, one
graduate student, and three postdoctoral fellows. These have included several
women, as well as persons from disabled and under-represented minority groups.
The first year of this program will be undertaken at the Thomas Jefferson
University School of Medicine, where the Orthopedics Research group is studying
the role of hedgehog and BMPs in jaw development. During the second two years
this research will be performed at Swarthmore College (during the academic year)
and Thomas Jefferson University (during the summers). .

