* 0316925
* Protein Folding Kinetics and Activated Rate Models
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Martin Gruebele, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/2006
* USD 459,308.00

In this project, the PI will study the physical foundation of protein folding
kinetics: To what extent can the widely assumed transition state theory
accurately describe protein folding? To achieve this goal, the proteins lambda
repressor, ubiquitin, and phosphoglycerate kinase will be modified by site-
directed mutagenesis to speed up their folding kinetics into the microsecond
range. Preliminary work has shown that transition state theory breaks down below
2 microseconds. This lies well within the resolution capability of the
temperature-jump instrumentation used in this research. As a result, protein
ensembles that are normally hidden by a folding barrier can be examined in fast-
folding proteins. Preliminary indications are that the dynamics is
heterogeneous. This work will quantify the heterogeneity by probing the multiple
timescales and the number of such ensembles that have different spectroscopic
signatures. A number of specific technologies will be developed to achieve the
overall goal of dissecting protein ensembles en route to the folded state: (1)
Tailoring the electric field near tryptophan residues, and inserting electron-
and proton-transfer quenchers by site-directed mutagenesis, will provide
unprecedented control over protein spectral properties, allowing different
ensembles to be probed in parallel by fast temperature jumps. (2) Further
development of multi-channel infrared, absorption, and multi-channel
fluorescence techniques will further dissect different ensembles by allowing
large numbers of spectroscopic probes to be applied in parallel on the
microsecond and faster time scales. (3) The role of water in the heterogeneous
dynamics will be probed by reducing the water density, and by monitoring protein
stability and folding rates at the resulting negative pressure. Water is often
neglected in simple folding models, but de-solvation and "drying" of the native
protein core upon folding are currently little understood, yet are processes of
fundamental importance. The main goal of this research is a rigorous test of new
statistical theories of folding, whose predictions differ from classical models
most dramatically on fast time scales. Fundamental elements of the theory, such
as stretching coefficients during barrier-free folding, glassy dynamics, and
transition state prefactors will be measured directly for the first time.

The classical biochemical view of protein folding - a sequence of intermediate
states separated by barriers culminating in the native state - has been
challenged by an approach based on statistical mechanics. In this "New View,"
the protein traverses a rough multidimensional energy landscape on the way to
the native state. Many protein ensembles, not necessarily lying on a one-
dimensional path, can be explored during folding. This work will apply many
folding probes in parallel to reveal how proteins move about on the
multidimensional energy landscape. Cooperation with theorists will be a central
feature of the work: both computational and analytical theories are now capable
of determining the outlines of the energy surface, but most of the results have
not been directly tested experimentally. The work will train graduate and
undergraduates students. In addition, a program to bring biophysical principles
into the rigorous physical chemistry and physics courses taken by majors will be
completed. Currently, biological ideas often show up mainly in "watered-down"
non-major courses, depriving physics and physical chemistry majors of this
important field of application during their undergraduate training.