* 0316950
* Actin Assembly in Non-Motile Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Kathryn Miller, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 07/31/2009
* USD 885,646.00

Actin structures are critically important for functional and structural
differences among the many cell types of multicellular organisms. The activities
important for generation and maintenance of the different actin structures in
different cell types are not well understood. This project will investigate the
proteins and activities important for assembly of some of these structures.
Using Drosophila as a model system, control of actin assembly into filament
bundles will be studied in bristle cells. The adult sensory bristle relies on
actin bundles, assembled at the proper time and proper place, for its
specialized shape. Loss of function mutations in capping protein, a regulator of
actin assembly, lead to actin bundle and, therefore, bristle shape defects. When
amounts of other actin regulators that work with capping protein in bundle
assembly are even slightly altered in capping protein mutant animals, striking
changes in actin organization are observed. Thus, capping protein mutant animals
provide a sensitive assay system for interactions among actin regulators. To
accomplish these experiments, the amounts of different actin regulatory proteins
will be altered using mutations in the genes that encode them or transgenes that
increase copy number in sensitized [capping protein mutant] animals. The
organization and assembly of actin bundles in fixed and live samples will be
analyzed. All eukaryotic cells rely on actin structures to live and perform
specialized functions. Because actin structures and their protein constituents
are conserved across species, the results obtained from these studies will be
generally applicable. This work will also have broad impact through training of
undergraduates, graduate students, and post-doctoral fellows in the practice of
science. In addition, these studies will generate collections of transgenic and
mutant animals that are of use to a broad array of cell biologists interested in
actin and in the development of different cellular specializations.