* 0316515
* Neutral Products from Ionic Reactions in the Gas Phase
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Thomas Morton, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 06/30/2007
* USD 409,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professors Thomas H. Morton at University of California- Riverside explores the
neutral products formed by reactions of positive ions with neutral molecules in
the vapor phase. Gas phase ion chemistry has been extensively explored by many
research groups using mass spectrometric techniques, but a number of crucial
questions about the structures and reactivities of positive ions can be
addressed only by looking at the electrically uncharged products of their
reactions with nucleophiles or Bronsted bases. Three techniques are described
for producing isolable yields of neutral products from gaseous cationic
reactions: (1) Nuclear decay of organic molecules containing 2 tritium atoms.
b-Particle ejection from one of those nuclei yields an ion that still retains a
single tritium; hence, neutral products of its ion-molecule reactions can be
detected by virtue of their remaining radioactivity, (2) Electron impact on C1
and C2 halocarbons as targets in an Electron Bombardment Flow (EBFlow) reactor.
Apart from the potential environmental relevance of the products of their
ionization, the even-electron ions resulting from loss of a halogen atom can
react with a variety molecules to give neutrals, whose isomeric distributions
will answer questions regarding the factors that underlie kinetic control of
stereochemistry in the absence of solvent, and (3) Injection of monatomic and
diatomic ions into reactive gases. High intensity ion sources are extensively
used by physicists in accelerators that first produce negative ions and then
strip electrons from them to make positive ions. Adaptation of such a source to
chemical experiments increases the scope of bimolecular reactions that can be
studied by organic chemists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division supports Professor Thomas H. Morton
at University of California- Riverside who proposes several hypotheses regarding
organic reactivity that can be tested by looking at neutral products from ionic
reactions in the gas phase. These include a variety of fundamental questions
about Lewis acid-base chemistry. Understanding the origin of stereoselectivity
and increasing the yield of chemical reactions represent two major aspects of
organic chemical research. Professor Morton's work will describe ways in which
ion-molecule reactions might be harnessed to provide useful quantities of
molecules that have not been previously prepared or give products that can be
more efficiently formed and recovered from gaseous reaction mixtures. Examples
include radio labelled compounds used for nuclear medicine and fluorine-
containing molecules that have not been synthesized in any other way. This work
will provide training for graduate and undergraduate students in several
important areas of chemistry: organic reactions mechanisms, experimental
physical chemistry, computations, and mass spectrometry. &lt;br/&gt;