* 0316125
* Collaborative Research: REVSYS: Systematic Revision of the Etherioidea, the Freshwater Mussels (Mollusca: Unionoida) of the Gondwanan Continents
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Daniel Graf, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2008
* USD 199,805.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Daniel Graf of the Academy of Natural Sciences
in collaboration with Kevin Cummings of the University of Illinois to document
the diversity and evolutionary relationships of a group of southern hemisphere
mollusks known as etherioidean freshwater mussels. These animals are of interest
to biologists because of their wide distribution on South America, Africa,
Madagascar, India and Australia and because they have a life cycle that involves
a fascinating larval stage which is parasitic upon fish. Recent analyses
indicate that etherioidean freshwater mussels are closely related to each other,
and this, combined with their enormous geographic range on the southern
continents suggests that these patterns are the result of ancient continental
drift. This research will test these hypotheses of evolutionary relationship and
biogeographical processes by synthesizing the vast amounts of zoological
information about freshwater mussels that is housed in museums and recorded in
over 250 years of biological literature. The result will be a complete synthesis
and reclassification of the nearly 200 species of etherioidean freshwater
mussels.&lt;br/&gt; The data and conclusions generated by this research will not
only be made available through traditional media but will also take advantage of
modern means of dissemination such as CD-ROMs and the internet
(&lt;http://clade.acnatsci.org/mussel&gt;). While this information will be of
interest to scientists and conservation officials, it will also serve teachers,
students and all members of the public interested in better understanding their
world. Besides providing a novel scientific perspective on an interesting,
important and imperiled fauna, this study will also serve to train up-and-coming
biologists through hands-on research experience.&lt;br/&gt;