* 0316174
* Biomechanics of Segmented Axial Musculature in Salamanders and Fishes
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Elizabeth Brainerd, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* William E. Zamer
* 06/30/2006
* USD 382,400.00

More than half of all vertebrate animals are fish, yet the fundamental
relationship between the 3-dimensional (3D) geometry of their muscles and
swimming behavior is poorly understood. The body muscles of fish are organized
into short segments of muscle fibers, separated by sheets of tendon-like
collagen (in "flaky" fish fillets, the segments are the flakes). Within each
segment, muscle fibers run in complex trajectories and the segments themselves
are folded into cone-like shapes. The complex, 3D structure of these muscles has
made it difficult to understand how they function in swimming. The general
objective of this study is to understand the function of segmented musculature
in two model systems: adults of an aquatic salamander, Siren lacertina, and
larvae of zebrafish, Danio rerio. These model species were chosen because they
use segmented body muscles for swimming, but the 3D geometry of their muscle
segments is simpler than in adult fishes. Interdisciplinary approaches to this
problem will be used including mathematical modeling, 3D digital imaging with
laser scanning confocal microscopy, and measurement of muscle contraction
(muscle strain) during swimming with a sound-pulse based technique,
sonomicrometry. The three specific aims of this study are: (1) to develop a
mathematical model of the relationship between muscle fiber strain, longitudinal
strain, and 3D segment deformation in S. lacertina; (2) to test and refine the
model by measuring muscle fiber strain, longitudinal strain, and 3D segment
deformation with sonomicrometry during swimming in S. lacertina; and (3) to use
confocal microscopy to measure the 3D architecture of segmented musculature in
zebrafish larvae, and apply our 3D model to gain insight into the relationship
between structure and function of larval zebrafish muscle segments (larval
zebrafish will be studied when they first begin to swim freely - a day or two
after they hatch out of their eggs). The results of this study will yield an
integrated understanding of the effects of muscle fiber angle, muscle segment
shape, and connective tissue architecture on the mechanics of swimming. In the
future, these results will be applied to the vast diversity of fish species, in
order to understand the evolution of the musculoskeletal system in fishes.