* 0316705
* Inositol Synthesis and Catabolism in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Glenda Gillaspy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 08/31/2008
* USD 502,746.00

This project utilizes molecular, genetic and biochemical tools to address a
fundamental pathway present in most organisms that gives rise to a large number
of required metabolites. Myo-inositol synthesis and catabolism is crucial in
many multiceullar eukaryotes for production of phosphatidylinositol signaling
molecules, glycerophosphoinositide membrane anchors, cell wall pectic non-
cellulosic polysaccharides, Vitamin C, and several other molecules. Myo-inositol
synthesis and catabolism are especially important in plants and ground-breaking
biochemical experiments from the 1960's and 70's defined all of the major
enzymes involved. Multigene families encoding myo-inositol monophosphatase (IMP;
EC 3.1.3.25), and myo-inositol oxygenase (MIOX; E.C. 1.13.99.1) enzymes are
present in the plant model system, Arabidopsis thaliana. The project will
address the hypothesis that the IMP and MIOX genes have specialized roles in
providing inositol for various pathways. To test this hypothesis, IMP and MIOX
expression patterns will be examined. To address whether the different IMP and
MIOX isoforms have different catalytic activities, recombinant proteins will be
produced and their substrate specificities determined. Complementing this
approach will be a genetic analysis which is crucial for determining function in
vivo. Metabolic profiling by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry will be
utilized to determine the effect of each isoform on levels of the myo-inositol,
phosphatidylinositol, D-glucuronic acid, galactinol, ascorbic acid, and other
inositol metabolites as required. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The inositol synthesis
and catabolism pathway provides inositol for many required cellular functions of
both plants and animals. This project will investigate how a model plant
controls the synthesis of inositol to meet its varying needs. Since the dynamics
of inositol turnover in plants can impact the environment through phosphorous
contamination of soil, this research will provide knowledge about possible ways
to limit such contamination. As well, inositol synthesis is altered in diseases
such as diabetes, Down's syndrome, Alzheimer's and bipolar disorder. Thus
investigating the basic science of inositol metabolism is vital also for
understanding the pathology of these diseases. &lt;br/&gt;