* 0316868
* Metal Complex Bioconjugates as Artificial Enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Nenad Kostic, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph L. Templeton
* 06/30/2005
* USD 289,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports research by Dr. Nenad M. Kostic at Iowa State University to synthesize
reagents that catalytically cleave proteins with unprecedented sequence-
selectivity and site-specificity. These inorganic reagents complement enzymes in
applications in biochemistry, molecular biology, pharmaceutical chemistry, and
biotechnology. This research builds on previous NSF-supported work that
explained a striking difference in the sequence-selectivity of Pd(II) and Pt(II)
complexes as cleavage agents in terms of the coordination stereochemistry and
the kinetics and mechanisms of the cleavage reactions. The current research aims
to develop a new biotechnological method for protein cleavage by Pd complexes
and also to develop a second generation of Pd-containing cleavage reagents that
will achieve catalytic turnover in backbone cleavage. The specific objectives
are to: (1) study the effects of the residue X in the X-Pro and X-Pro-His
segments and of the local protein conformation on the kinetics and the
specificity of protein cleavage at neutral pH by the palladium aqua complexes.
The scissile segments will then be inserted into fusion proteins tp demonstrate
that these reagents can successfully cleave fusion proteins, in cases in which
common proteolytic enzymes are inadequate; (2) develop two classes of new
palladium-organic conjugate reagents, in which the ability of the Pd aqua
complexes to cleave the polypeptide backbone is combined with the ability of one
or two attached beta-cyclodextrins to recognize aromatic side chains proximal to
the cleavage site. The stereochemical requirements for these simultaneous
recognition-cleavage interactions will be investigated and used in designing
optimal reagents for cleaving the x-Pro bond in the X-x-Pro-y-Y segments in
which X or Y or both are phenylalanine, tyrosine, or tryptophan; (3) solve the
problem of product inhibition and achieve catalytic turnover in the hydrolytic
cleavage at neutral pH of the x-Pro bond in the X-x-Pro-y-Y segments in which
both X and Y are aromatic residues with the Pd-bis(beta-cyclodextrin) reagent.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a partnership with Invitrogen Co., which will
endeavor to commercialize some of the products of this research, students will
learn about industrial science, commercialization, and potential employment.
This research will be widely disseminated in leading journals, seminars and
international meetings, and in a new graduate special-topics course for
chemists, biochemists and molecular biologists. &lt;br/&gt;