* 0316120
* Mechanisms of Color Production and Animal Visual Signals
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2007
* Ronald Rutowski, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 06/30/2007
* USD 305,000.00

PI: Ronald L. Rutowski&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Mechanisms of Color Production
and Animal Color Signals&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No.: 0316120
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animals produce color signals using both chemical pigments
and physical structures. The specific mechanism employed is predicted to have
consequences for how they use the signals in behavioral interactions. This
three-part project examines these consequences in the Orange Sulphur, a common
North American butterfly. In this species, pigments produce the yellow-orange
and black markings on the male=s upper wing surfaces while structural
modifications found only on the male=s upper wing surfaces produce an iridescent
and highly directional ultraviolet (UV) reflection. The first part of the
project describes the nature and appearance the UV signal by describing its
physical characteristics and then analyzes the spatial relationships between
interacting butterflies to see if signal transmission is optimized. The second
part examines how much males in nature vary in the structural- and pigment-based
components of male coloration and the extent to which this variation leads to
variation in male mating success and avoidance of harassment by other males. In
the third part, males will be reared under different conditions to see how much
the environment affects a male=s coloration and therefore the extent to which a
male=s coloration may indicate his condition or quality. These last two parts
together test recent suggestions that some mechanisms of color production might
provide more information than others about the quality of male signalers for
females in mate choice. This project provides rich research and training
experiences for students from diverse backgrounds and levels of professional
development in the hopes of encouraging and enabling their pursuit of careers in
science. The results will be disseminated to a broad audience through the
scientific and popular press, web-based materials, and public presentations for
non-profit natural history organizations. &lt;br/&gt;