* 0317094
* The Origin and Nature of Persistent Combustion-Generated Radicals
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Barry Dellinger, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 08/31/2007
* USD 398,948.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to determine from
what fuels and under what conditions persistent radicals are formed in
combustion systems and ultimately incorporated into airborne fine particulate
matter (PM2.5). Specific objectives include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. To
determine experimentally how known semiquinone radical precursors react under
post-flame combustion conditions and under which conditions they form radicals.
This is done using a high-temperature flow reactor/gas chromatograph/mass
spectrometer system to study the thermal reactions of hydroquinone and catechol
under oxidative and pyrolytic conditions. Effluent is trapped using cryogenic
techniques for analyses by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. To determine experimentally the combustion conditions
under which various common fuels generate stable free radicals. Laboratory
reactors are used to study the thermal degradation of various fuels and to trap
free radicals for characterization. Candidate fuels include: propane, gasoline,
diesel fuel, biodiesel fuel, No. 6 fuel oil, coal, wood, and a chlorinated
hydrocarbon mixture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. To identify which precursors and
particle surfaces form and stabilize persistent free radicals. The chemisorbed
radical hypothesis is investigated by dosing surrogate particle samples with
semiquinone-type radical precursors using a packed-bed reactor system. The
particles investigated include activated carbon and silica or alumina doped with
iron, copper, magnesium, calcium or zinc. Radical precursors studied include
hydroquinone, catechol, phenols, benzenes, and chlorinated
analogues..&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. To determine if carbonaceous materials form
persistent free radicals. The intrinsic radical hypothesis is investigated by
generating and modifying soots or chars formed by thermal degradation of fuels.
The particles will be characterized for radicals before and after partial
oxidation with various oxidants (O2, NO2, OH, O, and Cl). The radical
concentrations and lifetimes are determined by EPR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. To
elucidate the structure, stability, and reactivity of semiquinone-type radicals
using ab-initio calculation techniques. Density function theory (DFT) procedures
are used to calculate the structures, energies, and spin densities of radicals
derived from hydroquinone and catechol as well as related radicals identified in
the experimental tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;6. To demonstrate whether similar
persistent radicals are associated with full-scale combustion-derived and
ambient PM2.5 samples. A limited number of full-scale combustion and airborne
PM2.5 samples are characterized to quantify associated radicals and the metals
(iron, copper, magnesium, calcium, zinc) that may have a role in stabilizing
them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept of
persistent, combustion-generated free radicals is an area that needs exploratory
research to establish the nature, origin, and reactivity of these radicals under
a variety of conditions. This project is designed to provide this information so
that the research community can further explore the impact of persistent
radicals under specific conditions and for specific applications. It also
supports an ongoing collaboration with Drs. William A. Pryor and Guiseppe
Squadrito of the Biodynamics Institute at LSU and other health-effects
researchers at LSU and&lt;br/&gt;Tulane Medical School. The results of this
study form a basis for detailed studies of the biological chemistry and health
impacts of persistent free radicals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;