* 0317872
* Collaborative Research:  Entrepreneurship, Friction and the Macroeconomy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Mariacristina De Nardi, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 199,159.00

The effects of taxation on economic inequality and capital accumulation have
long been a concern for economists and policy makers. While taxes serve the
purpose of redistributing resources from the richest to the poorest, they also
have negative effects on household's incentives to work and save and thus reduce
economic efficiency. In view of the central importance of this question, it is
perhaps surprising that we still do not have analyses of the effects of taxation
that incorporate the extreme degree of wealth inequality observed in the data
and the key role played by entrepreneurs in shaping such inequality and
influencing aggregate investment. The goal of this project is to understand the
distribution of income and wealth and how tax policies interact with financial
market frictions with particular emphasis on the role of estate taxes, income
taxes and capital taxation on entrepreneurial income. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project consists of three parts. First, it seeks to understand how the tightness
of borrowing constraints and the receipt of bequests affect entrepreneurial
decisions, aggregate capital accumulation and inequality. Less tight borrowing
constraints reduce wealth concentration and allow more people to run an
entrepreneurial activity. Moreover, the fact that not all of the bequests are
accidental, but some are actually voluntary, generates the emergence of some of
the large firms and fortunes observed in the data, and increases wealth
concentration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, the project aims at studying and
quantifying the effects of estate and income taxation. Preliminary simulations
show that eliminating the estate tax would generate very small increases in
capital accumulation and in wealth inequality, while increasing the effective
tax rate to very high levels would greatly reduce inequality, but would be very
detrimental to capital formation and output. Lower taxes on entrepreneurial
income would have a large positive effect on production and capital accumulation
(more so than capital income taxes), but would also increase wealth
concentration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Third, there is a long tradition in
macroeconomics of trying to understand how small shocks, consistent with the
order of magnitude of those observed in the data, can generate the type of
fluctuations observed over the business cycle. Models with heterogeneity and
entrepreneurial choice have the potential to generate the kind of amplification
and propagation measured in the data. Aggregate shocks affect entrepreneurs and
non-entrepreneurs differently. Business investment and firm size change over the
business cycle and, in presence of borrowing constraints, private wealth and
firm size in turn affect entrepreneurial choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact: This research project seeks to advance the understanding of the
quantitative effect of taxes on capital accumulation and inequality and the role
of entrepreneurship over the business cycle. It can thus have an impact on the
design of tax policies that are currently being discussed by policy-makers, in
particular regarding capital income and estate taxation.&lt;br/&gt;