* 0317249
* Use of Antisense Ribosome Mutagenesis to Study Purinergic Reception in Tetrahymena
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Todd Hennessey, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 02/28/2006
* USD 116,751.00

Since ATP normally exists inside of cells, external ATP is a depolarizing
chemorepellent in the free-swimming eukaryotic cell Tetrahymena because it
represents a "blood-in-the-water" danger signal. The problem to be studied is
that the major genes and gene products necessary to generate ATP responses in
this model sensory cell are unknown. The methods used are a combination of
"forward genetics", using antisense ribosome mutagenesis to generate behavioral
mutants and "reverse genetics", using identified gene knockouts and directed
antisense ribosomes. Antisense ribosome mutants were produced by transformation
of wild type cells with an antisense ribosome library. Each mutant contains an
antisense insert in its rRNA which hybridizes to a specific mRNA and reduces the
level of that gene product, producing a functional knockout of that protein.
Since Tetrahymena normally "dance" back and forth in ATP, behavioral mutant
screens were used to isolate individuals, which either don't respond (swim
forward) in external ATP or over-respond (dance longer). Over-responsive mutants
(called 413) and under-responsive mutants (SA2 and B6) have already been
obtained. Their antisense ribosome inserts sequences have been determined by
whole cell PCR but this project will re-transform wild type with these inserts
to verify them. The sequence information will also be expanded by PCR with cDNA
libraries and final verification will involve gene knockouts. This way, the gene
responsible for the phenotype can be identified. The broader significance of
this work is to provide a model system to study ATP responses in general.
Extracellular ATP is detected by nociceptive (chemical pain) nerves to produce
pain signals in vertebrates because it indicates danger in the form of cell
lysis (breakage). If the Tetrahymena mechanisms are similar enough to those of
vertebrates, this may be a simple, humane model system to study these responses
and possibly screen for drugs, which may affect them. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be very involved in this project.