* 0317769
* Collaborative Research: Surface-Atmosphere Feedbacks and Holocene Climate Variations in Eastern North America:  Linkages, Impacts, and Governing Mechanisms
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Patrick Bartlein, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 02/29/2004
* USD 198,532.00

This award supports research to document the spatial and temporal modes of
climate variation and land-cover change in eastern North America at millennial
scales, assess the interactions between global forcings (orbital variations,
trace gas concentrations) and regional controls (land-cover change, topography,
lake effects) of climate and their relative effects on Holocene climate
variability, and identify the critical mechanisms governing surface-atmosphere
feedbacks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will utilize a Regional Climate
Model (RegCM2) in combination with a new generation of land-cover
reconstructions to detail the effect of Holocene surface-atmosphere feedbacks on
atmospheric processes. Model results will be evaluated against millennially
resolved climate reconstructions for eastern North America based upon multiple
networks of climate proxy records. The dense networks of proxy records and the
large and regionally varied changes in Holocene temperature, aridity, and land
cover make eastern North America an excellent case study for the interplay
between forcings external to the climate system and internal feedbacks in
temperate regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because
climate variations during the Holocene were substantial, spatially variable, and
spanned a wide range of frequencies and rates of change. Although these
variations are in part forced by mechanisms external to the climate system,
internal interactions among the atmosphere, oceans, and terrestrial biosphere
are a critical source and modulator of climate variability. In particular,
surface-atmosphere feedbacks are receiving increased scientific interest, due to
recent demonstrations that such feedbacks exert a strong influence on Holocene
and Recent climate processes at regional to global scales, with a magnitude
comparable to orbital and greenhouse gas forcings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In
summary, this project will advance our understanding of Holocene climate
variability and the interactions between climate and vegetation dynamics,
enhance the scientific infrastructure, build partnerships among institutions,
and help support a new generation of climate scientists. All model and data
syntheses produced during the course of this work will be stored at the World
Data Center upon publication.