* 0317720
* Econometric Volatility Measurement, Modeling, and Forecasting
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Francis Diebold, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 228,429.00

Prop ID: 0317720 P I: Diebold, Francis X. Organization: University of
Pennsylvania Title: Econometric Volatility Measurement, Modeling, and
Forecasting

This research both deepens and broadens the scientific tools available for
volatility measurement, modeling, and forecasting in economics. Both
theoretically and empirically, it extends and significantly completes the
research program on second generation volatility models developed and
popularized by the investigator and his coauthors. The intellectual merit of the
work is high, as the problems addressed, which have eluded solution in the
volatility literature for nearly two decades, are widely acknowledged to be
simultaneously highly challenging and crucially important to the full
development of the literature. The broader impacts of the work are equally high,
as it focuses throughout on eliminating the gaps between the available tools and
those needed by the large communities of practitioners in government, policy
organizations, and industry.

Intellectual Merit: By any measure, the measurement, modeling, and forecasting
of volatility has been one of the most active and successful areas of time-
series econometric research areas in the past twenty years. However, several of
the most challenging and important problems remain unresolved, including how to
(1) deal with pollution of volatility estimates by market microstructure noise,
(2) deal with the very high-dimensional multivariate data often relevant in
practice, and (3) understand conditional variance dynamics in their relation (or
lack thereof) to conditional mean dynamics in general, and market timing ability
in particular. Diebold's work contributes directly to their solution by
constructing and evaluating (1) filtering methods for attenuating the
deleterious effects of market microstructure noise on volatility estimates, (2)
a latent-factor framework for volatility measurement, modeling, and forecasting
in high-dimensional situations, and (3) a framework for understanding the links
among conditional mean dynamics, conditional variance dynamics, and market
movements. The work extends both theoretical and empirical econometrics
frontiers, pushing forward the new theory of empirical quadratic variation for
special semi-martingales, the new empirics of high-frequency modeling, and
crucially, their intersection.

Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of the project are substantial and several-
fold. First, it will contribute directly to teaching and learning via the
investigator's mentoring and collaborating with graduate students. Second, it
will reach out to underrepresented groups via broad web-based dissemination of
all research results. Third, it will enhance infrastructure for research and
education by establishing a variety of collaborations: between disciplines (by
deepening our understanding of the macroeconomics / financial economics
interface as related to volatility), between researchers and nations (by
utilizing national and international coauthorships and joint projects), and
between academia and other communities including government, policy
organizations and industry (by facilitating and accelerating knowledge transfer
from academia). This research will also significantly push volatility
measurement, modeling, and forecasting toward routine application, benefiting
society via improved risk management, asset pricing, and asset allocation, which
in turn improve the general functioning of financial markets and the
macroeconomy.