* 0317085
* Collaborative Research: Testing for Cascading Effects of Habitat Fragmentation
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* James Diffendorfer, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 09/30/2006
* USD 250,000.00

Collaborative Research: Testing for Cascading effects of Habitat Fragmentation
Diffendorfer, James, F. San Diego State University

Food web theory provides a useful framework for management of ecosystems, and
compliments well the more traditional population-level approach. However, the
applicability of food web concepts, including keystone species and top-down
cascades, to ecosystems of conservation concern is unclear. This project will
study changes in predator-prey interactions in the coastal sage scrub ecosystem
of southern California cause by habitat fragmentation, associated with urban
development. This project focuses on four landscape treatments in coastal San
Diego County that vary in the degree of exposure to urban edge and
fragmentation: interior of large habitat blocks (>1000ha), urbanized edge of
large blocks, large habitat fragments (50-100 ha) and small fragments (5-20 ha).
The proposed research will expand previous work by continuing demographic
studies on birds, but with simultaneously estimation of mesocarnivore, snake,
and raptor abundance and activity to estimate their impacts and examine how
these vary with habitat fragmentation. The work will determine if nest
predation, juvenile and adult bird survival, as well as small mammal abundance
and survival vary with fragment size and predator composition. In addition, it
will investigate the role of snakes, and raptors and determine their impact
relative to mammalian predators by comparisons across experimental treatments
and by path analysis. By comparing bird responses to small mammals this project
will address the question of whether all primary consumers are vulnerable to
cascades, or if the biological differences between taxa make one group more
susceptible to top-down regulation than another. Overall, this project will
train 18-25 undergraduates, 3 graduate students and a post-doctoral student, and
will creating research opportunities for underrepresented students participating
in an NSF Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental Biology teaching program. In
addition, this research will directly benefit ongoing management and reserve
design objectives of local wildlife agencies and nonprofit, land management
organizations.