* 0317072
* Studying the Role of Water Dynamics on the Protein Folding Mechanism Using Worldwide Distributed Computing
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Vijay Pande, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2008
* USD 743,983.00

In this project, funded jointly by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, the role of water in
the folding mechanism will be investigated using computer simulation.
Specifically, through large-scale massively parallel simulation, the folding of
small, fast-folding proteins will be investigated on the tens of microsecond
timescale. In addition, hypotheses regarding the role of water will be tested.
For example, does water play a structural role in the transition state or does
water merely act as a hydrophobic, dielectric medium? Previous work has
suggested many possibilities, including the role of the escape of water
molecules during compaction and folding, water-protein hydrogen bonding, the
discrete aspects of individual water molecules and the hydrophobic effect, and
lubrication effects of water. With novel simulation techniques and computational
methods, these ideas will be explored and hopefully novel mechanistic aspects
will be discovered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Before proteins can carry out their
biological function, they must self-assemble, or "fold." Understanding how
proteins fold is complicated by the nature of water. While water at first may
seem like a simple liquid, it has many remarkable and complex properties. These
properties, including the hydrophobic effect and hydrogen boding, can likely
only be correctly understood with complex, "explicit" models for water. However,
these models to date have been too complex to use in understanding long
timescale behavior, such as protein folding. To overcome these timescales, a
distributed computing project was created. This project, called "Folding@Home,"
now has approximately the power of 100,000 PCs and this vast computing power
combined with novel algorithms should allow one to simulate the role of water in
protein folding for the first time. Moreover, distributed computing allows for a
novel "collaboration" between science and the general public. To help foster
this active collaboration, the PI actively maintains a "chat room" for
participants as well as many web resources to better understand proteins and
protein folding. This directly connects with many of the broader impact criteria
championed by NSF, including the goals of advancing discovery and understanding
while promoting teaching, enhancing infrastructure for research and education
(the distributed computing infrastructure itself), and broad dissemination to
enhance scientific understanding (brought about and encouraged by the
participation of people donating their time for the distributed computing
project and their direct interest in the work being performed).&lt;br/&gt;