* 0317104
* Emerging Frontier 03: Functional Analyses of the Genome of the Phenotypically Complex, Multicellular Cyanobacterium Nostoc Punctiforme
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2008
* John Meeks, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 07/31/2008
* USD 848,723.00

The experimental core of this project is functional genomic analyses of the
cyanobacterium Nostoc punctiforme. The shotgun sequencing of the 9.25 Mbp genome
of N. punctiforme has been completed and an annotated database is available at
http://www.jgi.doe.gov . N. punctiforme has an extraordinarily wide range of
ecological niches, physiological properties and cellular developmental
alternatives, including the unusual ability of fixing nitrogen in both free-
living and plant-associated symbiotic growth states. Nitrogen fixation occurs in
terminally differentiated cells called heterocysts. In addition to heterocysts,
N. punctiforme vegetative cells can transiently differentiate into resting cells
termed akinetes and motile filaments called hormogonia. The working hypothesis
is that the regulatory elements and pathways governing cellular differentiation
alternatives and symbiotic interactions of N. punctiforme uniquely evolved in
cyanobacteria. Therefore, functional, in addition to computational, analyses are
required to identify the developmental genetic elements and regulatory circuits
present in the genome. Understanding how these circuits are integrated in N.
punctiforme has implications on the evolution of developmental pathways in
complex organisms. This project will utilize high throughput genomic
methodologies of global gene expression assays, using DNA microarrays, and
mutagenesis. The resources generated, including all of the individually
amplified genes present in the genome, will be made available to the national
and international cyanobacterial community. Researchers at the level of
principle investigators, technicians, postdoctoral fellows, graduate and
undergraduate students, will interact in developing and applying these new
methodologies to this complex cyanobacterium; thus, the project affords an
integrative training opportunity.