* 0317154
* RNA Tectonics and Self-assembling RNA Nano-devices
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Luc Jaeger, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 08/31/2006
* USD 376,000.00

With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the
Chemistry Division and the Molecular Biochemistry Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Professors Luc Jaeger at University of
California- Santa Barbara will work to further the science and technology of
fabricating novel nano- devices using ribonucleic acids (RNA) as a material.
This project relates to RNA tectonics, a concept that refers to the fabrication
of RNA self-assembling architectures and nano-devices with novel properties by
taking advantage of the knowledge of motifs, folding and assembly rules
governing the three-dimensional shape of complex natural RNA molecules. Like
organic chemistry that allows an infinite number of molecules to be build with
the same subset of synthons, RNA tectonics open the way to the design of an
infinite number of RNA supra and macromolecules by judiciously using known RNA
motifs and modules. General principles of RNA tectonics will be explored and
applied to the design of smart, programmable 2D RNA arrays for generating
templates with desirable topography for bottom-up fabrication of nano-electronic
devices. It is anticipated that RNA is a suitable material for building
electronic systems over large areas on the sub-10 nm scale.

The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division and
the Molecular Biochemistry Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences supports Professor Luc Jaeger who will collaborate with scientists
in leading European laboratories to pursue various strategies for immobilization
of RNA arrays on a surface, and investigate electronic properties of the
decorated materials. Besides establishing RNA tectonics as a new field for the
supra-molecular chemist, Professor Jaeger will investigate a new route to device
RNA based technology with strong potential in micro and nano-electronics, a key
economic sector of significance to all leading world economies. This
multidisciplinary project will offer the possibility of fruitful exchange
between US and European laboratories and will contribute to training graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows at the interfaces between supra-molecular
chemistry, biochemistry, nano-engineering, material and physical sciences.