* 0317265
* Estimation of Gross Domestic Product Before 1800: The Colonies and States of the Mid Atlantic Region
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2010
* Peter Mancall, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2010
* USD 173,023.00

The project will produce estimates of gross domestic product (GDP) and GDP per
capita&lt;br/&gt;at benchmark dates in the eighteenth century for the Middle
Colonies of British North America, an area composed of the present-day states of
New York, New Jersey, Delaware, and Pennsylvania. This study follows a pilot
project on the economy of the Lower South (North Carolina, South Carolina, and
Georgia). After completion of the work on the Middle Colonies, the investigators
will estimate GDP for New England&lt;br/&gt;and the Chesapeake Bay region, and
combine the figures for all regions to obtain GDP for the colonies as a whole.
The investigators shall also link those figures to the GDP series for the early
nineteenth century constructed by David (1967) and Weiss (1992 and 1994) and to
existing estimates of GDP for the period since then, including official series
produced by the Department of Commerce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
estimate GDP by using the method of estimation devised by David and modified by
Weiss, and used in the pilot project on the Lower South. The proposed estimates
for the Middle Colonies, like those for the Lower South, will draw on the rich
and extensive literature on wealth and standards of living in these colonies
that has accumulated over the past several decades, will make use of the probate
samples and other data sets that have been compiled by other researchers, and
will supplement this work with documentary evidence of the sort we found for the
Lower South. An annotated bibliography, probate samples and a database
containing data on variables pertinent to estimating GDP for the region will be
prepared and made available to other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
estimates will take into account the economic activity of Native American
Indians. Whether one thinks that Indians should be treated as though they were
part of the colonial economy or as separate nations and trading partners, their
economic activity and its impact on the colonists needs to be taken into
account. Native Americans were simply too important quantitatively to be
ignored. The proposed work will establish more clearly the extent of Native
Americans' participation in markets, their economic interactions with colonists,
and the value of output produced by them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate the ways in which the colonial and early national periods of America
contributed to the gradual acceleration of the nation's economy into sustained
economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact of This Work&lt;br/&gt;Our
estimates will be of greatest interest to economic historians initially, and are
already being cited in textbooks (e.g. Hughes and Cain, 2003). In the longer
term they will be of use to those doing empirical macroeconomics and economic
growth. This work can eventually inform public policy decisions regarding the
nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;As in our pilot study on the Lower South, we will
produce databases that will be of use to other researchers, and we will make
these readily available via the EH NET website and CD-
ROMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also involve undergraduates,
primarily as paid assistants, but as occurred in the pilot project, they are
likely to become interested enough in the subject to engage in research of their
own. And this project will engage underrepresented groups in this research just
as occurred in previous NSF sponsored projects conducted by Weiss. The fact that
part of this research is about Native American economic history should increase
the likelihood that other underrepresented groups will participate and be
attracted to the study of economics. Furthermore, with the Native American
component to this research we plan to present our results to multidisciplinary
conferences and workshops,&lt;br/&gt;and disseminate it in ways that will reach
broader audiences, just as was done in the pilot project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;