* 0317880
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  Institutions, Forests and Hunger in Eastern Guatemala
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Elinor Ostrom, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2005
* USD 11,340.00

An important academic breakthrough in what we know on the dynamics of land-use
and land-cover change is that human institutions and property rights play
important roles in the fate of resources like forests. Both scholars and
policymakers concerned with the fate of tropical forests and their users
(usually the vulnerable rural dwellers of less developed countries) devote their
work to finding the mechanisms that may improve the livelihoods of these
resource-dependent groups, while preventing more destruction of valuable natural
resources. In the face of increasing environmental vulnerability to events like
drought or hurricanes, empirical efforts attempting to clarify the linkages
between local institutions and property rights with land-use/land-cover change
dynamics can make significant contributions not only to the academic community
but also to policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation proposal will look at
how institutions, property rights, and harvesting of non-timber forest products
(NTFPs) have enabled the Chorti of Eastern Guatemala to cope with a drought,
record-low coffee prices, and hunger. The study will address the roles that
NTFPs, institutions, and tenure security have in shaping the incentive structure
of forest users. The researchers aim to test whether communities with strong
local institutions are better able to protect and use a forest resource. The
study also seeks to&lt;br/&gt;understand how lack of tenure security over the
resource affects the decision-making process of forest users and aims to
determine whether strong institutions compensate for weak property rights
regarding forest conservation. The income forest dwellers may generate from
NTFPs and how it alleviates the precarious conditions of hunger will be studied
to clarify its influence on the decision-making process of this
vulnerable&lt;br/&gt;indigenous group regarding their forest
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To carry out the effort, the methods of
institutional analysis, case studies, household surveys, forest mensuration, and
satellite imagery analysis will be used. The effort will look at four Chorti
communities in Chiquimula, Guatemala, selected among NTFP-harvesting communities
to show variation in tenure security and institutional
strength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this effort will contribute to the
academic and policymaking arenas concerned with deforestation, environmental
vulnerability, and poverty alleviation.&lt;br/&gt;