* 0317397
* Etching of Dielectrics:  Fundamental Plasma-Surface Interactions Through Mass-Filtered, Energy-Tuned Ion Beams
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* Konstantinos Giapis, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Westmoreland
* 06/30/2007
* USD 450,000.00

Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to understand the fundamental
plasma-surface interactions responsible for the etching of silicon, silicon
dioxide (silica), and other novel dielectric materials (zirconia, porous silicon
oxide, black diamond) in fluorocarbon plasmas or other appropriate chemistries.
To this end, plasma-extracted, mass-filtered ion beams of adjustable energy are
directed at surfaces of the aforementioned dielectric materials using a unique
ion beamline combined with scattering and surface diagnostics. Neutral radicals
of the same or different chemical composition are also supplied simultaneously
at varying neutral to ion ratios. The emitted reaction products are monitored by
time-of-flight quadrupole mass spectrometry in situ and in real time. The stable
surface products of the interaction are analyzed using surface analysis
techniques. Comparisons are made with scattering at silicon surfaces to
understand selective etching of dielectric materials over silicon. Specific
goals include the understanding of the scattering dynamics of energetic, inert,
and reactive ions on surfaces of relevance to the semiconductor industry; the
reasons for etch selectivity between silicon and silica in fluorocarbon plasmas;
distinguishing non-thermal reaction pathways and measuring their contribution to
etching relative to that of thermal reactions; monitoring the extent and
chemical nature of the surface modification facilitated by the ion bombardment
as a function of the translational energy and chemical identity of the ions;
measurement of etch yields as functions of translational energy and incident
angle of the projectile ions and developing phenomenological models of the
observed dependencies; using the etch-yield models for beam scattering to
simulate profile evolution; and performing etch experiments in the beam path for
comparison and validation purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controlled ion-beam
surface experiments are performed that target the fundamental interactions
occurring when etching silicon, silicon dioxide, and novel dielectric materials
in high-density plasmas. A detailed picture of the scattering interaction is
produced, including etch yields and reaction products as functions of incident
energy and angle. Complex ions [CFx+ and SiFx+ (x=1-3)] typical of the complex
fluorocarbon chemistries employed in the etching of oxides and low-k dielectrics
are employed. A rapid screening of the role of a number of ions in etching
various materials is performed. This establishes a new paradigm to select the
plasma chemistry to achieve a desired etch rate and etch profile in contrast to
the time-consuming and costly recipe development by trial-and-error now
practiced by industry. The experiments are used to validate results from
molecular dynamics simulations for improved understanding and to produce
phenomenological models of scattering needed by the industry for truly
predictive profile evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results produced are fundamental enough to be
used by theorists in the validation of simulations of beam-surface interactions
and practical enough to be useful to process engineers in the selection of
chemistries and operating conditions that permit rapid optimization of etch
tools. A new paradigm in etch process development is established through a
combination of fundamental beam-scattering experiments and etch-profile-
evolution simulations. The knowledge and understanding obtained is incorporated
in courses and tutorials on plasma-surface interactions to educate students and
engineers on the underlying principles of chemical reaction dynamics. A new,
low-cost experiment involving atmospheric microplasmas in direct patterning of
silicon is developed to introduce plasma-surface interactions to
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;