* 0317829
* Collaborative Research: Discrimination in Low-Wage Labor Markets:  An Audit Study for New York City
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Bruce Western, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2005
* USD 158,815.00

SES-0317820&lt;br/&gt;Bruce Western&lt;br/&gt;Princeton
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-0318158&lt;br/&gt;Devah
Pager&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern University&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This is an audit
study of hiring discrimination in the labor market for unskilled, entry-level,
jobs in New York City. The research assesses the extent of discrimination
against African American men and men with criminal records. Although the issue
of race discrimination in hiring has been of longstanding interest, the topic
has acquired renewed urgency in the context of the U.S. penal boom that has
given prison records to a third or more of non-college black men under age 40.
Unskilled black men seeking work today thus face the burden of race
discrimination, and discrimination against ex-felons. While the high prevalence
of criminal records among young black men suggests the effects of discrimination
may be substantial, little is known about employers current treatment of
unskilled black and ex-felon job candidates. In this project the PIs will send
testers into the field to apply for entry-level jobs in New York. The testers,
young black and white men, will present resumes that show evidence of a long
spell of unemployment or a criminal record. Interest focuses on whether
employers call back black and white testers at the same rate. Similar
comparisons will be made for ex-offenders and non-offenders. Because resumes
will be randomly allocated, and black and white testers will be matched on their
resumes and other characteristics, the research design provides a strong basis
for inferring discrimination by employers. This project replicates and
elaborates an earlier audit study conducted by Devah Pager in Milwaukee. In
contrast to recent research suggesting that labor market inequality is due
mostly to differences in skills rather than discrimination, the Milwaukee study
provided striking evidence of race discrimination and discrimination against ex-
offenders. Among whites, 34 percent of job applicants without criminal records
received callbacks compared to just 17 percent of whites who reported criminal
records. Among blacks, 14 percent without criminal records received callbacks
compared to just 5 percent with criminal records. The New York study goes beyond
the Milwaukee research in several ways. The New York replication will examine
whether hiring discrimination can be found in a large ethnically heterogeneous
labor market. The current design also admits a more direct test of race
discrimination. Because a relatively large number of audits will be conducted,
the current research will allow us to examine how discrimination might vary
across occupations and industries. The strength of experimental design promises
large gains in understanding the extent of discrimination that goes
significantly further than the previous study of social survey data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have three significant broader impacts.
First, it will shed important new light on the extent of labor market
discrimination in New York. Many contend that current patterns of labor market
inequality are rooted in differences in education and ability; if extensive
discrimination is still evident, this research will underline the continuing
importance of active enforcement of anti-discrimination law. Second, the project
will involve extensive training of students, introducing them to the research
problems and implementation of social science analysis. Third, the data
generated by this project will be lodged with the Inter-University Consortium
for Political and Social Research, broadening the resources available to all
scholars for research on discrimination and inequality. &lt;br/&gt;