* 0317634
* Information Leakage, Intellectual Property Rights and the Incentives to Innovate
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Ronny Razin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2004
* USD 61,979.00

The theoretical literature in economics assumes that intellectual property
rights can be perfectly enforced. In reality this is far from the case. The
central aim of this project is to provide a theoretical foundation for
understanding the impact of intellectual property rights when enforcement is
imperfect. To this end, the project first introduces a theoretical framework
with which one can analyze the formation of new firms in the absence of property
rights. In particular, two main issues are addressed. First, the project
investigates the ability of innovators to appropriate economic rents from the
fruits of their ideas. The study shows that, even in the absence of intellectual
property rights, this can be achieved by equilibrium effects in an industry.
Second, the study will follow the (endogenous) flow of information in an
industry and analyze the implications of these flows on the generation of new
products, the market structure of new industries and on differences between
different industry configurations (a motivating example being the differences
between Silicon Valley and Route 128 industry configurations). Finally, the
study will analyze the effects of different legal property rights regimes on the
incentives to innovate and on the market configurations.

The Law and Economics literature are both in desperate need for theoretical
foundations to understand the economics of innovation under imperfect property
rights protection. This gap in the literature has persisted for some years for
several reasons. First, it was believed for many years that empirically it would
be very hard to gather and analyze data relating to issues of information
diffusion and its affects on industries. This poverty of empirical analysis
deemed any theoretical investigation of these issues as futile. After all,
empirical and theoretical analysis are complementary goods; one can not progress
in one without a progress in the other. Lately, due to advances in statistical
estimation, availability of new data and the importance of information in high-
tech industries, there is a surge in empirical research on this topic. This
brings about the importance of having a robust and tractable theoretical
understanding of the economics of innovation and the diffusion of information in
industries. This is the main aim of this study. What can be concluded from the
experience of the high-tech industries in the last two to three decades? What
impact did different Intellectual Property Rights regimes, employed in different
states and countries have on the observed outcomes? Can we learn something about
how to design new legal regimes that would enhance innovation and growth? These
are the questions that are central to this research. This study will provide
building blocks that together with empirical investigation will allow to answer
these questions. Ultimately, this proposal offers a framework for understanding
the policy implications of different intellectual property rights regimes for
innovation and diffusion.

