* 0317132
* Theoretical and Computational Studies of Quantum Dynamical Processes in Condensed Matter
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Gregory Voth, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Raima Larter
* 07/31/2007
* USD 429,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Professor Gregory A. Voth, of the University of Utah, is supported by
the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to perform theoretical
studies on excited-state reaction dynamics, surface chemistry and condensed-
phase processes. Current focus is on extending and further developing the
centroid molecular dynamics method (CMD). The CMD method is based on computing
trajectories of Feynman path integral centroids using classical molecular
dynamics techniques. The trajectories are then correlated and statistically
weighted with the phase space Feynman path integral centroid density. The
resulting time correlation function can be related by Fourier transform to the
quantum time correlation function. CMD therefore allows quantum time correlation
functions to be approximately calculated with a numerical effort similar to a
classical MD calculations. Such methods are aimed at understanding proton
transport in aqueous environments and in the simulation of hydrated electrons.
Specific improvements under development include: (1) the development of a
numerically exact algorithm to provide corrections to the CMD dynamics, (2) the
incorporation of the semiclassical initial value representation for centroid
dynamics propagation, (3) simplifying the CMD approach using Gaussian
representations, including nonadiabatic dynamics of the electronic degrees of
freedom, (4) inclusion of nonlinear correlation functions, and (5) inclusion of
Fermi-Dirac statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proton transfer in complex
condensed phase systems is a fundamental aspect of many biological processes
such as photosynthesis in plants and breathing in animals. The complete
understanding of these processes is currently absent and in need of
sophisticated theoretical treatments that are capable of accounting for the
quantum-mechanical behavior of electrons and the nearly classical motion of
protons. Methods developed here are well suited for dynamical descriptions
associated with nearly classical proton transfer. Further understanding of these
processes is requisite to the development of biomimetic materials for solar
energy conversion, carbon sequestration and possibly biologically inspired
environmentally friendly catalysis. Similar dynamics are of interest to
atmospheric chemistry since protonated water clusters are abundant in the upper
atmosphere. Research is also imparted to various communities through the
training of graduate and postgraduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;