* 0317667
* Collaborative Research on the Political Control of Trial Court Judges
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Sanford Gordon, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2006
* USD 101,026.00

This proposal undertakes research on the origins and implications of different
methods for the selection, retention, and direct control of trial court judges
in the American states. The research project addresses two interrelated
questions: (1) How are trial judges' decisions in office influenced by a) the
method of choosing them and b) formal constraints on their discretion? (2) What
explains variation in formal constraints on trial judge discretion in the
American states? Trial judges are powerful actors in the American political
system and the method of choosing and otherwise constraining them have been
debated since the American founding. Concerns with judicial power have not,
however, generated commensurate comparative empirical research on the
consequences for trial judge behavior of different selection systems or ex ante
constraints on judicial discretion. Moreover, political scientists have not
undertaken much comparative work to explain variation in the adoption of
restrictions on trial judge discretion. We seek to remedy this weakness by
constructing and testing an agency-theoretic model of the selection, retention,
and direct control of trial judges. This research will assist in providing
empirical evidence for, and will contribute to, ongoing public policy debates
about the consequences of different rules for selecting and retaining trial
court judges. Unlike existing research on selection systems that focuses on
voter behavior, electoral outcomes, or descriptive characteristics of judges,
the researchers undertake a direct comparative examination of trial judge
behavior. Further, they seek to understand how ex ante constraints on discretion
like sentencing guidelines and mandatory sentences interact with selection
systems to influence trial judges' behavior. While political scientists have
examined the behavior of appellate court judges in different electoral systems,
these findings may not extend to the actions of the more numerous and less
publicly visible trial judges whose actions in large part govern the case-by-
case application of the state's coercive authority. The researchers will
continue research currently underway, to compile three datasets for quantitative
analysis and to conduct unstructured qualitative interviews with sitting trial
judges in a variety of institutional contexts. The project offers two
significant downstream benefits. First, the investigators construct and document
three datasets detailing judicial sentencing behavior, the selection experience
and biographical characteristics of trial judges, and the nature of direct
constraints on judicial discretion. These datasets and accompanying
documentation will be placed in the public domain. These datasets will
complement research on state appellate courts and allow other researchers to
conduct comparative research on judicial selection, trial judge behavior, and
state criminal justice policymaking. Second, undertaking this research will
provide opportunities to enhance the training of graduate students by involving
them in the construction, documentation, and analysis of the datasets used in
this project.

