* 0317772
* Cea-Crest:  The Center for Environmental Analysis of the    California State University, Los Angeles
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Carlos Robles, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Victor Santiago
* 08/31/2009
* USD 4,228,149.00

HRD - 0317772&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Center for Environmental Analysis of the
Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CEA-
CREST)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;California State University, Los
Angeles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Carlos Robles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;California
State University, Los Angeles will continue operating the Center for
Environmental Analysis of the Centers of Research Excellence in Science and
Technology (CEA-CREST). CEA- CREST's mission is threefold: (1) to increase the
numbers of minority citizens embarking on careers in the environmental sciences;
(2) to conduct innovative, multidisciplinary environmental research; and (3) to
provide a technical and personnel resource for the many academic, governmental,
and industry environmental programs of the Southwestern United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the unifying theme of spatially structured dynamics,
CEA-CREST will expand partnerships with major national research centers, enhance
graduate degree programs helping still greater numbers of CEA-CREST graduates to
enter doctoral programs, and ultimately elevate a coalition of CEA-CREST
research teams to national competitiveness. To provide more educational
opportunities for the diverse pool of CEA-CREST Student Fellows, the Center will
revise an existing interdisciplinary Master's program and couple it with an
initiative to establish a joint doctoral degree between California State
University, Los Angeles and partner institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Center
research components include: Marine Population Dynamics; Ecosystem Carbon Flux;
Genetics and Evolution of Marine Populations; Biogeochemical Cycling in
Watersheds; and, Hydrology of Arid Lands. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit:&lt;br/&gt;The Center's five research components outline plans for an
impressive series of discoveries at various stages of realization. Established
components led by senior investigators will disseminate significant research
findings within the context of their expanding partnerships. Newer components
led by young investigators will receive support to ensure that their very
promising projects reach fruition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts:&lt;br/&gt;CEA-CREST presents a vision of a fully integrated science
community in which minority faculty and students lead significant intellectual
enterprises. The vision inspires the efforts of other Minority Serving
Institutions and encourages the allegiance of majority research universities in
the causes of educational and environmental justice.&lt;br/&gt;