* 0317155
* An Integrated Investigation of Cartilage as a Skeletal Material
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Adam Summers, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 06/30/2008
* USD 369,643.00

This research project is a multi-level, interdisciplinary investigation of the
performance, biomechanics, and biochemistry of cartilage as a skeletal material.
Cartilage is usually perceived as an articular material, a bearing surface
between bony elements, or as contour-filler in the nose and ears - yet sharks
and their relatives use cartilage as their skeletal material. The skeletal
system is fundamental to the success of vertebrates, providing support,
protection, and serving vital physiological roles. It is therefore unsurprising
that the biology of bone, the typical skeletal material, is quite well
understood. Similarly, cartilage, in its 'usual' role as an articular surface
has been well studied because damage and malformations of this type of cartilage
are major health issues. It would not be an exaggeration to say that cartilage,
in its role as a skeletal material, is almost completely unknown. In fact, there
is not a single published value for the stiffness or strength of cartilage from
a shark.&lt;br/&gt;Despite a cartilaginous skeleton sharks and their relatives
evolved an exclusively hard prey diet at least four times. This project compares
the cartilaginous skeleton of hard prey crushers and closely related generalists
at four levels: whole animal performance; structural mechanics; material
properties and biochemistry. Preliminary data indicate that the cartilage of
hard prey specialists is different in structure, material, and biochemistry than
that of generalists, and also varies from mammalian cartilage. Preliminary data
indicate that cartilage is more varied among four species of shark than among
all tetrapods, perhaps because the demands placed on a cartilaginous skeletal
tissue are more variable than the demands placed on articular cartilage.
&lt;br/&gt;Performance will be assessed by determining the bite forces in hard
prey crushers and generalists, while structural mechanics will be determined
through analysis of 3-d CT scans of jaws. The material properties of blocks of
cartilage are measured with solid and viscoelastic tests. Three aspects of the
biochemical composition - collagen content and cross linking, aggrecan content,
and leucine-rich proteoglycan content (decorin, biglycan) will be assessed and
compared to values for tetrapods. In addition, correlations between composition
and material properties will lead to a clearer understanding of the causal
relationship between the constituents of cartilage and its response to load.
&lt;br/&gt;