* 0317177
* Collaborative Research: Andean Fossil Mammals--Phylogenetic and Geologic Implications
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Andre Wyss, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rafael O. de Sa
* 09/30/2008
* USD 150,004.00

Collaborative Research: Andean Fossil Mammals-Phylogenetic and Geologic
Implications.

A grant has been awarded to DrAndre Wyss of the University of California Santa
Barbara to collect and study fossil mammals from the Andes Mountains of central
Chile, and to carry out geological investigations of the region. This study will
clarify poorly known aspects of South American mammal evolution, and help
unravel the complex geologic history of the Andean mountain chain. Field
collecting and reconnaissance will be undertaken to discover new localities and
assemblages of fossil mammals of different ages. Once prepared, these fossils
will be described in the scientific literature and analyzed in order to
understand how factors such as climate change affect species diversity. The
unusual occurrence of these fossils in volcanic rocks will enable the
application of various "absolute" geologic dating methods, providing precise
ages for these fossils and more accurate scientific analyses.

South America was an isolated continent for most of the last 80 million years.
The highly peculiar mammals arising in response to this isolation have captured
the interest of biologists and paleontologists for more than two centuries. Some
15 years ago, Collaborator Flynn and his colleagues unexpectedly discovered the
first fossil mammals from this region of South America. By studying the fossil
mammals, the team showed that the fossil-containing rocks were nearly 100
million years younger than previously assumed. This discovery has revolutionized
understanding of the region's tectonic history. Moreover, this and other
discoveries have helped to fill in important "missing chapters" in South
American Mammal history, leading, for example, to the recent recognition of a
new South American Land Mammal Age and evidence of the world's oldest
grasslands. This project builds on earlier work, focusing on targeted geographic
areas and particular groups of mammals (rodents, extinct plant eating forms,
marsupials, etc.).