* 0318995
* Confocal Video (Capillary) Microscopy with Fluorescence
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Kyriakos Papadopoulos, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/2005
* USD 54,000.00

Papadopoulous, Kyriakos D., et al&lt;br/&gt;Tulane
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Confocal Viedo \ (Capillary\) Microscopy with
Flourscence" &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a deconvolution
workstation, which, together with a number of attachments and software will
enable researchers in the Department of Chemical Engineering at Tulane
University to do confocal microscopy and sophisticated image analysis. Existing
video (capillary) (fluorescent) microscopy setups in the laboratories of
Kyriakos Papadopoulos and Kim O.Connor have been used by all participating
investigators, and this upgrade will significantly impact their individual and
joint research projects that rely on microscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will use this acquisition to visualize and
quantify interfacial processes that are important in drug delivery schemes
involving double emulsions, liposomes, and pheroidal aggregates of cancer cells.
Additionally, the equipment will be very useful in the ability to develop a
capillary microscopy technique that will visualize phenomena at high
temperatures, and will also make possible the quantification of luminescence in
nanowires and of transport of Dense Non-Aqueous-Phase Liquids in model porous
media that simulate contaminated soils. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Tulane enjoys
very strong research and educational ties with Xavier University, a major
minority institution in the southern United States. Kyriakos Papadopoulos has
had a continuous collaborative research project with Xavier Physics Professor
Elia Eschenazi, which has involved many undergraduates and which has led to
three Tulane Chemical Engineering MS degrees awarded to students who had
previously majored in Chemistry at Xavier. Additionally, the PI's fully
participate in the Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation (LAMP), a
comprehensive, statewide program aimed at substantially increasing the number
and quality of minority students earning bachelor's degrees in science,
mathematics, engineering and technology (SMET) areas. In the last 2 years, Vijay
John has supervised three students through this program (Jonathan Hijuelos and
Hendekea Azene from Tulane, Stephanie Sigers from Dillard University). The
program is sponsored through an NSF grant to the State of Louisiana. The
investigators are committed to continuing their research collaboration with
Xavier, thus providing educational opportunities to the students of that
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;