* 0318367
* Globalization and Westernization: Theory and Measurement
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Edward Crenshaw, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2005
* USD 102,606.00

SES-0318367 Edward Crenshaw Pamela Paxton Ohio State University Globalization
and its effects are among the most controversial topics in international social
science, but no agreement exists on what globalization is, and few attempts have
been made to empirically measure the concept. Our primary goal in this project
is to advance the comparative measurement of globalization and the related
concept, westernization, across a large number of countries. The PIs will use
theory-driven empirical models comprised of multiple indicators to tap the
latent constructs of globalization and westernization as country attributes.
Higher-order confirmatory factor analyses will include three theoretical
dimensions of globalization: economic globalization, political globalization,
and socio-cultural globalization, as well as an overarching, summary measure of
globalization. The measure of the closely related concept of westernization will
use the same methodology with a different set of variables. Given economic
expansion around the globe, the PIs expect a bifurcation of generalized
globalization and westernization over time, and the project will provide a
baseline for subsequent research on this topic. Analyses will be completed on
approximately 150 countries over three time periods: circa 1975, 1985 and 1995.
Extending the measures over multiple decades permits longitudinal analysis,
thereby allowing researchers to consider reciprocal effects between
globalization (and/or westernization) and other social constructs. Also, while
samples and indicators will be more constrained, the main analyses will also
employ relational (i.e., network) measures. Network measures for each dimension
of globalization will provide more specific information about the embeddedness
of particular countries and help determine the shape of the global
stratification system.

The measures of globalization and westernization will be made available through
a public data archive. Public access to the measures will allow researchers to
use common indicators to investigate relationships between globalization and
other substantive topics in international social science. US economic, cultural
and political issues are increasingly embedded within a globalized world and
better techniques for measuring and understanding processes of globalization
will help to inform international policy and debates.