* 0318893
* Acquisition of a Multifunctional Imaging System for Research and Teaching in an Undergraduate Environment
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Thomas Lawson, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2006
* USD 76,100.00

A grant has been awarded to Bates College under the direction of Dr. Thomas G.
Lawson that will allow Bates College to purchase a Multifunctional Imaging
System. The goal of this project is to enhance the ability of Bates College
faculty members to more effectively perform molecular life science research and
teaching with undergraduate students. The instrumentation will be used in
research projects being directed by six principle investigators in three
departments and two interdisciplinary programs. It will be incorporated into the
teaching laboratories of at least four courses in two departments. The imaging
system will be used for the detection and quantification of radiolabeled and
fluorescently tagged biological molecules under study via a wide array of
experimental approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major research projects in
which this instrument will be used include studies of the mechanism by which
proteins are specifically selected for destruction by the ubiquitin/26S
proteasome system. An experimental system based upon cultured mammalian cells
that carry inducible genes of picornaviral proteins will be developed in order
to determine the role the degradation of these proteins plays in picornavirus
replication. The response of bacterial cells to environmental stress conditions
will be examined through experiments to determine precisely how the translation
of the RNA polymerase subunit-encoding rpoS mRNA is regulated. The influence of
environmental conditions on rpoS mRNA higher order structure and regulatory
protein binding will be examined. The relationship between mRNA structure and
translation initiation rates will be elucidated. In another set of projects, the
imaging system will be used to uncover information about the complex signaling
cascade involved in mammalian spermatogenesis. A major focus of these studies
will be to determine the role of inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatase in the
signaling cascade by comparing wild type and sterile mouse mRNA populations,
evaluating the effects of mouse gene knockout mutants, and comparing specific
protein levels in wild type and mutated mouse cells. Other projects that will be
carried out include studies of the mechanism by which dioxin exposure induces
cardiomyopathy, evaluations of the activation characteristics of N-methyl-D-
aspartate and glutamate receptors in neurons, and analyses of the mechanisms by
which the mammalian hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis responds to stress
conditions. The instrumentation will be used in teaching laboratory projects in
biological chemistry, immunology, environmental toxicology, and introductory
chemistry courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the imaging system by
Bates College will have a broad impact upon undergraduate science education and
the local and national science research infrastructure. Original research
experiences are an integral component of the science curriculum at Bates, and
these include senior thesis research projects. The instrumentation will be used
by nine to twelve undergraduate researchers each year and potentially by dozens
of students in teaching laboratories. The opportunity to use state of the art
equipment in real and significant research projects will help maintain students'
interest in science and will contribute to keeping undergraduates in the
pipeline that provides the trained scientists who are crucial to the
technological and economic well being of the United States. Bates is an isolated
institution located in a state which receives a disproportionately low fraction
of available federal research funds. The purchase of this imaging system will
provide an important pillar of support for the ongoing research programs of
Bates scientists, will allow them to remain active and competitive in their
disciplines, and will help them continue to effectively prepare and encourage
new generations of young scientists. The on-site presence of key instrumentation
will also increase the likelihood that Bates scientists will be able to
participate in meaningful collaborations with researchers at larger
institutions. Such collaborations play an important role in maintaining a
healthy research environment at Bates and provide the students there with
expanded training opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;