* 0318241
* MRI/Engineering Equipment Proposal: Acquisition of a Multi-user Imaging Ellipsometer
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Kathleen Stebe, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Michael W. Plesniak
* 07/31/2004
* USD 105,331.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No. CTS-0318241&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: K. Stebe, Johns Hopkins University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
is for the acquisition of an Imaging Ellipsometer. By impinging polarized light
on a surface and measuring the change in polarization of the reflected beam,
ellipsometers determine film thicknesses on solid surfaces with angstrom level
resolution. Imaging ellipsometry performs these measurements by focusing the
beam onto a high resolution CCD camera to provide spatial resolution of 1micron
over areas as large as 400 x 500 microns, allowing for the construction of
surface topological maps at that resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
measurement of such surface topologies is useful in disciplines ranging from
sputter rippling of gold films to the evolution of adsorbed protein films on
polymeric surfaces used for controlled drug release. Therefore, this
instrumentation will advance research and educational efforts in several
research groups at JHU. Undergraduate and graduate students from the departments
of Chemical &amp; Biomolecular Engineering will use the imaging ellipsometer and
Materials Science &amp; Engineering in projects administered by the co-PIs in
the general areas of nanotechnology, surface science and bioengineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-PIs have a record of effective collaboration. Three
of the co-PIs have created new courses for an undergraduate concentration
between the departments of Chemical &amp; Biomolecular Engineering and Materials
Science &amp; Engineering. All of the co-PIs have made a concerted effort at
increasing the numbers of women and underrepresented minorities students in
their research programs. At the undergraduate level, students are drawn into
research via research projects for credit, and via REU programs administered
through our MRSEC and in the department of Chemical &amp; Biomolecular
Engineering. Through these channels, the co-PIs together have directed 60
undergraduates in research projects, of whom 31 were female and 4 were drawn
from other under-represented groups. At the Ph.D and post-graduate levels, women
and minorities are also actively recruited. This focus is apparent in the
numbers of women and members of under-represented groups being trained in these
programs; of the 30 Ph.Ds and postdoctoral researchers, half have been women,
and two were drawn from other under-represented groups. The acquisition of this
equipment will support the co-PIs efforts in their research and outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Jointly supported by the Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) program and the Interfacial, Transport and Thermodynamics
Program&lt;br/&gt;