* 0318821
* Migration and Ethnic Identity:  The Archaeology of the Nahua/Pipil of Postclassic Pacific Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Frederick Bove, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2004
* USD 105,569.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Frederick Bove and an
international team of colleagues will conduct one field season of archaeological
and ethnohistoric research on the Guatemala central Pacific Coast. The team
brings together U.S., Dutch, and Guatemala specialists in archaeology,
ethnohistory, and linguistics to examine the interface between migration theory
and the archaeological identification of Nahua/Pipil ethnicity at the major site
complex of Carolina-Gomera believed to be a major Pipil regional center. The
Postclassic period in Mesoamerica was marked by massive social, political,
economic, and demographic upheaval following the collapse of Classic period
polities in Mexico and Guatemala. While the causes of these cataclysmic events
are obscure one salient fact is the Nahua migrations from central Mexico and the
Gulf Coast to Pacific Guatemala and lower Central America that are believed to
have occurred in a series of movements from about A.D. 800 to A.D. 1350. The
migrations of Nahua-speaking groups from Mexico to Central America constitute
one of the most important examples of large-scale population movements in New
World culture history. The recent discovery of large Late Postclassic regional
centers that are most likely Pipil on the central Guatemala Pacific Coast are
the basis for the project and present a rare opportunity to combine both
documentary and archaeological research in a conjunctive approach. The goal is
to develop a general understanding of the Pipil migratory process that is
closely interrelated with the archaeological identification of Pipil ethnicity.
The nature of the research questions require basic data principally in
residential areas that allow the identification of Pipil ethnic groups. Once
this accomplished the chronological problems associated with the Pipil
migrational process itself can be approached together with the reconstruction of
their settlement system, social differentiation, and household economy. Specific
tasks are 1) completely map Carolina, Gomera, and all surrounding rural centers,
2) complete the extensive survey and collection of surface materials in and
around the same centers, 3) conduct test excavations of a stratified sample of
patio groups at all sites and the lateral exposure of a sample of these, 4)
complete the analysis of all collected artifacts, 5) to integrate the
documentary data with the survey and excavation data. The Late Postclassic
project will provide much needed information at both theoretical and substantive
levels. The intellectual merit of the research will be to test models of
migration and methods of identifying ethnicity, two of the most contentious
issues confronting contemporary archaeology. The broader impacts of the study
are that it will contribute significant information during an obscure period and
since no project has ever focused on the Late Postclassic period in the region,
the substantial increase in knowledge will provide the basis for major revisions
in the scientific understanding of the prehistory of this dynamic region.
Guatemala and U.S. students will participate in the project to enhance their
training and increase their knowledge of the importance of Pacific Guatemala's
prehistory.