* 0318438
* Collaborative Research: Studies of Innovation and Information Exchange
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Michael Whinston, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/2007
* USD 176,429.00

This proposal consists of two distinct projects. The first project will study
theoretically the effects of various antitrust policies and industries that are
characterized by high rate of innovation and "winner-take-all" competition. This
issue is not well understood, as antitrust analysis has traditionally not
focused on issues of innovation. Yet such concerns form an increasingly
important aspect of antitrust policy. Recent antitrust cases focus on precisely
this issue. An excellent example is the recent U.S. versus Microsoft case, in
which distinguished economists were fundamentally in disagreement about the
effects of antitrust enforcement on innovation and future productivity of the
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project will study the ways in which
information exchange among individuals engaged in a group decision-making
process change when the individuals providing information have preferences and
motives that are unobservable to the other members of the group. This kind of
unobservable bias is present in many real world decision-making situations.
However, the effects of this bias on the kind of decision that are reached and
the implications for how to optimally structure decision-making are not well
understood by economists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the first
project will extend to improving antitrust policy in a crucial sector of the
American economy. The broader impacts of the second project will come from
designing better decision-making procedures for real world
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;