* 0318741
* Daubert in the Juryroom: Juror Assessments of Scientific Validity and Reliability
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2007
* Jennifer Groscup, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Susan Brodie Haire
* 01/31/2007
* USD 327,082.00

Expert testimony has been a special problem in the law, and recent Supreme Court
decisions have emphasized the trial court judge's role as the gatekeeper of
scientific evidence and have required them to evaluate the reliability of expert
evidence to determine its admissibility. If admitted, jurors have the
responsibility of evaluating the influence that evidence will have in their
verdict decisions. Reliability could be the means by which jurors determine if
and how they will be influenced by expert testimony. Concerns have been raised
about whether judges are capable of appropriately evaluating the reliability of
complex expert testimony. Even if judges are able to distinguish reliable from
unreliable evidence, reliability could be an issue argued by the attorneys.
Therefore, reliability could be an issue for jurors to evaluate when determining
the weight to give to expert testimony. Jurors also may be unable to distinguish
between reliable and unreliable testimony. Unreliable testimony might not only
be admitted, but it might be heavily relied upon in jurors' verdict decision
making. Recognizing this potential problem, the Court suggested several legal
safeguards to prevent jurors from relying on unreliable experts. These
safeguards included cross-examination, jury instructions, and opposing expert
testimony. The purpose of the proposed studies is to determine if jurors are
sensitive to reliability, to examine the effectiveness of each of the Court's
suggested safeguards, to maximize the increase in juror sensitivity to
scientific reliability due to the use of these safeguards, and to provide
additional information about jurors' information processing. This will be
accomplished by manipulating various indicia of reliability for psychological
expert testimony and by manipulating the use and type of the safeguards to
determine if and to what degree their presence increases juror sensitivity to
evidentiary reliability. In these studies, the type of cross-examination, jury
instructions, and opposing expert testimony will be manipulated to test
hypotheses regarding the interplay of safeguards and evidence reliability. These
hypotheses are derived from theories about the processes underlying juror
decision making based on the elaboration likelihood model and on the use of
heuristics. To test these theories, complexity will be manipulated to determine
when information about the reliability of expert testimony is processed
peripherally or centrally. The proposed research will have a broader impact on
undergraduate teaching, the college, the involvement of underrepresented groups,
the research community, and on society.