* 0318435
* The Lion's Mane
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Craig Packer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 01/31/2005
* USD 74,933.00

This Communicating Research to Public Audiences project is derived from work
funded by research grant DEB-9903416 entitled "LTREB: Long Term Studies of
African Lions." In partnership with the Bell Museum of Natural History, Craig
Packer at the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities will develop a 500 sq ft
traveling exhibition and associated website on the factors that contribute to
the successful survival and reproduction of individual lions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This exhibit builds on public interest
in lions and the intriguing question of why males have manes to educate visitors
about the process of scientific research. Its content is based on seven years of
observations and experiments by a leading researcher on the behavioral ecology
of lions. The exhibit will include a life-size "model" lion (actually a plush
toy made to exact specifications) that was used in the field to test responses
by real lions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: In addition to being
displayed by the Bell Museum, "The Lion's Mane" exhibit will travel to zoos with
lion exhibits and to museums with lion dioramas. By highlighting a female
researcher, the exhibit provides an entry point and a role model for girls. This
exhibit will benefit from and build upon extensive national publicity received
by the Lion Research Project and its lionresearch.org website.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;