* 0318520
* SBIR Phase I:     Low Cost, High Definition Display Element for Projection Display Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Yin Liu, LW MICROSYSTEMS
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I proposes using micro
electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) technology to make low cost, high definition
display elements in the application of digital projector display. In the
proposal, the display uses electrostatically-actuated light modulators in which
a beam of light is directed towards a light valve target, e.g., an array of
micromirrors. The micromirrors response to a video addressing signal, imparts a
modulation onto the light beam in proportion to the amplitude of the deflection
of the individual reflective micromirrors. The amplitude or phase modulated beam
is then passed through projection optics to form the image.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The digital projector display market, including
business projectors, televisions, and portable &lt;br/&gt;Displays, has been
growing continuously, and reached the size of ~$4 billion in 2002. The key
&lt;br/&gt;Performance criteria for displays are brightness, contrast ratio,
resolution, uniformity, and optical &lt;br/&gt;Efficiency. The market for low
cost, high brightness projection display is expected to grow at a
&lt;br/&gt;rate of 120% until 2005. In 2005, the estimated market size is ~6
million units for home projectors only, about 60 times of the market size in
2001 (98,000 units).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;