* 0318657
* Uncertainty Management in Optimal Disassembly Planning Through Learning-Based Strategies
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Spiridon Reveliotis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 07/31/2006
* USD 136,966.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides funding for the development of
an analytical framework able to represent, analyze and eventually manage the
extensive levels of uncertainty inherent in the emerging reverse logistics
processes. The particular application area will be the optimal disassembly
planning (ODP) problem, which constitutes one of the core activities in any
reverse logistics process network. Specific steps in the proposed research
program are: (i) the development of a formal representation of the decision
making underlying the disassembly process, that will be able to explicitly
characterize the involved uncertainties; (ii) the characterization of the
optimal disassembly plan in the face of the aforementioned uncertainties; and
(iii) the development of computationally effective and efficient algorithms able
to analyze the impact of the process uncertainties and to eventually derive an
optimized disassembly plan through observation of the process behavior. The
representational framework sought in Step (i) will be based on the Petri net
modeling framework, which is one of the standard frameworks for modeling
discrete event system dynamics. Steps (ii) and (iii) will be based on Dynamic
Programming theory and some emerging variants of it known as "Reinforcement
Learning" algorithms. The effectiveness and efficiency of the derived techniques
will be assessed and demonstrated through application on a number of
prototypical case studies to be obtained from the relevant
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research
will lead to a better understanding of the uncertainties involved in the ODP
problem, and they will provide a methodological framework for explicitly dealing
with these uncertainties. In this way, they will further enhance the relevance
of the undertaken optimization approaches to the particular ODP problem context,
since they will enable the adaptation of the decision making process to the
prevailing operational and economic conditions, and they will eventually lead to
more environmentally benign and economically ludicrous disassembly plans. At the
same time, the proposed research will enrich the field of computational learning
theory since, by taking advantage of the particular problem structure, it is
expected to offer a number of new implementation insights and techniques for
recently emerged algorithms. Finally, the proposed research program and the
dissemination of the derived results will increase the awareness of the
manufacturing and logistics community regarding (i) the role of the uncertainty
in contemporary production systems, and (ii) the availability of formal methods
and tools to effectively deal with this uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br
/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;