* 0318975
* The Arabidopsis gp91-phox Gene Family and NADPH Oxidase Function
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Jeffery Dangl, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2007
* USD 424,999.00

Plants cannot move to defend themselves from aggressions in their environment.
Also they do not posses a complex, circulating, cell-based immunological system
of defense like vertebrates. However, plants have evolved an immune system for
pathogen recognition that initiates a set of cellular responses that
collectively stop the intruder or can react and respond to stress situations.
Production of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROI) is one of the earlier responses
observed after pathogen infection in plants. ROI produced may directly
participate in the killing of the invading pathogens, but could also act as a
signal that induces further defenses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A plasma membrane
bound NADPH oxidase is the likely source of ROI in plants. This oxidase, also
known as the respiratory burst oxidase (RBO), was initially described in
mammalian macrophages and is a multienzymatic complex that mediate the killing
of microbes. This protein is the enzymatic subunit of the NADPH oxidase that
uses molecular oxygen to make superoxide. Arabidopsis has a 10 member Atrboh
(Arabidopsis thaliana respiratory burst oxidase homologs), gene family,
homologous to the animal protein called gp91phox. However, the precise subunit
structure of the NADPH oxidase and the regulation of its activation appear to be
different than in mammalian macrophages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is becoming
evident that ROI is not an executioner but a signal that mediate the activation
of the defenses as well as other responses to the environment and developmental
processes. In mammals, multiple isoforms of gp91phox act in different cell
types, and perform different functions. Similarly, different NADPH oxidases in
plants may also mediates production of apoplastic ROI in different tissues and
in responses to different environmental stimuli. For example, our group has
shown that AtrbohD and AtrbohF are responsible for the production of ROI during
the defense response and that ROI generated through these members of the Atrboh
family are required as second messengers in ABA signaling during stomata
closure. Also, the oxidative burst mediated by AtrbohC regulates plant cell
expansion during root hair formation through the activation of channels that
allow calcium to move in and out of the cell.. Interestingly, Nitric Oxide (NO),
another reactive molecule that mediates cell death in mammalian macrophages, may
regulate plant responses in conjunction to ROI. Studies show that interaction
with pathogens trigger NO release, and ROI and NO seem to, then, work
synergistically to control the hypersensitive response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to decipher, using functional genomics tools, the
functions of the plant NADPH oxidase gene family. The hypothesis to be tested is
that different members of Atrboh, components of the plant NADPH oxidase, control
production of ROI during defense response and in developmental processes, PCD
and other responses to the environment. The connections between ROI and NO,
another important regulator of PCD and other responses, will be also
investigated. The identification of the Atrboh genes also enables to study the
mechanism that activates the plant NADPH oxidase. This is particularly relevant
since important regulatory elements of the mammalian NADPH oxidase appear to be
absent in the plant oxidase. Studies will be conducted to identify more
components of the ROI signaling, especially those involved in earlier steps of
the signal transduction pathway that regulate Atrboh function, as well as
putative targets or mediators of ROI-dependent signaling. These studies will
allow to further understand the function of ROI during disease resistance
responses, as well as in a range of developmental responses mediated by ROI and
NO. &lt;br/&gt;