* 0318672
* Collaborative Proposal for Facility Support:  Development and Maintenance of the Magnetics Information Consortium (MagIC)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Lisa Tauxe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2008
* USD 740,961.00

Intellectual Merit: Modern scientific research is increasingly dependent on
timely access to digital in-formation, and the ability to conduct sophisticated
searches of datasets for information matching specific criteria, often with the
goal of exploiting previously unconsidered connections among datasets. Although
the paleomagnetic community had a good start in the establishment of digital
databases, the existing database infrastructure no longer meets the needs of the
research community. Critical information is widely disseminated in scientific
journals and because of space limitations important details never see the light
of day. There is no publicly sponsored mechanism for making data rapidly
available to the general research community. This collaborative proposal is to
establish a multi-user facility to be known as the
Magnetics&lt;br/&gt;Information Consortium (MagIC). There are two major goals we
hope to accomplish. The first is to establish and maintain state-of-the-art
relational databases that will form a digital archive for rock and paleomagnetic
data. The second is to provide an information technology infrastructure and web
portal for these and other research-oriented digital databases run by the
international magnetics' community. As its name implies, MagIC will not be
restricted to paleomagnetic or rock magnetic data, although the scope of
material to be archived will initially focus on these kinds of information. In
the longer term we anticipate that MagIC will effectively act as a kind of
digital library for the range of magnetic data collected in basic research of
the kind typically (but not exclusively) sponsored by NSF. Because existing
databases catalog other kinds of magnetic data or information that are used in
magnetic studies there is also a need for cyber tools that will allow the
exploitation of database efforts by other groups. The project will not only have
tremendous impact on the way that magnetic research is routinely carried out but
will make educational and research contributions to other areas of the earth
sciences (for example,&lt;br/&gt;geochronology, petrology, studies of Earth's
deep interior, paleoclimate and environmental studies). A number of magnetic
data products like time scales, magnetic field models and animations of magnetic
field variations are routinely used in a wide range of research as well as in
education. In addition to providing software and visualization tools MagIC can
act as a storage facility for these data products. It is anticipated that in the
long term the database will be accessible at a range of expert
levels.&lt;br/&gt;The scope of the work to be carried out under this proposal
will be: (1) Establish flexible metadata structures for archiving of rock and
paleomagnetic data via a process that involves extensive consultation with the
research community; (2) Provide a web portal (that can be adapted to individual
users' needs) to upload data for archival or download data for research or
educational uses; (3) Educate the community in operation of the database and
encourage researchers to archive data as they collect it; (4) Bring legacy data
into searchable&lt;br/&gt;archives; (5) Provide tools for searching databases;
(6) Provide visualization and software tools; (7) Develop optimal cross linking
and/or integration with related databases.&lt;br/&gt;Existing resources will be
exploited as much as possible (including efforts already invested at Scripps
Institution of Oceanography (SIO) in EarthRef.org and the Geochemical Earth
Reference Model, GERM) and to coordinate efforts among researchers at the
Institute for Rock Magnetism (IRM), SIO and the University of Western Australia
(UWA). Substantial effort will need to be invested to establish metadata that
are specific to each of the rock and paleomagnetic aspects of the project, but
the goal is to coordinate overlapping information. MagIC data will reside at the
San Diego Supercomputer Center, which is a significant resource in terms of
information technology, database, and programming expertise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Access to a wide range of magnetic data is
useful across almost all geoscience disciplines, including but not limited to
tectonics, climate change, Studies of Earth's Deep Interior, crustal processes,
stratigraphy and the dating of geological processes. The interface and
visualization tools to be developed will enable easy access to current as well
as historically important research in a format suitable for a variety of
educational purposes. In this regard the undergraduate population will be
especially well-served.&lt;br/&gt;Researchers generally will benefit from access
to information presented at a range of levels of expertise, and enhanced ability
to conduct cross-disciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;