* 0318551
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Understanding Abrupt Climatic Disturbance in the Aptian-Albian (Mid-Cretaceous)
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2007
* Timothy Bralower, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2007
* USD 71,840.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Some of the best evidence for the effects of abrupt
environmental change on the Earth's biosphere and geochemical cycles can be
found in Cretaceous strata. These rocks contain clear evidence for drastically
altered atmospheric composition and oceanic circulation that resulted in
widespread, episodic, and geologically ephemeral (~0.5 to 1 m.y.) oceanic anoxic
events (OAEs). The recent documentation of negative C isotope excursions at the
base of some mid-Cretaceous OAE deposits, and a likely contemporaneous isotope
anomaly of greater magnitude delineated by the d13C values of early Aptian
terrestrial flora, suggest that environmental perturbation during the mid-
Cretaceous may have been the result of greenhouse-gas-driven warming at rates
comparable to those inferred for the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum, and
currently experienced by Earth over the last century. Thus detailed, integrative
study of these mid-Cretaceous events, such as will be carried out by this study,
holds potential for refining our understanding of abrupt climatic disturbance
during greenhouse warming.&lt;br/&gt;This investigation is designed to establish
the nature of changes in environmental boundary conditions during mid-Cretaceous
OAEs, and to interpret the temporal and mechanistic relationship of these
changes within the context of potential forcing mechanisms. Two oceanic anoxic
events that represent the most extreme and widespread environmental change are
being studied: (1) the early Aptian OAE1a (119.5 to 120.5 Ma), and (2) the late
Aptian to early Albian OAE1b (~108.5 to 113 Ma). Shelf and slope sections in the
Sierra Madre Oriental of Mexico that represent the most expanded sedimentary
records available, and for which we have developed a detailed
chronostratigraphic framework are the primary field area of study. These
platform deposits have accumulation rates 3 to 15 times higher than those
typical of deep-sea sequences that should provide clear lead-lag relationships
between the different proxy records. We will also investigate select deep-sea
records of the OAEs to define a more global signal and a wider paleo-depth
perspective. One of the fundamental and previously unexplored aspects of this
investigation is to unravel, where possible, on a 103 to105 yr time scale the
precise phase relationship between proxy records and the interactions,
responses, and feedbacks of their inferred environmental changes.&lt;br/&gt;The
research will integrate a series of stratigraphic, paleontologic, geochemical
and isotopic proxies of carbon and nutrient cycling, productivity, bottom-water
oxygenation, and sea level. Detailed nannofossil, and planktic and benthic
foraminiferal assemblage studies are being carried out to determine variation in
surface- and deep-water environments including changes in nutrient budgets,
productivity, water column structure, temperature gradients, and deep-water
oxygenation. Geochemical and isotopic records (d13Ccarb, d13Corg, TOC, %CaCO3,
and d34S) are being developed as proxies of carbon cycling, organic carbon
burial, productivity and anoxia. In order to develop a more complete
understanding of the environmental implications of our geochemical and isotopic
proxy records, we will compare their rate/phasing/amplitude relationships to
paleoecological trends inferred from microfossil assemblage data, and to the
relative sea-level history. Isotopic analysis of terrestrial vascular plant
matter in the Barremian through Albian interval of a deep-sea core (Site 398)
will provide an independent and highly sensitive indicator of disruption to
normal carbon cycling, as well as shifts in CO2 fluxes and carbon
reservoirs.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, we will carry out numerical experiments using a
box model for the carbon isotopic systematics of the ocean and a linked
biogeochemistry- 3D global ocean model in order to assess how the proxy records
and their inferred environmental conditions constrain a series of geological
'forcings' relevant to the hypothesized mechanisms for the origin of the OAEs.
The resulting set of high-resolution proxy records developed simultaneously from
statigraphically expanded sections, coupled with numeric modeling and data-model
comparisons should provide significant insight into the oceanographic and
atmospheric conditions underlying oceanic anoxic events. Moreover, this study of
abrupt environmental change associated with the classic Cretaceous OAEs should
provide an end-member model for biogeochemical cycling during greenhouse warming
of other geologic periods, including the current earth system.&lt;br/&gt;