* 0318581
* Intergroup Interactions: Mediating Role of Behavior Regulation
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Josette Shelton, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 01/31/2007
* USD 56,950.00

Since the momentous 1954 ruling by the U.S. Supreme Court mandating racial
desegregation as the law of the land, Whites and Blacks have come into
increasing contact with one another. Previous research has documented the
dramatic impact that individuals' attitudes and stereotypes can have on the
dynamics of intergroup interactions. The majority of this work, however, has
taken an "individualistic" approach, insofar as researchers study one side of
the dyadic intergroup interaction. The current research takes a step beyond this
approach by studying intergroup interactions from the perspective of both Whites
and Blacks simultaneously. This work will focus on how Whites' concerns about
appearing prejudiced, and Blacks' concerns about being the target of prejudice,
shape their own and their partner's affective and cognitive outcomes during
interracial interactions. Specifically, a paradoxical model of interracial
interactions is proposed which predicts that Whites' and Blacks' concerns with
prejudice negatively impact their own experiences in interracial interactions,
but positively impact their partners' experiences. Moreover, the proposed
research will examine the mediating factor of behavioral regulation in the
relationship between interpersonal concerns with prejudice and affective and
cognitive outcomes. It is predicted that Whites who are concerned with appearing
prejudiced attempt to control their nonverbal and verbal behaviors, which is
what leads to the differential impact in the dyad members' experiences.
Similarly, it is predicted that Blacks who are concerned about being the target
of prejudice use compensatory behavioral strategies, which lead to the
differential impact in the dyad members' experiences. These studies will enrich
our theoretical understanding of intergroup contact. Moreover, the research will
provide information to help improve the psychological well-being of
underrepresented ethnic minority groups during interpersonal interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;