* 0318404
* Collaborative Research: Holocene Climatic Variability in Southern Alaska -- Quantitative Estimates of Temperature and Precipitation, Warm Intervals, and Possible Cyclicity
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Feng Sheng Hu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2008
* USD 390,054.00

This award will collect new data to investigate the nature of Holocene climatic
variability in southern Alaska. New data generated in the project will be
integrated with similar records from a developing network of sites to
reconstruct the spatial-temporal pattern of change in the North Pacific and
across the Arctic. The research team will reconstruct winter precipitation
(which in Southern Alaska is positively correlated with the strength of the
Aleutian low) and summer temperature (which places recent and projected climatic
warming in the long-term context). The team will focus on intervals of warmth
such as the early Holocene thermal maximum, the Medieval anomaly, and the 20th
century. Detailed climatic records of these intervals may offer the long-term
context for post-industrial warming and its impacts.

Recent scientific results from Southern Alaska indicate that pronounced
centennial-scale cycles occur throughout the Holocene which match those reported
from the North Atlantic region. Cycles imply predictability and therefore may be
key to understanding whether natural variations may exacerbate or mitigate
anthropogenic warming. New data from other sites in Southern Alaska are needed
to determine whether these cycles are reproducible and to understand their
possible origin in the climatic system.

Southern Alaska was chosen for the study because its maritime climate is highly
sensitive to changes in the strength and location of atmospheric-circulation
centers, especially the Aleutian low, which in turn is modulated by well-
recognized inter-decadal modes of variability in the North Pacific (e.g., the
Pacific North America pattern) and across the Northern Hemisphere (e.g., the
Artic Oscillation). In addition, paleoclimatic records from this region provide
an important link between previous paleoenvironmental research in Alaska to the
north and paleoceanographic research in the North Pacific to the south.

In general, the researchers will couple a lake (with a record of summer
precipitation) with a nearby glaciated basin that registers winter
precipitation. Monitoring of local weather and limnological conditions, sampling
of lake water, and analysis of modern/recent sediment will be conducted to
calibrate the proxies used for paleoclimatic reconstructions. Summer
temperatures will be derived using transfer functions of midge assemblages and
new techniques for analyzing the isotopic composition of specific organic
compounds and diatom opal. Winter precipitation will be derived using a well-
established correlation between summer temperature and winter precipitation at
the equilibrium line of glaciers (ELA). Fluctuations in ELA will be
reconstructed by studying the geomorphology of glacier forefields and the
physical properties of sediment in proglacial lakes. This award targets
particularly relevant aspects of climatic change by focusing on the impacts of
warmth on time scales applicable to policy and ecosystem management decisions.
Undergraduate and graduate students will receive first-hand training as part of
an interdisciplinary team of global-change researchers. The researchers will
produce educational materials for outreach to the general public via the
Paleoenvironmental Arctic Sciences (PARCS) website and by development of public
programs that will be used for visitor interpretive activities by the US Fish
and Wildlife Service and the US National Park Service.