* 0318116
* Collaborative Research on Trust, Race, Framing and Institutions
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,07/31/2008
* Rick Wilson, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Robert E. O'Connor
* 07/31/2008
* USD 133,490.00

This research focuses on the linkage between discrimination and trust. This
linkage is especially important when considering the important role that trust
plays in the success of initial encounters between strangers. In many social
settings trust and reciprocity can improve the well-being of both parties. Quite
often brief, face-to-face interactions are the primary basis by which
individuals initiate and build social networks in economic and political arenas.
If particular ethnic groups are not trusted in these brief interactions (through
discrimination), then individuals from those ethnic groups lose the opportunity
to prove themselves trustworthy. Consequently those individuals lose access to
many financial opportunities that stem from repeated interactions that are
fueled by trusting relationships.

Laboratory experiments are used by which strangers make decisions with one
another. The decisions involve financial stakes in which one person can trust
another, and in return, a counterpart can choose to be trustworthy. The
experiments manipulate three major variables: the ethnicity of the partners; the
framework in which the decision is cast; and the institutional guarantees
underlying the trust game. The experimental are novel in that they are conducted
via the internet, in real time, between multiple laboratories. The experiments
suggest policy interventions that can encourage initial trusting behavior
through minimizing discrimination.



