* 0318340
* Evaluation of Financial Structure
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Robert Townsend, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2007
* USD 369,010.00

Prop ID: 0318340 P I: Townsend, Robert M. Organization: National Opinion
Research Center Title: Evaluation of Financial Structure Institutional
Affiliation: University of Chicago

The purpose of the research is to develop theory and empirical methods that can
be used with micro and macro data to evaluate the financial structure of a given
economy. The principal application is Thailand, where the PI has been fielding a
large survey of households, small businesses, village funds, headmen, and joint
liability groups. The proposal is distinguished by its three-pronged strategy:
(1) take widely-accepted but rarely-tested models to the data, (2) engage in
non-parametric fact-finding missions, thus moving back and forth between
existing theory and data, finding patterns and documenting anomalies, and (3)
create new theory, e.g., dynamic mechanism design. One topic concerns the micro-
underpinnings of growth with increasing (and eventually decreasing) inequality
as observed in Thailand l976-l996. Utilized is a dynamic stochastic infinite
horizon model of transitional growth with endogenous financial deepening.
Theorems establish overall concavity via endogenous randomization and allow
computation. The model will be calibrated, estimated, and tested. As a non-
ergodic transitional economy, entire paths are influenced by idiosyncratic and
aggregate shocks, so a test statistic using Monte Carlo methods will be of
independent interest. The model would be further compared via growth and
inequality decompositions and predicted end-of-period income distributions to a
model of wealth-constrained occupation choice. Likewise these models assume full
access to the financial sector carries with it full risk-sharing in consumption
and immunity against income effects in investment. The panel data would be used
to gauge the performance of commercial banks, village funds, a government
development bank, and the informal sector against these standards during and
after the crisis, and in distinct regions. Tests, anomalies, and apparent policy
remedies need to identify obstacles to trade: limited commitment, moral hazard,
adverse selection and other impediments. Models of wealth-constrained occupation
choice, some standard with potential default (limited commitment), others with
exogenously incomplete contracts, and others with moral hazard are to be
compared. Maximum likelihood estimation and mechanism design formulations are
combined. Likewise, four polar but well-known models of joint liability groups
positing moral hazard, monitoring, adverse selection, or limited commitment
would be taken to data on repayment rates. Dynamic mechanism design models with
both unobserved investment (moral hazard) and unobserved returns (hidden
information) will be analyzed. This environment gives rise to imperfect risk
sharing and to history-dependent partial credit guarantee schemes with insurance
reserves, to be compared to those usually recommended.

BROADER IMPACT: PhD students from Chicago and other universities are well
integrated into the research, first in the classroom, and then as valuable
research assistants and collaborators. Undergraduates from Chicago and other
universities also contribute as summer interns, part time assistants, or full
time RA's before entering graduate work. Women and minorities in the US and
aboard play a key part. A field research, infrastructure unit with
anthropological, geographic and ecologic components would be continued in
Bangkok with subunits in the provinces. Enumerators include women and minority
language groups (Khmer, Lao), and include current and future Thai students, some
of whom visit the US for training (and US students visit Thailand). In addition,
the Thai SES survey and comprehensive Village Census data are part of the
construction of a broader data base/research archive, unified under a common
GIS, enhancing infrastructure for research and education and facilitating
dissemination. Policy implications follow at each step of the research
algorithm. Executive summaries of completed papers and seminars in Thailand, the
IMF, and IADB influence the formulation of public policy. A smaller, but
parallel effort continues in the US with the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago
and Minneapolis, studying households and small businesses in African-American,
Mexican, and Mong neighborhoods