* 0318050
* Centennial-Scale Climate Variability in New England During the Holocene:  New Insights from Compound-Specific Hydrogen Isotope Analysis
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Yongsong Huang, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2008
* USD 318,314.00

This award aims to acquire the first set of centennial-scale, high-resolution
hydrogen isotope records of Holocene climate variations for New England from
five selected lakes. The lakes lie in a south to north transect, and have
similar hydrology to Crooked Pond, MA which has been shown to record the
temperature changes for the last 14,000 years. One lake has annual lamination,
allowing further calibration of hydrogen isotope proxy against instrumental
records. The approach is particularly suited for studying New England lakes
because carbonate minerals (which have provided numerous high-resolution climate
records based upon stable isotopes of oxygen) are not preserved in New England
lake sediments. This research will provide new and independent measurements of
Holocene climate change in New England with resolution more than one order of
magnitude higher than currently available data (mainly pollen assemblages and
lake level data). The new data acquired from this work will be a critical step
for understanding the fundamental mechanisms of the Holocene climate variation
and predicting the future climate change in North America. Several fields and
research goals will benefit from further development of the techniques to
reconstruct lake water Deuterium from compound specific isotope analyses of
organic matter. There is graduate student training on this project.