* 0318258
* ADVANCE Leadership Award:  Collaborative Research:  Leadership Skills and Community Building Program for Junior Women Engineering Faculty in Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Rosalyn Hargraves, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Mitchneck
* 09/30/2009
* USD 190,613.00

The goal of this proposed work is to establish a regionally-organized, self-
sustaining leadership training program for junior women faculty in engineering
disciplines. By simultaneously training women engineering faculty in leadership
and constructing a regional peer-mentoring network, the investigators hope to
increase job performance and satisfaction for academic women in engineering,
thus increasing both retention and advancement. The proposed activity is based
on a pilot program conducted in the Northeast and will fund a three-year series
of &lt;br/&gt;regional meetings in the mid-Atlantic that will provide leadership
training, facilitate networking, and will be used as a model for other regions
of the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of this proposed
program are to: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Train junior women engineering faculty
in leadership, communication and conflict management through an experiential
learning program; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Educate women about the academy
through an "insider's perspective" from a senior woman academic
engineer;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Enable and foster peer-mentoring and regional
networking among junior women faculty in engineering; and
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Promote the expansion of the program throughout the
United States. &lt;br/&gt;