* 0318045
* Diagnosing, Modeling, Interpreting, and Leveraging Spatial Relationships in Time-Series-Cross-Section Data
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Jude Hays, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2009
* USD 286,440.00

Social scientists recognize that observations in time-series-cross-section
(TSCS) datasets will usually correlate across time and space. As Beck and Katz
(1996) noted, their empirical analyses typically reflect one of two perspectives
on these temporal and spatial dependencies. Some see such correlations as a
nuisance. These analysts' concerns surround the drawing of accurate causal
inferences about relations between other explanatory variables and the dependent
variables; interest in temporal and spatial dependence arises only insofar as
such dependence might jeopardize these theoretically more-central inferences.
Given these goals, they do not always see a need to model spatial (or temporal)
dependence directly. They argue, sometimes incorrectly, that the only cost of
failing to do so lies in reduced efficiency, and that, therefore, estimation of
standard errors robust to spatial (and temporal) correlation may suffice to
ensure sound inferences. Others have more-substantive interest in spatial (and
temporal) dependence and attempt to model these relationships directly. Standard
practice in political science is now to model dynamics (i.e., temporal
dependence) directly, typically with lags of the dependent variable, and to
address spatial dependence solely by applying panel-corrected (robust) standard-
errors. Thus, researchers commonly treat spatial dependence as a nuisance. In
this project, the researchersargue, however, that direct modeling of spatial
dependence (plus robust standard-errors perhaps) is always superior, regardless
of the substantive interest in these relationships. Directly modeling spatial
dependence enhances efficiency and, under many circumstances, is necessary to
obtain unbiased coefficient estimates for non-spatial regressors. If, e.g., both
dependent and independent variables correlate spatially, yet the statistical
model ignores these correlations or relegates their role to adjusting standard-
error estimates, the resulting inefficient coefficient estimates will also tend
to misstate (i.e., bias) the direct effects of explanatory variables (adding to
them the effects of spatial diffusion or of omitted stimuli that correlate
across space). This also implies biased hypothesis tests, with null hypotheses
rejected more or less often than truly warranted. &lt;br/&gt;Understandably,
analysts uninterested in spatial relationships per se will want to employ simple
proxies for more-complicated diffusion processes or omitted spatially correlated
stimuli. The researchers investigate spatial lags and indicators as two such
simple proxies. Those more directly interested in spatial dependence,
contrarily, will prefer more sophisticated modeling techniques to estimate the
possibly complex diffusion patterns in their data. For these purposes, the
investigators explore spatial analogues to estimators from econometric
approaches to dynamic-panel models (e.g., Hsiao 1986; Baltagi
1995).&lt;br/&gt;This sophisticated methodological investigation is addressed
both to social-science &lt;br/&gt;researchers directly interested in spatial
relationships (spatial substance) and to those primarily concerned to make
optimal inferences regarding other substantive relationships given spatially
dependent data (spatial nuisance). Building from analogies to similar, better-
explored issues arising in temporal dependence and through analytic derivation
and Monte Carlo experimentation, the investigators: (1) detail the conditions
under which failing to model spatial dependence directly (or relegating its role
to standard-error adjustment) renders other coefficient estimates biased or
merely inefficient, exploring bias and inefficiency magnitudes under varying
spatial-dependence conditions; (2) distinguish spatial diffusion from correlated
responses to omitted spatially correlated factors conceptually and explore the
properties of alternative approaches to making this distinction empirically; (3)
develop and evaluate several non-, semi-, and parametric tests for and gauges of
spatial correlation, with and without spatial lags in the model; (4) compare the
properties of simple proxies for full models of the true spatial-diffusion or
common omitted-factors--e.g., spatial dummies or symmetric spatial-lags
comprised of averages of other cross-section units. dependent variables each
time-period--to each other, to PCSE's alone, and to differing methods of
estimating fuller models.&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will create and publish
freely statistical-software algorithms to implement, and, where potentially
useful, pedagogical modules, to teach, all of the techniques that they develop
and explore&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;