* 0318851
* SBIR Phase I:  Coherence-gated Backscatter Particle Sizing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Charles Lysogorski, North Dancer Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,596.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will show proof
of principle for &lt;br/&gt;an innovative optical technique using backscattered
laser light to perform particle sizing &lt;br/&gt;measurements. Limitations of
existing systems include the need to measure transmitted &lt;br/&gt;instead of
reflected light, the inability to make accurate measurements in dense particles
&lt;br/&gt;fields, and the inability to characterize particle shape. Phase I
research will lead to the &lt;br/&gt;realization of a unique diagnostic system
capable of fast, non-invasive measurements in &lt;br/&gt;media of high
turbidity; use of backscattered, not transmitted, light; solid-state fiber optic
&lt;br/&gt;construction; cost effective gain-guided laser diodes for light
sources; and assembly &lt;br/&gt;from commercial-off-the-shelf components.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particle sizing techniques are critical for process
characterization and control in diverse &lt;br/&gt;areas of manufacturing and
research. The worldwide market for particle sizing &lt;br/&gt;instruments has
been estimated at $300 million. Industries using particle sizing include
&lt;br/&gt;agrochemical, cement, ceramics, cosmetics, personal care, soil
testing, wastewater &lt;br/&gt;processing, paints, inks and other surface
coatings. The proposed system will introduce &lt;br/&gt;a patentable new
technology to the field of particle sizing by the novel extension of a
&lt;br/&gt;proven commercial technique. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;