* 0318801
* Cell Differentiation and Organogenesis in Aspergillus
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Bruce Miller, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P.  Jack
* 08/31/2009
* USD 375,000.00

0318801&lt;br/&gt;Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The filamentous fungus
Aspergillus nidulans has multiple developmental programs, each with a unique set
of differentiated cell types that are organized into tissues, organs and higher
order structures. Devel-opmental landmarks include spore germination and the
establishment of true filamentous hyphae, the ac-quisition of developmental
competence (Tc), and the asexual (mitotic) and sexual (meiotic) reproductive
cycles. Fundamental processes required for these events include the ability to
correctly respond to diverse extrinsic and intercellular signals and to
correctly transduce this information to elicit necessary changes in gene
expression. In addition, development-specific gene expression must be correctly
integrated with al-terations in cell polarity and cell cycle regulation and
specialized nuclear movement events. A. nidulans is a classical model organism
for developmental genetics and a representative of a major group of Asco-mycete
fungi that include important animal and plant pathogens. Also included are human
pathogens that are increasingly problematic as the population of
immunosuppressed persons increases. Potential out-comes of the work include a
comparative approach to understanding how diverse fungal species use con-served
regulatory proteins and signaling mechanisms in different ways to control
biological processes such as self/non-self recognition at both the cellular and
nuclear level, zygote formation (karyogamy) and gametogenesis (meiosis and
ascosporogenesis). From a broader perspective, this project's objectives ad-
dress mechanistic questions concerning the regulation of cell differentiation
and organogenesis, processes that are fundamental developmental events in all
complex eucaryotic organisms. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Recent studies indicate
that the filamentous fungi possess a regulatory network linking signal molecules
to cell differentiation events that differs from the budding yeast paradigm.
This is consistent with the more complex life cycle of fungi that form diverse
multicellular structures. This project's central hypothe-sis is that a study of
organogenesis in A.nidulans will identify new genes and regulatory mechanisms
that will provide novel models for eucaryotic multicellular development and
reproductive biology. The spe-cific goals of this project are to use a key
transcriptional regulator, SterileA, as an entry point into path-ways
controlling the initiation of meiotic reproduction and the differentiation of
sexual reproductive structures. SteA (Sterile) controls fertilization events and
ascogenous tissue development. steA is con-stiuitively expressed, indicating
that SteA interacting proteins control SteA function in response to signal-ing
pathways. Interacting proteins will be identified by co-immunoprecipitation of
protein complexes (a proteomic approach) and by screening a yeast two-hybrid
library expressing A. nidulans developmentally regulated cDNAs. Specific
interactions with MpkB (ERK1 type MAPK) and cAMP-dependent protein kinases will
also be tested. Direct SteA target genes representing the downstream effects of
SteA activa-tion, will be identified using chromatin co-immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) analysis. This class of target genes likely represents key components of
the regulatory network controlling foci formation, fertilization and ascogenous
tissue differentiation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;For over 50 years, A.nidulans has
been a valuable tool for teaching classic eucaryotic genetics and, more recently
molecular genetics, to young scientists at the undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral levels. A project goal is to train productive new scientists.
Therefore, this project includes young scientists at all levels and will provide
them with research opportunities and learning experiences in the areas of
molecu-lar genetics and cellular and developmental biology. They will also have
the opportunity to hone commu-nication skills through daily interactions with
other colleagues, and to the larger scientific community, through publications,
posters and oral presentations at regional and national meetings. &lt;br/&gt;