* 0318677
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Room Temperature, Mid-infrared Thin Disk Laser
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Susan Kutcher, BRIMROSE CORPORATION OF AMERICA
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project involves the development
of material that is suitable for the fabrication of a tunable, room temperature,
mid-infrared thin disk laser. Novel, tunable room temperature solid-state laser
material using transition metal doped Cd1-xMnxTe has recently been developed.
Lasing up to 3.01 microns with a tuning range of 2.1 to 3.1 microns, the widest
ever reported was demonstrated; and quasi-cw lasing in Cd0.55Mn0.45Te:Cr was
demonstrated. Calculations of the gain profile indicate that the material is
capable of operation up to 3.4 micron. However, problems related to the
inhomogeneity of the dopant concentration and the low thermal conductivity of
the material have hindered the development of a laser device. In this work,
problems related to the thermal conductivity will be alleviated by thinning the
CdMnTe crystal to approximately 250 micron prior to doping, the homogeneity of
the chromium will be improved through a systematic study of the doping process
aided by theoretical and computational modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications of this technology include infrared
countermeasures, mid-IR spectroscopy, active/ hyperspectral imaging, mid-IR room
temperature power limiting, atmospheric measurements, optical communications,
remote sensing, medicine, and environmental studies. Numerous civilian
industries such as the aviation, communications, meteorological and the
chemical/petroleum industries are potential customers for this
technology.&lt;br/&gt;