* 0318466
* Private, Public, or Cooperative? Organizational Form and Economic Diversity in the U.S. Electrical Utility Industry, 1900-1950
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Marc Schneiberg, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 06/30/2006
* USD 85,589.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When do consumers and local governments pursue
cooperative or publicly owned alternatives to for-profit corporations? What
conditions foster such alternatives to dominant forms of economic organization?
Since the 1900s, Americans have depended heavily on private, investor owned
utility corporations for generating, transmitting, and distributing electricity.
During this time private utilities helped build a technologically sophisticated,
national electricity system. At the same time, however, many private utility
corporations regularly failed to act in consumers' or the public interest by
working aggressively to eliminate competition, corrupting public officials, and
routinely charging high rates, while leaving whole classes of communities under-
or unserved. In response, consumer groups, reformers, and local public officials
pursued new forms of power provision, organizing over 2500 local, publicly owned
municipal utilities between 1900 and 1930 and nearly 1000 electrical
cooperatives during the late 1930 and early 1940s. This study is an historical
and quantitative analysis of when and how Americans consumers pursued
alternatives to private corporations and regulated monopoly in the critical
electric power infrastructure sector. I draw hypotheses from sociological,
historical, and rational-choice institutionalism to examine how the economics of
organization induced actors to turn to public and cooperative enterprise, and
how politics, existing organizational ecologies, and institutional embeddedness
enabled actors to pursue those forms. A key question here is whether public and
cooperative solutions to utility market problems were built on the
organizational legacies of struggles to establish alternatives to corporations
in other periods and sectors. The proposed research will contribute to
organizational analysis by shedding new light on the capacity of institutional
systems to support organizational diversity and the production of new
organizational forms, and it will revise current views of the organizational
history of American capitalism, documenting how the U.S. economy crystallized
around not one, but at least two logics or industrial orders during the critical
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. This study also will help to
foster a challenging and research based educational environment at Reed College
by providing undergraduate student assistants involved in the project with
extended, hands-on research training and a range of new research skills, while
producing data sets and techniques that can be used for course and research
based program development. Equally important, this study will provide
information on policy options currently being debated in the utility industry,
notably the use of public ownership and cooperatives to solve regulatory
failures in electrical utility markets.&lt;br/&gt;