* 0318701
* SBIR Phase I:  High Efficiency, Water-Vapor-Fueled Plasma Propulsion Thruster for Low-Power Satellite Attitude Control and Station-Keeping
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Rodney Petr, Science Research Laboratory Inc
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,976.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a compact,&lt;br/&gt;efficient, all-solid-state Gas-Fed Pulsed Plasma
Thruster (GF-PPT) that can perform&lt;br/&gt;critical orbit phase changes or
plane (inclination) changes for near- and intermediate earth&lt;br/&gt;orbit
satellites. The GF-PPT technology provides fuel-mass utilization efficiency
close to 100%, based on solid-state power modulators that allows high repetition
rate (10 kHz) pulsing of the thruster plasma discharge. This is achieved by
delivering multiple micropulses to the thruster during the entire operating
cycle of the gas delivery system. In the project the tasks will consist of
designing and fabricating the GF-PPT thruster, integrating the power supply with
the GF-PPT thruster and then characterizing and optimizing the electrical
performance of the thruster hardware. A detailed plan will be developed with the
Jet Propulsion Laboratory to test the proposed high efficiency GF-PPT in an
appropriate space chamber. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercially, the GF- PPT
developed in this program will have applications to a broad range of space
missions in both the government and private sectors. Significant fuel savings
will result from reduced propellant mass, which can be lowered by a factor of
three or more using an electric thruster, as compared with chemical thrusters.
Furthermore, the GF-PPT can operate with a wide range of propellants, including
water-vapor and hydrazine, and the solid-state electronics capability of GF-PPTs
can extend the useful life in station-keeping satellites 1-3 years, thereby
prolonging mission lifetime. The successful development of the proposed GF-PPT
can result in substantial (&gt;10-20%) reductions in launch costs and orbit
maneuvering costs. This can save the Federal Government hundreds of millions of
dollars per year, when one considers that the current NASA budget for space
transportation is over $2 billion/year, and the DoD invests approximately $4
billion per year launching satellites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;