* 0318544
* Traceability Based Dynamic Metrics as a Tool for Evaluating Partitioning Decisions in Object-Oriented Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 08/31/2002,05/31/2004
* Carl Chang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2004
* USD 94,633.00

This research investigates a new method of assessing predicted
performance&lt;br/&gt;characteristics of Object-Oriented software architectures.
As scenarios&lt;br/&gt;represent the anticipated runtime behavior of a system,
they can be used at&lt;br/&gt;a very early stage in the design to quantitatively
predict aspects of that&lt;br/&gt;behavior. The proposed approach can be applied
earlier than other existing&lt;br/&gt;methods such as simulations and executable
designs, and does not require&lt;br/&gt;special analytical skills. Early
assessment is an important risk mitigation&lt;br/&gt;technique, that can
contribute significantly to the task of building a&lt;br/&gt;distributed system
with a greater degree of confidence in its ability to&lt;br/&gt;perform as
required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves formally defining a set of
scenario-based metrics and&lt;br/&gt;a corresponding system-wide dynamic metrics
model. A strongly typed&lt;br/&gt;traceability scheme is defined to support the
definition and automated&lt;br/&gt;querying of relationships between performance
requirements, scenarios, and&lt;br/&gt;architectural components. Scenario
invocation rates are specified within&lt;br/&gt;the context of typical usage
patterns, and the relationship between&lt;br/&gt;scenarios is investigated to
determine when performance requirements should&lt;br/&gt;be propagated from one
scenario to another. A supporting tool is developed&lt;br/&gt;and used to
capture metrics and validate them against runtime and
simulation&lt;br/&gt;measurements taken from a variety of distributed
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;