* 0318506
* Facilities Upgrades to the Geomicrobiology and Electron Microscopy Laboratory at Portland State University
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2004
* Sherry Cady, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 12/31/2004
* USD 80,990.00

0318506&lt;br/&gt;Cady&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports upgrades to the
geomicrobiology and electron microscope facilities available to researchers at
Portland State University. Specific equipment to be acquired included a Gatan
ion beam etching/coating systems for cleaning and conductively coating samples
prior to electron beam microanalysis, a Gatan tilt-rotate cryotransfer high
resolution transmission electron microscope (HR-TEM) stage, a high resolution
film scanner, image analysis software and a photographic quality printer. The
equipment will support research both within the Department of Geology and across
campus. The equipment will also support graduate, undergraduate and K-12 student
exposure to electron microscopy techniques that are crucial for emerging
nanoscience research initiatives. Research by faculty in the Geology Department
will focus on studies of hyperthermophilic biofilms and biogeochemical cycling
in iron-rich hot springs. Learning to recognize microbial biosignatures in
natural materials from extreme environments has implications for our
understanding of the evolution of life on earth. Micro and nanoscale techniques
for investigating microbial mineralization processes in extreme environments
also offers potential for discovering trace fossils of extraterrestrial biotic
activity.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;