* 0318152
* Collaborative Research: Calibration of Sr:Ca and d18O Proxies of the Southern Quahog, Mercenaria Campechiensis, to Reconstruct Late Holocene Climate, SW Florida
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Donna Surge, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 10/31/2004
* USD 206,028.00

This award will calibrate Strontium/Calcium ratios and delta oxygen-18 isotopes
from modern shells of the southern quahog clam, Mercenaria campechiensis, as
proxies for temperature and salinity, respectively, to generate low-latitude,
preindustrial, Late Holocene climate data derived from archaeological quahog
shells. To determine seasonal and spatial variability in physical and chemical
water properties, temperature, salinity, delta Oxygen-18 (water), delta
Carbon-13 (dissolved inorganic carbon), and Strontium/Calcium (water) in the
Charlotte Harbor estuary, southwest Florida, will be measured/sampled during the
wet and dry seasons. These data will be used to construct predictive-model
shells for comparison with observed data. The southern quahog will be calibrated
by comparing observed shell data with predictive-model shells. The PIs will also
evaluate whether Strontium/Calcium and delta oxygen-18 (shell) in archaeological
quahogs can track temperature and salinity, respectively, by comparing the
predictive model to the geochemistry of modern shells and to known
archaeological data. The successful completion of this research will yield
multidisciplinary data with applications to a number of problems in the area of
global climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outreach component of this work
will be facilitated by the Florida Museum of Natural History's Randell Research
Center (RRC). Public education will target K-12 students (including inner-city
children) and teachers, the retired community, and others, via volunteerism,
newsletters, websites, tours, docent training, exhibits, lectures, and
workshops. In all these venues, the RRC promotes public archaeological and
ecosystem stewardship as part of its mission.