* 0318879
* SBIR Phase I:  Super Broadband Gain Medium for Next-Generation Optical Communications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Ping-hui Yeh, Optospace
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2004
* USD 99,556.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop a super
broadband, 1.27~1.61 micron, Amplified Spontaneous Emission (ASE) light source
for spectral test instrumentation. This innovation has significant market
potential. Spectral measurement is necessary for all components used in the
Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM) optical communication systems, in
particular, for next-generation WDM networking systems using the newest optical
fiber: zero-water-peak fiber, which eliminated the water absorption peak at 1.4
micron and extended the low-loss transmission window to 1.27~1.61 micron
continuously for the first time. This innovation would offer a solution for the
need of a super broadband gain medium that traditional gain media such as fiber
lasers and diode lasers cannot offer. This innovation has significant
intellectual merit. A disruptive technology would be used in this project. The
device module would be composed of a specialty crystal fiber with designed
single-mode confinement structure, directly pumped by diode laser. The overall
package would be compact with its output power coupled into a standard single-
mode fiber at a target of 100 mW. The novel transition and linkage between
conventional bulk-crystal optics and contemporary fiber optics would inspire
many publications and patents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project would
strengthen the U. S. technology leadership in WDM and would have a multiplier
effect to the overall optical-telecommunications industry. Moreover, this
innovation would establish a technology platform for a series of super broadband
amplification products, which would be among the key components enabling the
next-generation optical communications using super broadband zero-water-peak
fiber. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;