* 0319767
* Development of Instrumentation for Measurement of Microscopic Dynamic Motions in Physical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Ronald Gibson, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2006
* USD 275,434.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic behavior of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS),
microscopic weld-zone dynamics during&lt;br/&gt;ultrasonic welding, sonic-
infrared imaging for non-destructive evaluation of cracks, vibration-
assisted&lt;br/&gt;processing of nanocomposites and imaging of microscopic
vibro-acoustic sources are all subjects of current&lt;br/&gt;or proposed
multidisciplinary research programs at Wayne State University (WSU), and all of
these&lt;br/&gt;research efforts would be significantly enhanced by adding the
capability for precise measurement of&lt;br/&gt;complex high frequency
microscopic motions and the distribution of those motions over finite regions
in&lt;br/&gt;physical systems. Such measurement capabilities are not currently
available at WSU, and this project&lt;br/&gt;addresses that need by outlining a
program for systematic acquisition and development of new
instruments.&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition and development activities are tightly
integrated. &lt;br/&gt;The micro scanning laser vibrometer has the capability to
perform full modal analyses related to out-of-plane&lt;br/&gt;motions in micron-
sized regions, while the new 3-D Nano-imager will be developed to provide full
3-D&lt;br/&gt;motion measurements of nanometer-sized regions. The proposed 3-D
Nano-imager will be developed&lt;br/&gt;using two methods, a new optical
measuring method based on the inverse scattering phase retrieval,
and&lt;br/&gt;stroboscopic interferometer based three dimensional (3D)
measurement technology. Both systems are&lt;br/&gt;needed for the following
reasons; (1) motion measurements generated by the newly developed 3-D Nano-
Imager&lt;br/&gt;system must be validated by comparison with independent
measurements, and the micro scanning&lt;br/&gt;laser vibrometer system would
provide that validation capability, (2) the micro scanning laser
vibrometer&lt;br/&gt;system can measure out-of-plane motions of micron-sized
systems, whereas the developed 3-D Nano-Imager&lt;br/&gt;system will extend the
measurement capabilities to full 3-D motions of nanometer-sized
systems,&lt;br/&gt;(3) the micro scanning laser vibrometer system would be
available for our research immediately upon&lt;br/&gt;purchase and installation,
whereas it is anticipated that the development of the 3-D Nano-Imager
system&lt;br/&gt;will take at least one year, (4) both systems can be used to
some degree in all of the research projects&lt;br/&gt;described in this
proposal.&lt;br/&gt; The outcome of the research conducted with the requested
instruments will add&lt;br/&gt;significantly to the knowledge base in the areas
of MEMS devices, sensors based testing, ultrasonic&lt;br/&gt;welding,
nondestructive testing of materials and structures, processing of
nanocomposites, and imaging of&lt;br/&gt;noise and vibration sources. Graduate
and undergraduate students will be trained in state-of-the-
art&lt;br/&gt;techniques using state-of-the-art instruments. The results of the
research will also be a source &lt;br/&gt;of course projects for a large pool of
local engineers, undergraduate and graduate students, &lt;br/&gt;particularly
from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;