* 0319442
* SBIR Phase I:     Photonic Crystal-Based Optical Fiber Temperature Sensors for Process Control
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Bradley Davis, Nanosonic Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop novel
photonic crystal-based optical fiber sensors for the rapid measurement of
temperature for real-time process control and civil structure monitoring
applications. A patented molecular-level electrostatic self-assembly (ESA)
processing method will be used to form multi-layered dielectric stacks with
periodically interleaved high and low refractive indices on the distal ends of
optical fibers to achieve one-dimensional photonic crystal sensor structures.
Such dimensionally-resonant optical structures can be used in several
configurations to measure temperature change by detecting thermally-induced
resonance mode frequency shifts. Both the temperature measurement range and
resolution of such physically small and mechanically robust sensors can be
controlled by varying packaging material constitutive properties. Similar
devices suggests a typical dynamic range of 80C, resolution of 0.2C and response
time of microseconds, orders of magnitude faster than conventional contact-based
thermal probes. During Phase I a major research university would assist through
thin film materials analysis and optical device testing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an immediate need for such fast response time
temperature sensors in a commercialized and field-deployed instrumentation
system for the oil and gas industry. Fast response time temperature sensors have
specific applications in closed-loop feedback control systems. Similar photonic
crystal-based sensors may be applied to measurements of strain, pressure and
chemical and biological targets.&lt;br/&gt;