* 0319327
* STTR Phase I:     Novel OptoCeramic Materials for High Efficiency Ceramic Lasers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Kewen Li, Boston Applied Technologies, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,986.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop
next-generation ceramic materials for high-energy laser applications. The
significance of this innovation include (1) high concentration doping
capability; (2) a comprehensive doping material and concentration screening
which can be easily and timely accomplished; (3) an innovative material system
capable of multifunction performance; (4) a unique ceramic material which is
very low-cost. Success in the ceramic laser material development will lead to an
exciting new family of luminescent ceramics capable of delivering high
efficiency lasers at many different wavelengths. In the project the tasks will
involve predetermining the dopant materials, sintering the PLZT powders
including optimization, combinatorial screening of the materials coupled with
characterization to identify the optimum composition.

Commercially, the technology developed in this program will greatly benefit many
technology sectors. High efficiency laser materials developed from this project
would lead to high power and low cost solid-state laser systems that would have
tremendous strategic and commercial values to military and civilian
applications. These include remote sensing, target recognition and detection,
missile guidance illumination, measurements from air- and space-borne platforms,
multiple wavelengths next-generation measurement systems, and industrial laser
machining.