* 0319571
* MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Nutrient Analyses in Ecological Research
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Jonathan Brown, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 135,887.00

A grant has been awarded to Grinnell College under the direction of Dr. Peter
Jacobson to purchase a suite of three instruments with a common focus: to
elucidate the influences of nutrient dynamics on ecological systems. This
equipment - a Nitrogen/Carbon Analyzer, an Automated Ion Analyzer and a
Combustion Analyzer -- will be used in collaborative student/faculty research
projects spanning the breadth of ecology, from ecophysiological studies of
plants to large-scale ecosystem impacts of hydrologic change. The instruments'
ability to automate many time-consuming procedures will make these
investigations more efficient and more effective learning tools for students,
who will be able to spend more of their time exploring appropriate modes of
analysis and understanding the applications of their data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the equipment will enable investigations of:
(1) the mechanisms by which fire and grazing affect prairie arthropod
communities; (2) the nutrient-sensitivity of resource trade-offs in plant
reproduction; (3) the environmental factors that shape arbuscular and
ectomycorrhizal fungal communities; and (4) the influence of flood pulses on
nutrient dynamics and production in riparian forests. In addition to these
studies, the instrumentation will significantly increase the range of
investigations available to students in the laboratory and field while providing
them with invaluable experience using state-of-the-art analytical techniques in
ecological studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities have a number
of broader impacts. Grinnell College's dedication to integrating research and
undergraduate education makes automated, user-friendly instruments essential.
The proposed activities would allow students to understand both the principles
and applications of nutrient analysis techniques, while involving them in
authentic research with faculty. These activities will contribute in diverse
ways to our understanding of nutrient dynamics in ecological systems, while
significantly enhancing the College's infrastructure by providing sophisticated
tools for ecological research and education. As with other instrumentation at
Grinnell College, this new equipment will be integrated into the curriculum at
all levels, enriching the research training and learning of a broad cross-
section of students. &lt;br/&gt;