* 0319432
* STTR Phase I:  Integrated Magneto-Optic Current Sensor for Power Electronics Modules
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Paul Duncan, AIRAK, INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to
develop magneto-optical current and temperature sensors capable of direct
integration into power electronic modules, with the design goal of improving
reliability and survivability of the power conversion and control circuitry.
Existing power electronics designs generally use one of three components to
sense current in power devices or in the control subsystem: Hall effect
transducers, resistive shunts, and current transformers. Each of these
components and their associated interface circuitry, while functional, are
becoming obsolete as switching frequencies of power conditioning equipment
surpass 100 kHz (10e5 Hz), and as the power contained in these circuits exceeds
1 MW (10e6 watt). Additionally, miniaturization of these components has become
increasingly difficult and has not kept the same pace as with the
miniaturization of power electronic modules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Phase I
program will develop a hybrid electro-optic power electronics module (HE-OPEM)
capable of measuring local current and temperature on the module using optical
methodologies. When coupled with on-board intelligence, expensive and high-power
density power electronic modules will be able to sense potential fault
conditions in nanoseconds, resulting in their ability to self-regulate their
operation and protect themselves from catastrophic failure. This is not possible
with today's technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technology
developed under this program could be used in all high-power, power electronic
semiconductors to self-monitor self-regulate their operation, leading to systems
that have higher reliability and lower corrective maintenance costs. &lt;br/&gt;