* 0319092
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Sex Pheromone-Based System to Suppress Populations of Soybean Aphids
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Junwei Zhu, MSTRS Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,912.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to demonstrate
the feasibility of using a sex-pheromone based mass trapping and mating
disruption system for soybean aphids. The soybean aphid, Aphis glycines, is a
newly invasive aphid pest, and the only aphid pest on soybeans. This species
causes major economic losses either as direct pests or as vectors of plant
viruses. This Phase I project will identify and optimize the sex pheromone blend
of Aphis glycines, and develop effective controlled release dispensers to be
used for disrupting the mating of females, either by classical pheromone mating
disruption or by mass trapping. Novel ways of inexpensively procuring large
amounts of the pheromone components will also be initiated. The research builds
on preliminary studies showing that the soybean aphids can be cultured in the
laboratory under controlled conditions to produce sexually active adults.
Preliminary experiments have also indicated the production in A. glycines of two
compounds known to serve as pheromone components in other aphid species. These
compounds evoke upwind flight by males in the wind tunnel, and are attractive to
both males and gynoparous female soybean aphids in the field.

The commercial application of this project is in the area of pest management for
soybean crops. It is expected that the technology developed against the aphid
species in soybean may also be applicable against other aphid pests in other
economically important crops.