* 0319497
* SBIR Phase I:   Determining the best modulation scheme and data rate improvement for ship's hull based acoustic modems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Kushal Talukdar, Harris Acoustic Products Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2004
* USD 99,940.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase-I project is aimed at increasing
the data rate for modems that uses ultrasonic acoustic energy through metal
structures as the means of communication. Wireless networking based on Radio
Frequencies (RF) is not very effective within enclosed metal structures such as
the hulls of ships. This technique can be used to overcome such limitations and
can establish a local wireless network for data transfer among sensors located
in various parts of the vessels. The through the hull communications technology
is at a nascent but proven state. A better understanding of the medium and the
associated issues is needed before extending such technology to a broader
context such as ballast water monitoring. The goal of this research is to
establish the target data rate, determine the best modulation scheme to achieve
it and then verify it on a real shipboard environment&lt;br/&gt;This technology
will be best used in the area of compliance and verification of ballast water
exchange or treatments in a cost effective way. Laws dictating such treatments
are already in effect in some parts of the US and other foreign countries to
prevent invasion by the various micro-organisms into the native coastal eco-
systems. An automated system of compliance that will collect information from
various ballast tanks on a ship and create a report will reduce the burden on
ship operators and law enforcement agencies. Developing an effective technology
for monitoring the ballast water has a broader impact on the society. It has the
potential to save economies depending on coastal resources and ensure the
preservation of the local eco-systems for the future
generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;