* 0319016
* Origin and Hemispheric Linkage of Millennial-Scale Climate Variability in the Pacific
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Alan Mix, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2006
* USD 699,758.00

This award will assess various mechanisms thought to be responsible for
millennial-scale variability in surface and shallow subsurface water masses in
high-sedimentation rate cores from the eastern margin of the Pacific over the
past ~65,000 years. Three key regions were chosen for detailed study in the
Northeast Pacific, Equatorial Pacific, and Southeast Pacific, because they offer
an opportunity to test three hypotheses that might affect patterns of climate
variability derived from coupled atmosphere-ocean model studies.

The first hypothesis assumes that sea-surface temperature anomalies are
transmitted rapidly from the North Atlantic to the North Pacific via the
atmosphere. This implies a strong response in the North Pacific and little or no
response in the south.

The second hypothesis assumes that global temperature anomalies propagate slowly
in response to changes in thermohaline circulation and predicts large changes in
intermediate water temperatures and ventilation in the Southeast Pacific that
are shifted in phase relative to changes in the northern hemisphere.

The third hypothesis assumes that rapid climate oscillations originate in the
tropical Pacific via El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) type mechanisms with
attendant effects on the ocean and atmosphere. This implies major changes in
sea-surface temperatures (SST) and pycnocline structure in the eastern tropical
Pacific and transmission of energy poleward into both hemispheres along the
eastern margin.

The researchers expect, based on a careful selection of sampling sites and the
application of high-resolution paleoclimatic proxies, to establish the spatial
"fingerprint" of millennial-scale variability in the Eastern Pacific. This is
important because it will help resolve the primary mechanisms responsible for
millennial-scale changes in the region especially the linkage between the
hemispheres and the interaction between tropical and extratropical climate
variability.