* 0319877
* RUI:  Acquisition of Geophysical Survey Instruments for Archaeological Research and Training
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Andrew White, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2005
* USD 92,961.00

With support from the National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation
award, Dr. Robert G. McCullough and Andrew A. White of the Indiana University-
Purdue University Archaeological Survey (IPFW-AS) will purchase three major
pieces of geophysical remote sensing equipment for use in archaeological
research and training: a ground penetrating radar (GPR) unit, a gradiometer, and
a resistivity meter. These instruments are used to collect data about near-
surface archaeological deposits in an efficient and non-invasive manner. GPR
uses radio waves to actively probe the earth to depths up to several meters. A
gradiometer detects fluctuations in the earth's natural magnetic field caused by
the presence of cultural materials such as fired clay or rock that has been
heated. A resistivity meter measures how well sediment conducts an electrical
current between two points on the surface. All of these instruments have their
advantages and shortcomings. They are often most effective when used in
combination.

Aboriginal house structures, earthen embankments and mounds, ditches, hearths,
storage pits, and food processing facilities that are preserved beneath the
ground surface are often detectable and identifiable using one or more of these
instruments. Information about community layout (e.g., the number and placement
of domestic structures, defensive structures and their openings, and communal
areas) is essential to the interpretation of large, complex village sites.
Detailed information about the locations of such features on a large (site-
level) scale is nearly impossible to carefully, cost-effectively collect using
traditional excavation and survey techniques alone.

In addition to their application in pure research, the state-of-the-art
instruments requested by the IPFW-AS will be used as a vehicle to integrate the
professional and student archaeological communities at IPFW. The incorporation
of the equipment into ongoing archaeological research projects and the existing
educational program will enhance infrastructure in both these areas and assist
in encouraging a culture of student exploration and research. Collection, use,
and analysis of geophysical instruments and data will be taught in the context
of both field and laboratory classes. Unlike more traditional archaeological
research, the collection of geophysical data does not entail the irreversible
alteration of archaeological resources and the attendant permit, laboratory, and
curation requirements. Thus geophysical data are ideally suited to use in
student research projects. Involvement of undergraduate students in an ongoing
atmosphere of exploration and innovation will benefit the scholarly development
of the students as well as the research itself.

Acquisition of these instruments by the IPFW-AS will have a significant impact
on the capacity of both undergraduate student and professional researchers at
IPFW to perform sophisticated archaeological research. By integrating training
in geophysical methods into laboratory and field courses, as well as encouraging
its use in the context of supervised undergraduate research projects, students
will be motivated to develop and pursue their own research. Further, acquisition
of the requested equipment will increase our research capacity for years to
come, thus increasing opportunities for beneficial interactions among
researchers, students, and the public. In the context of ongoing research
projects, the IPFW-AS has been building strong relationships with the interested
public as well as state and local government agencies to develop an
archaeological research park, interpretive center, and curation facility in
central Indiana. Acquisition of these geophysical survey instruments will allow
the IPFW-AS's programs to continue to expand and to involve an ever-broadening
audience in an active, sophisticated, and successful program of archaeological
research and education.