* 0319666
* SBIR Phase I:  Rapid Detection of Bacterial Contaminants Using Micro-fluidic Biochips
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Laila Razouk, Biovitesse, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop
micro-fluidic biochips for the rapid viability detection of bacterial
microorganisms from water, specifically for the pharmaceutical and bio-
pharmaceutical manufacturing applications. There are over 500 million bacterial
tests performed in the industrial microbiological control market
(pharmaceutical, food and environment) every year and over 200 million of those
are for pharmaceutical applications where sterility of water, buffer media, and
any injectable fluids is a necessity. Over 70 percent of these tests performed
are for the detection of total viable microorganisms using traditional colony
culture count (2-7 days). Once any viable microorganisms are detected, more
detailed genetic analysis or immunoassays are performed for identification
(another 5-10 days). This Phase I project will build on technology licensed from
Purdue University to develop part of its first product which will incorporate a
micro-fluidic lab-on-a-chip. This chip will use dielectrophoresis to concentrate
cells in an aqueous buffer, and micro-scale impedance measurements to
electronically detect the viability of microorganisms from water samples in less
than 3 hours. The follow-on Phase II project will develop the complete prototype
system that could be beta-site tested at biopharmaceutical manufacturing
facilities.

The initial commercial application of this project will be in the bio-
pharmaceutical industry. Additional applications in the areas of food
processing, environmental monitoring and homeland security are also envisioned
in the future.