* 0319974
* SBIR Phase I:     High Sensitivity Micro Strain Sensor Using Magnetostrictive Spin Dependent Tunneling Materials
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Dexin Wang, NVE CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to
demonstrate a test strain&lt;br/&gt;sensor in microchip form using
magnetostrictive spin dependent tunneling materials. Silicon
piezoresistive&lt;br/&gt;materials have high sensitivity but operate at low
temperatures, whereas metallic films have much better temperature capability but
much lower sensitivity. The limitations in sensitivity/temperature,
susceptibility to ESD, cost, and others have precluded the technology to be used
in several key commercial and military applications. An approach based on the
high sensitivity, wide temperature range, low power, small size and low cost of
similar devices is proposed. Although as a magnetic device, the sensor will be
insensitive to external magnetic fields of practical magnitude, using a
proprietary approach. The feasibility will be demonstrated by fabricating test
devices; constructing a miniature strain tester; and achieving high strain
sensitivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that these sensors will find
rapid initial acceptance in application areas of industrial control, civil
engineering projects, and robotics, and then expand to other applications. This
sensor&lt;br/&gt;will function under very adverse conditions of temperature, ESD
and radiation. Unlike&lt;br/&gt;other magnetic sensors the device will have no
response to magnetic fields, either natural&lt;br/&gt;or created by the
equipment it is trying to control. Because the sensor is
manufactured&lt;br/&gt;by microelectronics techniques it will be low cost and
the packaging requirements will not&lt;br/&gt;have to include many of the
techniques employed today to "safeguard" the existing
sensor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;