* 0319801
* Reducing Eyewitness Identification Errors: Procedural Strategies
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Steven Penrod, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Susan Brodie Haire
* 12/31/2006
* USD 298,398.00

Eyewitness researchers have recently started examining the impact on eyewitness
accuracy of a variety of alternative lineup and photo-array procedures that
might be employed by the police. One major procedural innovation is the
sequential array. Instead of being presented all at one time-the traditional
simultaneous method--the sequential method presents lineup/array members one at
a time and requires witnesses to identify or reject each individual. It is clear
that sequential procedures can appreciably reduce mistaken identifications (at
the cost of some lost correct identifications) and there are indications that
the reason for the improvement is a change in the decision-making strategies
employed by witnesses (a shift from a relative process in which simultaneous
faces are compared to one another) to an absolute process in which array members
are compared with memory for the perpetrator. However, existing research on
these processes simply does not resolve the theoretical question of whether the
salutary effects of sequential procedures are realized in part or wholly through
simple shifts in decision criteria produced by changes in procedure or are
exclusively the result of actual (and/or reported) changes in decision
strategies. Because existing research does not answer the process question
authoritatively, we do not know answers to the following questions-the targets
of the research: 1. Effects of Instructions. Can the substantial reductions in
false identifications (but smaller loss in correct identifications) achieved
with sequential procedures (which draw objections from practitioners-
particularly prosecutors) be achieved with simple caution-inducing or
decisionmaking instructions? 2. Lineup Size. How much does lineup size matter
with respect, particularly, to sequential procedures. Can lineup instructions
offset any size effects? 3. Knowledge of Lineup Size. Does knowledge of the
number of faces to be viewed sequentially affect performance and are such
effects reduced with larger arrays or alternative instructions? 4. Position
Effects. Are there (substantial) position effects in simultaneous procedures
that might weigh against the procedure-or weigh in favor of placing suspects
relatively early in a sequence? 5. Reviewing. How much do stopping rules-whether
witnesses are permitted to "go back" and reexamine faces if they do not (or do)
make a selection on the first pass affect performance? 6. Multiple Choices.
Should witnesses should be permitted to make multiple choices from sequential
lineups? Do instructions affect the patterns of multiple choices? 7. Blindness.
Do multiple selection or re-examination procedures make sequential lineups even
more vulnerable to non-blind presentation biases (possible suggestion by police
conducting the procedures)? Do instructions that the presenting officer does not
know who the suspect is reduce non-blind effects? The intellectual merit of the
proposal is in its potential to answer these crucial questions.

The research has a broad impact on undergraduate teaching, the college, research
participation by underrepresented groups, the research community, and on
society. The project is designed to involve and provide instruction for students
in both undergraduate and masters degree programs. Undergraduates and masters
degree students will be involved as research assistants, with the specific goal
of promoting interest and training in research and interest in post-graduate
education. Research results will be used to promote discussion of research in
the classroom (of particular relevance at a criminal justice college). The data
will be made available for training in research methods and statistics.
Underrepresented groups will be involved in the entire process, as John Jay has
a diverse student body (60% minority students) and both participants and
research assistants will be sought in the student body. The existence of the
project will benefit the College by increasing its involvement in research--a
major goal of the administration. The research results will be broadly
disseminated in both the psychological and legal communities. Conference
presentations will be made at interdisciplinary conferences and those
conferences targeting legal policy makers. Results will be published in both
academic journals for access by psychologists and in law reviews for access by
the legal community. Data will be made available to other researchers and
interested parties. Additionally, data and results will be used to provide
instruction on research methods, statistics, psychology, and law in the
classroom. The results have the potential to benefit society as a whole because
they could highlight areas of improvement in legal practice. The proposal is
based on the premise that current legal practices have been created in the
absence of empirical data-which will be supplied by the studies-and may be
improved significantly.