* 0319184
* SBIR Phase I:    Microscale Interferometric Sensor for High Speed MEMS Metrology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Thomas Kurfess, MEMScan, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2004
* USD 87,282.00

This SBIR Phase I project investigate the scientific and technical feasibility
of an innovative micromachined optical interferometer as a quality control tool
for MEMS production. One of the barriers to the growth of MEMS both as an
enabling technology and as a new market is quality control. Quality control not
only provides quality assurance but also it provides feedback to optimize the
design, fabrication and assembly processes involved. The proposed microscale
position sensing grating interferometer (uPSGI) with electrostatically actuated
grating is itself microfabricated and integrated with optoelectronics. It
measures the displacement of MEMS with high resolution (sub-nm) and bandwidth
(&gt; MHz). In this project, a uPSGI with movable grating will be fabricated and
integrated into a microscope objective. The performance of the interferometric
will be tested on dynamic MEMS devices and the feasibility of parallel array
operation will be evaluated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology
converts the large-scale interferometric metrology system to a miniature sensor
using a patented technology. It can be tailored for specific needs of MEMS
manufacturers to reduce manufacturing costs, lead-time and waste of material and
to increase product reliability. Potential customers include all the MEMS
manufacturing companies.&lt;br/&gt;