* 0319026
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra High Thermal Conductivity Substrate for High Power Optoelectronics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Juan Sepulveda, INTERTEC ADVANCED MATERIALS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,985.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
high thermal conductivity, low coefficient of thermal expansion, and low weight
substrate material for optoelectronics packaging. The metal matrix composite
(MMC) system uses a high thermal conductivity metallic alloy as the continuous
metal matrix and ultra high thermal conductivity particulates as the discrete
reinforcement phase. Heat sinks produced using this process are near net shape
as fired, requiring minimum machining to meet specifications. The coefficient of
thermal expansion (CTE) of the material can be made to match that of the die
that will be placed on top. A good match to silicon and to gallium arsenide is
obtained by adjusting the composition for the composite. The composite has
better properties than other existing MMC substrates systems in the market. It
is lighter than Cu/W or Cu/Mo; has better thermal conductivity than Cu/W or
Al/SiC; and exhibits a better thermal expansion match to the die than any of
them. The uniqueness of this ultra high thermal conductivity metal matrix
composite is that the carrier substrates can be better designed to match the
thermal expansion characteristics of the chip or other heat-generating
components attached to the carrier substrate while also providing improved heat
transfer. Commercially, high thermal conductivity heat sink materials are in
high demand in fiber optic components intended for underwater and long haul
related applications including amplifiers, receivers, transmitters, tunable
lasers, modulators; also for voice and high speed data transmissions and medical
and research lasers. Other areas of application include RF power package
components that are used in wireless telecommunication infrastructure for
cellular phones, base stations, high definition television (HDTV), and satellite
communications. The materials also have important applications in advanced
automotive or ignition systems intended for aerospace applications, military
radar, and guidance systems.