* 0319936
* SBIR Phase I: Manufacturing and Testing of Nanocrystalline Hydroxyapatite Orthopedic Implants
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Edward Ahn, Angstrom Medica, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 04/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I project proposes to
develop forming and sintering processes suitable for the manufacture of
nanocrystalline hydroxyapatite orthopedic implants. Though hydroxyapatite's
osteoconductivity has generated interest in many clinical applications,
conventionally processed hydroxyapatite materials have been limited by their
poor sinterability and lack of mechanical strength attributed to poor phase
purity and homogeneity. Angstrom Medica, Inc. has optimized its nanostructure
hydroxyapatite powders for sinterability, mechanical strength and
nanocrystallinity. The nanocrystalline HAP monoliths appear to provide superior
compressive and bending strengths as well as fracture toughness, and contribute
to better osteoblast attachment, proliferation and mineralization. This project
will conduct the early process and product development of a marketable
nanocrystalline HAP orthopedic pin for small bone fixation and the testing of
this pin in a cadaver bone model. In the follow on Phase II project, these
nanostructured materials will be formed into more geometrically complex implants
constructs and utilized in in vivo animal models commonly employed to validate
orthopedic implants for FDA approval.

The commercial application of this project is in the area of orthopedic
implants.