* 0319577
* STTR Phase I:  Fabrication of Large-Area, High-Density Microdischarge Arrays on Flexible Substrates
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Marc Zemel, Anvik Corporation
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,999.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a technique for the fabrication of large-area, high-density
microdischarge arrays on flexible substrates. Microdischarge devices are a type
of photonic emitter and detector in which a weakly ionized plasma is confined to
spatial dimensions typically less than 200 microns. Microdischarge devices and
arrays have the ability to operate continuously at atmospheric pressures with
specific power loadings of the plasma of several tens of kW per cubic
centimeter. In the proposed project, in order to evaluate the full potential of
microdicharge devices for these applications they will be fabricated in higher
densities on large, flexible substrates (as compared to the small arrays that
have been previously demonstrated in the laboratory). Large-area processing
techniques for deposition, patterning, gas filling, and lamination will be
developed. In addition roll-to-roll processing techniques for the above
mentioned steps, which is especially attractive for volume applications will be
explored.

Commercially, the development of a new technology to enable the fabrication of
large-area, highdensity microdischarge arrays would enable the construction of a
wide variety of devices, including flexible sheet light sources for numerous
commercial applications including chemical sensors, microdisplays, and large
area emission sources. Further, if the microdischarge pixels are made to be
individually addressable, it will be possible to develop a flexible plasma
display panel (PDP). Finally, through the use of roll-to-roll processing, such
devices could be manufactured economically in high volumes. Such devices would
be ideal for lighting applications where portability, conformability,
ruggedness, and low cost are required.

