* 0319935
* SBIR Phase I:    Low-Cost Laser Ultrasonic Receiver for Industrial Inspection Based on Pseudo Phase Conjugation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,01/31/2004
* Jeffrey Wilde, LASSON TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 01/31/2004
* USD 96,667.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR)Phase I project proposes to
demonstrate the feasibility of using a passive, interferometric receiver using
pseudo phase conjugation as part of a low-cost laser ultrasonic inspection
system for industrial inspection and process control. In many industrial
applications, conventional nondestructive inspection techniques cannot be
applied for real-time process control, because parts are hot, vibrating or
translating rapidly. Laser ultrasonics is a remote, non-contact inspection
technique that overcomes these limitations and can function in the most
demanding industrialenvironments. The new receiver will demonstrate high
detection sensitivity and bandwidth, as well as static and dynamic compensation
for speckles from rough surfaces. The design is adapted from classical concepts
but requires no path-length stabilization and uses no photo-refractive crystal.
The receiver can operate at an eye-safe wavelength using fiber optic components
developed for telecomm applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laser ultrasonics can
be used for in-line wall thickness measurement of seamless steel tubes and glass
containers, for in-line inspection of laser welds, and scanning inspection of
large composite panels used in the aerospace industry. Substantial cost savings
have been documented in each case. &lt;br/&gt;