* 0319508
* SBIR Phase I:     Magnetic Flow Sorter Channels for Rare Cancer Cell Enrichment
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,02/29/2004
* Paul Todd, Space Hardware Optimization Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 02/29/2004
* USD 99,976.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop the technology for the magnetic isolation of rare cancer cells from
human blood. Various problems have been encountered in attempts to collect and
identify cancer cells. Success will require processing large volumes of cell
suspensions, capturing cancer cells with high efficiency, and avoiding
morphological and physiological damage during separation. The company's
collaborators at Ohio State University and Cleveland Clinic Foundation have
established that quadrupole magnetic flow sorting fulfills most of the
requirements for successful cancer cell selection. The methods include positive
selection of immunomagnetically labeled cancer cells and / or negative selection
by removal of undesired cell types. This project will test the latter, higher-
yield method and compare it to the former. The Phase I project objectives are
(1) to transfer existing magnetic flow channel technology from the Cleveland
Clinic Foundation, (2) to determine, through research, the optimum manufacturing
processes for high-precision column manufacture using processes eligible for
cGMP qualification, and (3) to test, through partners at Ohio State University,
the efficacy of such columns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial application of
this project is in the area of clinincal research. The proposed project will
advance knowledge and understanding within the fields of oncology, cancer
biology, metastasis, pathology, hematology and stem cell research by putting a
powerful, high-capacity and user-friendly cell separation tool in the hands of
investigators and clinicians. &lt;br/&gt;