* 0319851
* SBIR Phase I:  High Speed Optoelectronic Recognition of Al, Si, and Mg Alloys
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* David Spencer, wTe Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project will develop a
novel optoelectronic sensing&lt;br/&gt;system for the high-speed identification
and sorting of metals, in particular aluminum alloys
containing&lt;br/&gt;silicon and magnesium alloying elements. The goal of the
program is to develop a commercial system that&lt;br/&gt;will be capable of
sorting wrought alloys from cast alloys. This new sensor driven technology,
called the&lt;br/&gt;Spectramet Technology, will ultimately provide a
revolutionary remote sensing intelligent-machine&lt;br/&gt;system (actually a
platform of sensors and systems) that will accurately and unambiguously analyze
and&lt;br/&gt;sort recycled metals at currently unachievable high accuracy and
high speeds into compositions of metals&lt;br/&gt;and alloys custom mixed to
smelter or mill specifications. If successful, the result would be a
commercially viable sorting system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Worldwide generation of
aluminum scrap amounts to 8 million metric tons per year, of which half is
generated here in the U.S. If successful, applying a projected scrap value of
$1500 per metric ton, this technology would create a paradigm shift in a $10
billion market for sorting and recycling scrap aluminum. The new technology
would be important in helping U.S. industry compete with low cost, labor-
intensive overseas operations. It would replace the need for new primary
production allowing substitution of existing U.S. aluminum scrap resources into
high-grade specification applications.&lt;br/&gt;