* 0320763
* RUI:     Structure and Kinetics of Epitaxially-Grown Surface Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,05/31/2008
* Lyle Roelofs, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2008
* USD 140,000.00

This is an award for Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) that involves
undergraduate students in the proposed research. Using a combination of kinetic
Monte Carlo simulation, careful analysis of experimental studies and state-of-
the-art total energy calculations for diffusion barriers, the principal
investigator (PI) has recently demonstrated that the structure and development
of surface alloys grown via heteroepitaxial deposition can be fully accounted
for. Such systems, involving as they do here more than one atomic species and
mixing of the deposited species several layers into the substrate, are
challenging to model accurately and so the success achieved is noteworthy. There
are also strong technological motivations for extending this work to other bi-
metallic systems since several of them have important relevance for surface
magnetism and catalysis. The model developed for treating the surface kinetics
of such systems at the atomic level is based on a simple, coordination
dependent, parametrized approximation for the energy barriers governing local
atomic arrangements. Both direct moves and exchange (coordinated, two-atom)
moves are included. The necessary parameters are deduced from experimental
information combined with total energy calculations using the VASP protocol and
the nudged elastic band method of mapping out diffusion pathways and barriers.
The kinetic development and evolution of the surface alloy system based on these
moves and the associated barriers are determined via a kinetic Monte Carlo
simulation (BLK algorithm), which also treats the deposition process faithfully.
This approach has succeeded in fully accounting for the interesting coverage
dependent structures seen for the Rh/Ag(001) system, and a first report on this
work has recently appeared in the journal Surface
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the present research this treatment and model
will be extended to other regimes and systems in collaboration with the
experimental group of R. Jurgen in Ulm, Germany, which has extensive
experimental capability for study of bi-metallic growth systems and was the
source of much of the STM data for the Rh/Ag(001) system. The first extension
will be to the Rh/Ag(001) system at higher temperature and then to other soft-
metal substrate surface alloys of differing substrate symmetry. After that we
will extend the method to harder substrate cases of industrial significance.
Such systems should evolve similarly, but require higher temperatures to achieve
the necessary mobility. In making these extensions to the model we will also
test for the necessity of extensions to our model for the coordination
dependence of the activation energy barriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group
also has underway a detailed analysis of adatoms and vacancies on metallic
terraces. We have shown that the visit probability function at low coverage can
be obtained via simple relaxation method calculations and will continue work to
apply this approach to various surface processes catalyzed by mobile adatoms or
vacancies. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This is an award for Research at
Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) that involves undergraduate students in the
proposed research. Using a combination of kinetic Monte Carlo simulation,
careful analysis of experimental studies and state-of-the-art total energy
calculations for diffusion barriers, the principal investigator (PI) has
recently demonstrated that the structure and development of surface alloys grown
via deposition can be fully accounted for. In the present research this
treatment and model will be extended to other regimes and systems in
collaboration with the experimental group of R. Jurgen in Ulm, Germany, which
has extensive experimental capability for study of bi-metallic growth systems
and was the source of much of the data for the previous
research.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;