* 0320535
* SBIR Phase I:     Nanobiotechnology for Identification of Membrane Proteins
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Fatemeh Mojtabai, Novatarg Pharmaceuticals
* Standard Grant
* George B. Vermont
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an
innovative, rapid and low - cost nanotechnology that is ideally suited for
industrial-scale identification of membrane protein structure. The main emphasis
of this program is to develop a rapid and low-cost approach for fabrication of
large membrane protein crystals, suitable for high-resolution structural
analysis. The feasibility of the approach will be established using members from
three different families of membrane proteins as prototypes for the
crystallization process. Electron diffraction and microbeam x-ray
crystallography using a synchrotron source will be employed for structure
determination. In the follow on Phase II project, the technology will be further
optimized to enhance resolution and increase throughput, suitable for
industrial-scale applications.

The commercial application of this project is in the area of drug design and
development. Structural genomics, related to identification of a large number of
protein structures in a high throughput mode, has become an integral component
of research in structure-guided drug design. Membrane proteins are central
mediators for numerous diseases including cancer and infections caused by
pathogenic bacteria. These proteins have presented a challenge to NMR and
crystallography because of problems with their expression, solubility and
crystallization. The new approach proposed in this program is expected to
circumvent this bottleneck and to further stimulate new developments, for
detecting, diagnosing, and intervening in disease at the earliest stages of
development.

