* 0320854
* MRI/RUI:Acquisition of Instrumentation for an Undergraduate Research Program in Biotechnology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Marilyn Cruz-Alvarez, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 108,674.00

A grant has been awarded to Florida Gulf Coast University (FGCU) under the
direction of Dr. Marilyn Cruz-Alvarez and Dr. Takashi Ueda for the acquisition
of equipment for an undergraduate research program in Biotechnology. The
equipment includes environmental chambers for growth of plants and plant
cultures under controlled conditions. Availability of this equipment is
essential both for faculty research in Biotechnology as well as for training of
undergraduate students in the program. By enhancing the infrastructure of the
new Biotechnology program it will aid in the recruitment of high quality faculty
and students at FGCU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Purchase of the equipment will
facilitate current research on basic aspects of plant development. In particular
the equipment will be immediately used for two federally funded projects
involving the analyses of the structure and function of two plant genes. One is
a novel cauliflower (Brassica oleracea) gene that may be involved in cauliflower
curd formation. The other is a buckwheat (Fagopyrum esculentum) gene encoding an
antioxidant enzyme found in a wide range of organisms, from bacteria to humans.
The equipment will be shared by current and future faculty in the program and
therefore it will have an impact on additional research projects. The equipment
will also be extensively used for educational purposes. The curriculum of the
Biotechnology program at FGCU emphasizes hands-on training and extensive
participation of undergraduates in faculty research. Students will benefit from
the equipment by using it in the laboratory components of courses such as
Molecular Genetics, Methods in Biotechnology, Cell Biology, Plant Physiology,
Plant Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry and Developmental Genetics, as well as
for independent research conducted under individual faculty supervision.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Availability of the equipment may have a broader
significance considering the potential biotechnological applications of the
research for which it will be used. Characterization of the plant genes
mentioned above, for example, may lead to a better understanding of the
development of edible parts in cultivated varieties of Brassica oleracea, such
as cauliflower, broccoli or Brussels sprouts, or of the processes of plant seed
desiccation and germination. Future applications of this research may include
manipulation of the formation of the edible parts in vegetable crops and
generation of drought-resistant crops. In addition, the availability of the
equipment will enhance research opportunities for students at FGCU and it will
aid in better preparing them for graduate studies or jobs in the biotechnology
industry. A strong research program and generation of a well-prepared workforce
are expected to make the Biotechnology program a center for attracting
biotechnology companies to Southwest Florida leading to economic growth and
further development of the region.&lt;br/&gt;