* 0320106
* Altruism and Institutions:  Theoretical, Econometric and Experimental Studies
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,04/30/2007
* James Andreoni, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 04/30/2007
* USD 273,918.00

One of the most significant contributions of experimental economics over the
past decade is bringing a greater awareness of the altruism, fairness, and trust
to economic theorists and policy makers. It now seems clear to most economists
that individual altruism is both real and important for understanding many parts
of the economic world around us. This project will study altruism from three
different directions: Theory, econometric policy analysis, and laboratory
experiments.

The theoretical model will build on decades of research on givers to charity by
combining that with new models of the strategic choices of charitable
institutions. The objective is to study non-profit markets using the insights
from game theory that were developed to study for-profit markets. In particular,
what are the strategic mechanisms behind the common fund-raising practices of
charities? The model captures the stylized fact that new charities tend to be
"seeded'" by disproportionately large donors, or by government or foundations
grants. The model shows that these large early donations can provide information
and confidence to smaller donors, and this in turn allows the charity to gain a
firm footing. The model illustrates the importance of foundation grants and
government granting agencies in seeding new private non-profits that could not
have had a successful start without the these seed grants. The second section
uses tax-return data from non-profit arts and social service organizations to
look at the actual effect of government grants on giving and fund-raising. We
hope to confirm they hypotheses of the theoretical section, and to show how
behavioral responses by non-profit firms can either dampen or magnify the impact
of government grants. Our results will, we expect, have important consequences
for both policy makers and fund-raisers. The final section outlines a series of
experimental research projects. These controlled laboratory studies will examine
various aspects of informal social institutions and formal "fund-raising"
institutions. The objective is to see how individuals' natural interests in
being fair, altruistic and cooperative can be captured and encouraged by simple
institutional designs. We hope to discover some basic relationships between how
people's interactions are structured and the amount of natural altruism that can
be expressed. Our ultimate goal is to show that simple remedies, rather than
complicated mechanisms, can have a big impact on harnessing the power of
individual altruism.

