* 0320157
* SBIR Phase I: Research to Develop a MEMS Based Multiobject Spectrometer
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Kevin Kearney, Pixel Physics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,934.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to do the
background research work needed to enable the fabrication of a micro electro
mechanical system (MEMS) based multi-object specrometer (MOS). Such an
instrument would allow the spectral signatures of many hundreds of targets in
the field of view of the fore optics of the MOS to be acquired simultaneously.
The key component of the systems is a MEMS array of micro mirrors that allow
light to be directed at either an imaging camera or into a true imaging
spectrometer. Measurement and understand of the scattering from such micromirror
arrays need to be understood so that an end-to-end design can be developed for
such a system. This design has mechanical, optical and electronic parts that
need to be seamlessly integrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-object
spectrometers of various types are already in use, however, they tend to be
either extremely large or expensive, or very limited in capability. Astronomers
at some of the largest facility use either fibers or masks to provide the field
selection ahead of the spectrometers. Unfortunately, these instruments to be
very large and not suitable for use on smaller optical systems. Specific markets
would be observatories of the many universities and colleges, in remote sensing
for example in monitoring plumes emanating from smoke stacks or the trails of
rockets and missiles, coupled to optical microscopes to allow sequences of
spectra to be obtained of cells as they move and interact in the field of
view.&lt;br/&gt;