* 0320968
* Acquisition of a High Speed Digital Camera for Advanced Materials, Processing and Dynamic Events Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Ranga Komanduri, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Clark Cooper
* 07/31/2005
* USD 251,725.00

0320968&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt; There has been a considerable
effort in research at Oklahoma State&lt;br/&gt;University (OSU) in recent years
in the fields of polymer fatigue, mechanics in the&lt;br/&gt;manufacturing of
continuous thin materials, called webs, high-speed machining
of&lt;br/&gt;difficult-to-machine materials, finishing of advanced ceramics, and
fluid-structure&lt;br/&gt;interactions. It has relied on extensive experimental
investigations utilizing advanced&lt;br/&gt;instrumentation. Technologies
developed from these researches have been transferred&lt;br/&gt;to industry and
have directly benefited sponsoring and other companies, such
as&lt;br/&gt;Eastman Kodak, 3M, Imation, Procter &amp; Gamble, ALCOA, Rockwell
Automation,&lt;br/&gt;Medtronic, and DuPont; and research findings have been
published in leading archival&lt;br/&gt;journals and conferences. To continue
research in these fields for the discovery in&lt;br/&gt;science and engineering
and for the development of new technologies transferable to&lt;br/&gt;industry,
a high-speed digital camera system is needed to investigate the high-
speed&lt;br/&gt;mechanics accompanied with the research in these areas. The
projects outlined in this&lt;br/&gt;proposal require the ability to observe in
situ high-speed phenomena occurring in these&lt;br/&gt;fields. Experiments using
the camera will be conducted to investigate the dynamic
crack&lt;br/&gt;initiation and propagation at high-speeds in both virgin and
fatigue-damaged structural&lt;br/&gt;polymers for the purpose of identifying the
onset and the mode of failure; to study high-speed&lt;br/&gt;mechanical slitting
processes of plastic and metallic webs; to study the&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms of
high-speed machining processes of advanced materials; to study
the&lt;br/&gt;mechanisms of material removal in magnetic-field-assisted ceramic
polishing processes;&lt;br/&gt;to study the interaction of thin films (solid)
and turbulent air (fluid) in web manufacturing&lt;br/&gt;processes; to examine
blade structural response and aerodynamic damping in&lt;br/&gt;turbomachine
compressors; and to study the high-speed winding of webs.&lt;br/&gt;The
availability of high-speed digital camera will greatly enhance
the&lt;br/&gt;research infrastructure at OSU, as well as develop research
infrastructure in Oklahoma,&lt;br/&gt;an EPSCoR state, to enhance research
competitiveness of the state; it will also help&lt;br/&gt;support productive
research that will continuously benefit the U.S. industry,
especially&lt;br/&gt;the web material industry through the Web Handling Research
Center, the only center&lt;br/&gt;on web handling in the world, that is
sponsored by 17 U.S. companies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;