* 0320940
* Acquisition of a Stable Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer and Supporting Instrumentation for Marine Biogeochemical and Paleoceanographic Studies [MRI/RUI]
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2006
* Mark Altabet, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Shor
* 01/31/2006
* USD 360,000.00

0320940&lt;br/&gt;Altabet&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award to
the University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth supports acquisition of an isotope
ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS), a high pressure liquid chromatograph (HPLC) and
a quadrupole mass spectrometer (QMS) to continue and extend research into
biogeochemistry and paleoceanography, emphasizing nitrogen cycling in the marine
environment. The IRMS replaces an existing, aging and increasingly unreliable
instrument, and is intended to improve throughput and reliability and maintain
the necessary high precision this work requires. The IRMS system includes a
continuous-flow interface and elemental analyzer for CNS, as well as a gas
chromatograph for compound-specific analyses, and a gas handling system for
nitrate. The HPLC will be mainly used for amino acid concentration analysis,
extending the capabilities of the lab into a new area. The QMS will be used for
two purposes. In the laboratory, it will be used to troubleshoot the IRMS
preparation system, particularly to detect leaks. The second application is as a
seagoing instrument for shipboard high precision gas ratio analysis, especially
addressing N2/Ar. The instrumentation will be incorporated into teaching and
research involving both undergraduate and graduate students at U Mass, both on
the Dartmouth campus, and system-wide via the new Intercampus Graduate School of
Marine Science and Technology. The award is supported by the Ocean Sciences
Division of NSF.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;