* 0320335
* MRI/RUI Acquisition of Behavioral Tracking and Environmental Control Systems to Support Research and Research Training in Fish Acoustic Behavior
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Martin Connaughton, Washington College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2006
* USD 48,385.00

A grant has been awarded to Washington College under the direction of Dr. Martin
Connaughton to provide behavioral tracking equipment and experimental
facilities/environmental control systems to support student research and
research training in fish acoustic behavior. Communication is the fundamental
mechanism underlying inter-organisms behaviors. However, in animal communication
there is a paucity of data identifying which components of a signal are
important in determining the response behavior of the recipient. In particular,
information is lacking on the functional relationship between acoustic signals
and behavior in fishes. This is important as many species of fish rely on
acoustic signals for courtship and mating. The goal of this work is to determine
which acoustic signal components elicit or modify startle and courtship
behaviors in a species of sound producing fish. This grant will compliment this
research by providing the behavioral monitoring hardware and software,
experimental facilities and environmental control systems required for the
study. Fundamental similarities in auditory processing suggest the possibility
of similar encoding of behaviorally relevant information in fishes and higher
vertebrates. As such, an understanding of signal coding garnered from the simple
communication system in this study could be applied to signal evolution in more
complex forms of acoustic communication in higher vertebrates.

The broader significance of this proposal includes enhancing the scientific
environment at Washington College, a small liberal arts college dedicated to
providing its students with research and research training opportunities.
Provision of the state-of-the-art behavioral tracking system and environmental
support instrumentation proposed in this grant would expose student researchers
to advanced, computer-based techniques for studying behavior and communication.
This instrumentation will also be used to introduce students in marine biology
and ichthyology courses to cutting-edge research methods and experimental design
through hands-on laboratory exercises. A collaboration with a local USDA aquatic
pathology lab will be forged with this instrumentation, broadening the
opportunities for student training on and off campus. The scientific importance
of the proposed work lies in advancing the understanding of which signal
components elicit or modify startle and courtship behaviors in this species.
Findings from this study are potentially applicable to studies of acoustic
communication in higher vertebrates.