* 0320262
* SBIR Phase I: Supply Tracking for Smart Anesthesia Workstation using RFID (Radio Frequency Identification)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Timur Sriharto, Mobile Aspects Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,424.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop proof of concept for the passive inventory control component of a Smart
Anesthesia Workstation. The current standard is a non-automated lock-and-key
Bluebell cart that requires frequent manual inventory counting and restocking.
Newer solutions, with multiple log-in functions, restrict immediate access to
critical supplies, a danger to patients during emergencies. This Phase I project
will use RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) technology in the Smart
Workstation to provide transparent inventory control, passively tracking and
recording all supply transactions. The Smart Workstation will require no changes
in current practice, yet could improve patient care through enhanced safety,
reliable stocking, and robust inventory control. This research will chart
current anesthesia processes, design a system capable of recognizing multiple
RFID tags simultaneously, design the optimal workstation architecture, and
determine tag specifications.

The commercial application of this project will be in human healthcare in a
hospital setting. This Phase I project is expected to result in the development
of a Smart Workstation proven to track transactions accurately and
transparently. Ultimately, this system will identify and track the clinician,
the supply or drug being administered and the patient. It will serve as a
passive patient safety system, a billing system and a materials management
system for hospitals.

