* 0320590
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences (SCREMS)
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Mayer Humi, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 07/31/2006
* USD 125,328.00

Title: SCREMS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This grant will enable the Mathematical
Sciences Department at WPI to&lt;br/&gt;purchase a high end, multiprocessor
shared memory computer in support ofa variety of cutting edge research projects
in the applied mathematical sciences and statistics. Major thrust areas of this
research program include: the modeling and simulation of atmospheric turbulence,
combinatorial investigations in cryptography, nonlinear partial differential
equations and the development of smart materials. In addition, this platform
will support research in biomathematics (stenosis of arteries), applied
statistics (disease control), and emergent areas such as financial mathematics.
Progress in many&lt;br/&gt;of these important research projects will not be
possible without the aid of the powerful computing environment provided through
this grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected results from these research projects
will have an impact on a&lt;br/&gt;wide range of problems in science and
engineering. Contributions&lt;br/&gt;will be made to the national security,
national defense, the manufacture of durable products and structures, health
care, epidemiology and financial forecasting. Furthermore this machine will
provide a highly interactive teaching and research platform. Its presence will
contribute to the preparation and training of a new cadre of undergraduates,
M.S. and Ph.D students. On each of these three educational levels, this machine
will enable us to enrich and stimulate the scientific education and growth of
our students.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, this machine will also make a modest
contribution to K-12 education through WPI's "summer camps" for high school
students in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;