* 0320375
* STTR Phase I:     P-Type CdSe for Thin-Film Top Cells Enabling High-Efficiency Monolithic Tandem Photovoltaics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Lawrence Woods, ITN ENERGY SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,932.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop a
wide-bandgap, thin-film semiconductor to enable a high-efficiency light-absorber
layer for the top cell in monolithic tandem or multi-junction thin-film
photovoltaics. Because of relatively high device packaging costs, tandem
junction thin-film photovoltaic devices can offer higher watt per square meter
and lower cost per watt than their single junction counterparts. In order to
overcome the current low thin-film device efficiencies for materials with
bandgaps greater than 1.6 eV, it is proposed to use CdSe, with a bandgap of 1.72
eV, which is an optimum bandgap for a top cell of a tandem junction device when
sharing the solar spectrum with an existing high-efficiency thin-film bottom
cell. However CdSe likes to be an n-type semiconductor, which does not allow for
its use as a top cell with the correct polarity on the high-efficiency p-type
bottom cell for monolithically integrated (two-terminal) tandem devices. In this
project an innovative approach to overcome this problem is proposed which
involves using existing low-cost deposition techniques with added doping
capability to fabricate p-type thin-films of CdSe. The retention of this
conductivity type after high-temperature device processing will also be
confirmed so as to enable high-efficiency devices as needed for application in
the monolithic tandem device. Commercially, two of the most important near-term
markets for high-efficiency flexible lightweight tandem-junction photovoltaics
are space and high-altitude airships (HAA). In addition it is possible to
leverage the monolithic tandem PV space/HAA product technology for the
implementation of a low-cost monolithic tandem PV terrestrial product. The
terrestrial product is anticipated to have a significant impact toward reducing
the cost of alternative energy (solar electric).