* 0320543
* Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope to Establish an Imaging Facility for Research and Teaching
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Clare Chatot, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

A grant has been awarded to Ball State University under the direction of Dr.
Derron Bishop to purchase a confocal microscope. This instrument will be used to
address a wide variety of biological questions that require the ability to
reconstruct biological tissues in three-dimensional space or localize proteins
within thick tissue specimens. The addition of a confocal microscope to an
existing scanning and transmission electron microscope is also part of a broader
effort to establish a high-resolution imaging facility available to
investigators throughout the campus and nearby undergraduate institutions. This
device will be the only one of its kind in the region and will serve as a
critical component in enhancing the research and education opportunities of the
diverse student body at Ball State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
permitting optical access to tissues previously inaccessible, the confocal
microscope will augment existing research projects spanning the biology, medical
education, and physiology-health science departments within the university. The
instrument will be used to: 1) understand cellular mechanisms underlying
rewiring of the developing nervous system; 2) localize proteins that regulate
the development of the mouse embryo; 3) elucidate molecular mechanisms of
synapse formation; 4) determine functional roles for annulate lamellae and their
interaction with endoplasmic reticulum; 5) understand neuroimmune interactions
in the digestive system. Undergraduate and master's level graduate students will
have access to the instrument not only through investigator-sponsored research,
but also as part of independent research projects in a newly revised course
focusing on electron and confocal microscopic imaging. Other students will have
access to the confocal microscope through individual research projects in cell
culture techniques and developmental biology courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Confocal microscopy will be demonstrated to local high
school students who routinely visit the imaging facility as a means of promoting
science and research at a pivotal time in their education. Because the
instrument will be available to nearby undergraduate institutions, scientific
collaboration between diverse interdisciplinary researchers will be encouraged.