* 0320053
* SBIR Phase I:   Transmission, Collection and Reporting of Vital Sign Data Over Cable Television Networks-A New Approach to Home Telemonitoring in the Medical Management of Patients
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Michael Mathur, BL Software Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,945.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
need for low-cost home medical monitoring for management of large numbers of
patients with chronic diseases. The research objectives are to demonstrate a new
approach to real-time monitoring of vital signs that connects low-cost medical
devices to a remote database using existing Cable Networks, a process for
accessing and reporting that information, and a system for generating automated
alerts based on data values. The research will focus on creation of a system
architecture that will: (1) support vital sign data transmission by wireless
monitoring devices over Cable Networks; (2) collect data in a back-end computer;
(3) produce and report alarms for out-of-range and abnormal results; and (4)
allow end-users and medical professionals to examine vital sign data from a
computer via the Internet. This project may result in a simple hardware/software
prototype that provides continuous monitoring of vital sign inputs and creates
automatic alerts for out-of-normal values. It will demonstrate whether Cable is
a viable means of collecting real-time medical information. The research will
help develop a technology platform that can be applied in other areas such as
home energy management, home security, and videoconferencing over cable.

This approach to home telemonitoring has significant commercial potential.
Potential end users number in the millions. Changing revenue structure and
demographics provide significant incentives for home health care companies to
utilize home telemonitoring. The relatively low cost of the devices and the use
of cable as an information transmission modality allows for creation of a mass
market. The primary customers, cable multimedia service organizations, perceive
home telemonitoring as a value-added product that can spur revenue growth.