* 0320896
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Holographic Laser Tweezer Array for Submicron Control of Soft Materials and Novel Network Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Rajarshi Roy, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 152,000.00

This grant supports the acquisition of a holographic laser tweezer array. The
instrument supports a broad range of cross-disciplinary research projects in
nonlinear dynamics, soft condensed matter physics, physical chemistry, and
biophysics. The holographic laser tweezer array permits the fabrication of
complex materials and the study of dynamical processes using up to 200
independently moveable laser light beams focused through a microscope objective.
The instrument permits the generation of complex shaped force fields, and the
simultaneous manipulation of multiple trapped objects. The system can generate
optical vortices, which can trap reflective particles and apply torque to
trapped objects. Based on these unique properties, the investigators plan the
following research activities: (1) ??Complex shaped objects such as giant
vesicles and cells will be trapped with rings of low power laser spots, which
provide the same trapping power through intensity gradient, but have less peak
intensity than a single laser spot, and are thus less damaging to the sample. It
will permit stretching cells and vesicles into arbitrary shapes by deforming the
ring of laser spots for studies of membrane elasticity to aid in understanding
spontaneous cell deformations, such as those observed during nerve growth and
during the spread of cancerous cells. ?(2) ??Complex force or torque fields
generated by the laser tweezer array will be utilized to study the distribution
of forces exerted by growing biopolymer networks and their response to external
forces or strains. In conjunction with the ring traps described above this will
permit studies of sticking or repulsive forces between cells or bacteria. One
particular application will be the study of biofilms, which often infect medical
implants. (3) ?Arrays of laser tweezers will allow creation of experimental
versions of small-world networks, composed of coupled optical oscillators, in
order to help understand conditions for synchronization and coherence in
sparsely connected networks. Such novel distributed laser sources have potential
applications in medical diagnostics and microwave detection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The establishment of an experimental research facility at
the interface between physics, chemistry and biology will foster cross-
disciplinary interactions among faculty, post- docs and graduate students.
Additionally, the instrument will have impact on K-12 education through the PIs
ongoing participation in outreach efforts, such as laboratory tours and summer
internships for underrepresented groups from DC area high schools. For the
University, the instrument will enhance the research infrastructure, which will
add to a new effort to expand and connect biophysics research into a visible,
top quality research and education program. With its unique capabilities, the
system will also be useful for the regional research community. The PIs have
developed joint projects with researchers at NIH and NIST, which take advantage
of the great regional strengths in the biosciences at NIH, and in materials
research at NIST. &lt;br/&gt;