* 0320751
* Development of a New Optical Nanoprobe Scanning Tunneling Microscope for Nanoscale Science and Engineering Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Teri Odom, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2007
* USD 380,030.00

With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Richard Van
Duyne and colleagues from the Chemistry Department at Northwestern University
will develop a new optical nanoprobe scanning tunneling microscope for nanoscale
science and engineering research and education. They will design, develop, apply
and bring to the marketplace a new class of ultrahigh vacuum scanning tunneling
microscope (UHV-STM) that combines the extraordinary spatial resolution of the
STM with the unparalleled sensitivity and broad system applicability of advanced
optical spectroscopic techniques. They will integrate high sensitivity, chemical
information-rich optical spectroscopic methods with STM in such a way that sub-
nanometer spatial resolution is preserved. In particular, they will use the
ultra-sensitive methods of electron beam-excited, localized surface plasmon
resonance (LSPR) spectroscopy, dark-field photon-excited LSPR spectroscopy, and
various surface-enhanced spectroscopies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development
of the optical nanoprobe STM will enhance the education experiences at
Northwestern University as it is incorporated into a number of courses. In
addition, through the development of network control hardware/software, other
educational institutions will have access. The principal investigators will
collaborate with an industrial partner to ensure the transition of this
instrument to the commercial sector. &lt;br/&gt;