* 0320143
* SBIR Phase I:  Portable Bioluminescence Regenerative Cycle (BRC) Detector for Nucleic Acid Detection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Steffen Nock, Xagros Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,970.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will result in the
design, development, and prototype of a portable device for nucleic acid
detection and quantification for research and medical diagnostics applications.
Currently, most of the conventional molecular detection platforms are complex,
delicate and bulky devices. Additionally, the associated biochemical procedures
are expensive, highly labor intensive, require skilled personnel, and often take
days or weeks to complete. There is a need for the development of inexpensive
techniques and portable biosensors for environmental, basic research and
biomedical diagnostics. It is proposed to develop a prototype device consisting
of a compact photo-detector, sensor array, and temperature controlled reaction
chamber. An ultra-sensitive novel nucleic acid detection assay, Bioluminescence
Regenerative Cycle (BRC), will be integrated into the proposed prototype
instrument to overcome the drawbacks of current biological assays.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will ultimately result in a handheld device that
is simple and easy to use for non-expert operators, even outside of the
laboratory, for applications such as analysis of patient samples in a doctor's
office or student research projects in a classroom setting. This device can also
be adapted for consumer and industry-based environmental monitoring for
applications requiring fast and sensitive detection and identification of
biological agents. &lt;br/&gt;