* 0320739
* Collaborative Research: Development of Autonomous Underwater Instruments to Sense Zooplankton and Their Environment Using a Laser Optical Plankton Counter
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* George Jackson, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Shelby Walker
* 09/30/2008
* USD 46,306.00

0321167 Checkley&lt;br/&gt;0320739 Jackson&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative Major
Research Instrumentation award to Scripps Institution of Oceanography
(University of California at San Diego) and Texas A&amp;M University provides
funds for development of the SOLOPC, an autonomous profiling float that combines
existing SOLO float profiler technology with a laser optic plankton counter
(LOPC) to provide a means of assessing oceanic zooplankton distribution in
addition to physical ocean properties and circulation. The initial objective is
to develop an instrument that will produce 50-100 profiles over a period up to
one year, during which it will transmit position and profile data via satellite
when at the surface, and ultimately be recovered. The longer-term objective is
to develop relatively inexpensive, expendable instruments, suitable for ocean
basin-scale studies. The development effort builds on several generations of
profiling floats, including ALACE and SOLO, which profile, drift and transmit
physical oceanographic and position data via satellites to autonomously profile
currents and physical properties of the ocean. The additional data here on
zooplankton size with the LOPC will be augmented with a fluorometer for
measuring chlorophyll a as well. Field evaluation and testing is incorporated in
the three-year development effort in several ways. Initial evaluation of float
parameters will be tested offshore from Scripps Institution in small boats. More
complete testing will involve 20 days of UNOLS vessel time (Sproul, New
Horizon), validating SOLOPC data against shipboard data collected with water
samples and net tows, and the final testing will include deployment during a
CALCOFI cruise off Southern California, with the floats transiting the standard
grid of Southern California stations simultaneously with the research vessel.
This instrumentation award is supported by the Division of Ocean Sciences at
NSF. Scripps Institution of Oceanography provides cost sharing support from non-
federal funds.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;