* 0320994
* Acquisition of an Eye Movement Tracking System for Research on Cognition, Memory and Affect
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Jesse Whitlow, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2004
* USD 32,191.00

Funding from a National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation award
will allow faculty on the Camden campus of Rutgers University to create a
laboratory facility that uses eye tracking to provide a non-invasive, real-time
measure of what people are looking at and how much the object of their gaze
interests them. Because vision is the sense that dominates information
processing for most people, monitoring the focus and duration of their eye
fixations (and pupillary diameter during each fixation) while people examine
meaningful scenes provides a powerful indicator of conscious and nonconscious
attention and thought. Because it does not involve intrusive procedures, eye
tracking can be used with a broad spectrum of subject populations. Moreover,
advances in technology now make eye tracking a feasible measure in applications
that extend well beyond traditional uses of this methodology. Thus, this
facility will support research in several new directions by faculty in
psychology and criminal justice at Rutgers-Camden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eye
tracking laboratory at Rutgers-Camden will allow a variety of researchers from
different disciplines to evaluate the role of visual attention in the context of
investigations of human causal reasoning, the development of memory (especially
"false memory") in children and adults, evaluations of alternative learning
strategies, like "accelerated learning", and the development of accurate
measures of recidivism among sex offenders. This facility will also strengthen
existing collaborations among faculty in psychology, criminal justice, and
biology on projects that combine cognitive neuroscience with applied problems in
clinical and forensic psychology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Whitlow and his
colleagues will use the funds to purchase a state-of-the-art eye tracking system
that provides accurate monitoring of eye movements and pupillary diameter
without requiring onerous head restraints. They will create a dedicated
laboratory space for collecting eye tracking data and for training both
undergraduate and graduate students in using the technology. They will also
provide demonstrations of the technology to pre-college students in various
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have important
benefits for both teaching and research. It will be the only research-quality
eye tracking system in an educational setting in southern New Jersey, and it
will be used by two departments that account for more than 30% of the
baccalaureates awarded at Rutgers-Camden. With respect to teaching, the facility
will support training undergraduate and graduate students in the use of a major
research methodology. It will also support the long-standing science education
outreach activities of Dr. Whitlow and his colleagues, which are designed to
interest high school students, especially urban, minority youth, in pursuing
science careers. With respect to research, the facility will provide a unique
capability for investigating new approaches to understanding how people process
and use information in causal reasoning, to exploring how visual information is
used in forming long-term memories, and for developing improved assessment
techniques in forensic psychology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;