* 0320726
* MRI Acquisition of Instrumentation for Thermal Characterization of Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Eric Grulke, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 172,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This action supports the acquisition of a Netzsch LFA 427 Laser Flash
Apparatus for the measurement of thermal conductivity and diffusivity.
Instrument users include researchers in Chemistry, Chemical and Materials
Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, the Center for Applied Energy Research
(CAER), the Center for Aluminum Technology and the Painting Technology
Consortium. Currently, the University of Kentucky has heavy demand for bulk
thermal conductivity measurements and investigators must rely on collaborators
at other institutions for such measurements, slowing the research programs.
Applications for the Netzsch LFA 427 include characterization of carbon
nanoparticle/polymer composites; carbon electrodes used in aluminum manufacture;
lightweight aluminum alloys; flame-resistant composites; fluids and nanofluids
with high thermal conductivity; organic materials for electronic device
applications; naval and automotive coatings; alloys and ceramics for high
temperatures and harsh environments; and agricultural grains and similar
products. The instrument will be located in dedicated laboratory space at CAER
under the supervision of a full-time professional staff member who will acquire
data for occasional users, train students and postdoctoral associates, and
coordinate data collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need for lighter-weight,
more energy-efficient materials is increasing, as is the demand on the physical
properties of these materials. Such materials are used in the aerospace industry
as structural composites and thermal management materials, in chemical
processing applications where high temperature stability and chemical resistance
are needed, and in the electronics industry to replace metals for conduction and
heat management applications. One of the most important physical properties of
these materials, especially those based on carbon, is how well they transmit
heat energy. Thus, the ability to determine thermal diffusivity is essential for
material evaluation. Further, the capacity to tailor or modify thermal
properties of materials by chemical functionalization or modification, thermal
processing and precursor development is essential in extending their application
into high performance, high value markets in electronics, aerospace, information
technologies, automobiles and medicine. This instrument will facilitate the
education of undergraduate students, graduate students and postdoctoral
associates. Undergraduate students are included in research activities to give
them more exposure to interdisciplinary work. An effort is made to target
recruitment and participation by minority students with a special regional
emphasis on Appalachian students.&lt;br/&gt;