* 0320662
* Aquisition of Instrumentation for Genetic and Genomic Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Paul Overvoorde, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 168,500.00

A grant has been awarded to Macalester College under the direction of Dr. Paul
J. Overvoorde for the acquisition of three fluorescence-based instruments: a DNA
Sequencing System; an Infrared Imaging System and a Real-time Quantitative PCR
System. The DNA Sequencing System can be used both for DNA sequencing and for
genetic "fingerprinting". The Infrared Imaging System allows the simultaneous
detection and quantification of two different infrared fluorophores. These
fluorophores can be attached to nucleic acids or proteins (e.g. antibodies)
allowing the non-radioactive adaptation of numerous techniques (e.g. Southern
blotting, RNA gel blot analysis, immunoblotting, gel shift assays, and others)
that have traditionally required the use of radioactivity for sensitivity. The
Real-time Quantitative PCR System allows measurement of the amounts of up to
four independent DNA targets within a single reaction. Because of several
factors including being able to start with small quantities of material, rapid
thermocycling, and instantaneous detection of multiple fluorophores, real-time
PCR has emerged as a powerful tool for assessing the level of gene
expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These instruments can be used as powerful
investigative tools in a wide variety of disciplines, and their acquisition by
Macalester College will support research by faculty whose research interests
include such wide-ranging fields as molecular biology, developmental biology,
neuroscience, plant ecology, and fresh-water mussel conservation and taxonomy.
Beyond advancing multiple research agendas, the requested instrumentation will
significantly strengthen the training of our students by providing them with
access to state-of-the-art equipment. The availability of this equipment will
deepen the rigor of scientific inquiry at this exclusively undergraduate
institution by allowing on-going research to be addressed more fully at the
molecular level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the requested equipment
will be coupled with support from industry to develop investigative modules that
expose students to the methods afforded by the advances in technology. When
students use state-of-the-art instruments, they gain a more accurate view of
modern scientific inquiry and can make more informed decisions about career
paths. In addition, exposure to this type of instrumentation allows students to
hone the types of critical thinking skills that are required for designing and
interpreting experiments at the molecular level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
will enhance the research productivity of faculty and the scientific rigor of
the undergraduate program at Macalester College.&lt;br/&gt;