* 0320305
* RUI/MRI:  Acquisition of Instrumentation for Experimentally Investigating Rotor-Tip Clearance Flow Phenomena in Gas-Turbine Engines
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Vascar Harris, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Michael W. Plesniak
* 07/31/2005
* USD 209,779.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No. CTS-0320305&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: M. Khan, Tuskegee
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extensive efforts are currently
underway to develop ultra efficient engine technology. Factors being evaluated
are fuel efficiency, noise and environmental impact. The interaction between
stator and rotor blades in the compressor (and turbine) greatly influence these
factors. Of the many variables, the clearance between the rotor blade tip and
the casing has been cited to have the most significant impact on engine fuel
efficiency and noise. Extensive experimental and numerical efforts have been
directed towards a better understanding of the flow field in the tip region in
order to desensitize engine design to the influences of the rotor tip clearance.
The recent use of swept blades has introduced further complexities in the flow
in this region. Earlier investigations have reported that the axial strain rates
generated due to the sweep impact the vortical structures in a blade-hub
juncture. The instrumentation procured under this grant will be used to
investigate the influence of axial strains rates on the flow physics of the tip
clearance region. The 2DPIV system and water tunnel acquired under this proposal
will be utilized to map the flow field of such a configuration. Mean and
turbulent characteristics of the flow in tip clearance region would be analyzed
to understand the physics. The impact of changes in sweep and clearance would
also be studied. The influence of relative motion between the blade and
simulated casing would also be documented. &lt;br/&gt;The availability of this
research instrumentation at Tuskegee University will enable the faculty to
conduct competitive research. Involvement of students at Tuskegee University in
fluid mechanics research and exposure to modern measurement techniques of fluid
phenomena would be an extremely beneficial consequence of this instrumentation.
Other laboratory courses in the Aerospace Science Engineering Department will
also utilize the instrumentation to strengthen theoretical concepts for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;