* 0320186
* STTR Phase I:  Anthocyanin Signaling of Heavy Metal Contamination
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Michael Blaylock, EDENSPACE SYSTEMS CORP
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to develop an
innovative, cost-effective, real time biosensor system that uses plants to
monitor water and soil quality. Monitoring heavy metal contaminants in the
environment, particularly in large or remote areas, is often cost-prohibitive
due to the expense of the extensive sampling required to adequately assess
heterogeneous distribution of the contaminants. The development of plant
biosensors that indicate the presence of heavy metals could offer high spatial
resolution, standoff reporting, ready scaling to large treatment areas, and
continuous operation of an in-situ monitoring approach. The system could be used
to detect and monitor metal concentrations in contaminated soil, water, or
landfill leachate, before, during and after remedial activities, and used for
risk assessment by monitoring the levels of bioavailable metals in the
environment. This Phase I project seeks to take advantage of recent discoveries
of a metal responsive promoter in Brassica juncea and link it to overexpression
of anthocyanin production. The production of anthocyanins in response to metal
uptake by the plant will create a visible (i.e., purple coloration) indicator of
metal accumulation. By transforming plants with the anthocyanin regulatory gene,
B, which activates anthocyanin production under the control of a metal
responsive promoter (MRP) element, this project will develop plants that express
high levels of anthocyanins only in the presence of certain metal ions. Such
plants could then be used to monitor the concentration of pollutant metal ions.
The development would also provide a valuable research tool for studying heavy
metal accumulation in plants.

The commercial application of this project is in the area of detection of heavy
metal contaminants in soil. Improving the ability to accurately monitor and
assess heavy metal contamination will improve awareness of contaminated areas
and provide a low cost assessment of private sites by homeowners, farmers, and
industry. Of particular usefulness would be the ability of farmers to detect the
potential bioavailability of heavy metals to food crops.