* 0320418
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Microfluidic Device for Rapid Analysis, Sorting, and Collection of Biological Particles using Photonic Forces
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2003
* Jonathan Diver, GENOPTIX INC
* Standard Grant
* Om P. Sahai
* 12/31/2003
* USD 99,771.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project propses to
demonstrate that moving optical gradient forces, Optophoresis, provide selective
and sensitive analysis and sorting of cells important to optimizing bioreactor
production processes. Isolation of stable cell populations, as related to
functional phenotype, and maximizing viable cell density are critical to the
efficient and economic production of protein-based therapeutic agents. The
ability to remove pro-apoptotic cells will significantly improve bioprocess
technology. This Phase I effort will demonstrate the analysis, sorting, and
recovery of non-apoptotic cells for further manipulations, and the isolation of
cells with certain biological characteristics, for example secretion levels. In
a microsorter device, cells will be simultaneously analyzed and sorted by the
optical gradient force based on the native cell characteristics (such as size,
morphology, dielectric properties etc.). The objectives of the Phase I project
are : 1) to build an optical and microfluidics workstation; 2) to fabricate
microfluidic devices for aseptic loading and recovery of cells, 3) to identify
and characterize apoptotic and secretor cell models, 4) to demonstrate that
Optophoresis can discriminate between different cell subpopulations, and 5) to
collect sorted populations for further manipulations. In the follow on Phase II
project, the microsorter instrument will be further developed for both research
and continuous on-line monitoring needs.

The commercial applications of this project include bioprocess engineering,
clinical diagnostics, cancer testing, environmental monitoring, tissue
engineering, and drug discovery.