* 0320715
* Acquisition of a Fluorescence Imaging System for Research in Biology, Environmental Science and Chemistry at UT Chattanooga
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Henry Spratt, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 95,100.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga under the
direction of Dr. Margaret Kovach for the acquisition of a fluorescent imaging
system that will be used as an important research and teaching tool for the
Departments of Biological and Environmental Sciences and Chemistry. The
Departments of Biological and Environmental Sciences and Chemistry have a strong
tenet for involving undergraduate students in research and, since the inception
of the masters program, graduate students as well.

The requested instrumentation is necessary for performing molecular analysis and
detection and can be used for a wide range of applications including genotyping,
differential display, mutation detection, and forensics. The system will also be
compatible with a wide variety of gel, membrane, microplate (ELISA) and
microarray-based technologies used for analyzing DNA, RNA and protein samples.
The research projects in genomics and proteomics, toxicology and biochemistry
that will be supported by access to this instrumentation are associated with the
laboratories and research interests of the five P.I.s . For example, the
fluorescence imaging system will support studies of gene regulation through
comparative analyses of gene expression profiles, the comparative study of
microbial populations, the study of toxicological effects at the level of DNA
and protein, and mutation detection and analysis by chemically induced
mutagenesis.

The acquisition of this imaging system will allow students and professors from
both departments to increase the number and variety of experimental procedures
available to conduct research. In addition, shared access to the fluorescent
imaging system will enhance interdisciplinary courses, curricula and research
between the departments. More than any other single item of equipment, the
fluorescence imaging system will allow UTC to develop and sustain vigorous
research and teaching programs that employ genomic and proteomic approaches to
benefit current research programs in molecular biology, microbiology, toxicology
and biochemistry.