* 0320651
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for an Ecological Genomics Laboratory to Support Research and Training
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Shane Sarver, Black Hills State University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 118,594.00

A grant has been awarded to Black Hills State University (BHSU) under the
direction of Dr. Shane K. Sarver to establish an Ecological Genomics Laboratory.
This laboratory will offer cross-disciplinary research opportunities to faculty
and students at BHSU in the emerging field of genomics. Two of the most recent
advances, real-time PCR and DNA microarray techniques are breaking down the
traditional boundaries separating the sub-disciplines in biology (i.e.
physiology, ecology, genetics etc.) and compelling an integrated approach in
biological research. Real-time PCR is a powerful new technique with a variety of
applications, ranging from genotyping and quantitative analysis of gene
expression, to protein detection and quantification. Microarray technology
integrates the relationship between the gene and the phenotype and allows the
researcher to examine groups of genes simultaneously in multiple contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Real time PCR combined with microarray techniques provide
unparalleled opportunities to integrate genomics into other areas of biological
research. Real time PCR will be used to genotype bison PrP genotypes and to
screen for heterplasmic walleye. Microarrays will be used to examine expression
of plant defense genes in Arabis under different ecological conditions. A gel
electrophoresis system will allow differentiation of alleles when internal
probes for real-time PCR are not available, or are impractical; and a
spectrophotometer that would allow quick and easy determination of nucleic acid
concentration, purity and integrity in a sample. The new Ecological Genomics
Laboratory will be used to support a new undergraduate course titled Ecological
Genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Black Hills State University is mainly an
undergraduate institution in an EPSCoR state. Nearly 75% of the biology majors
at BHSU are from groups that are underrepresented in the sciences. This
percentage mainly includes women, but also several non-white ethnic groups of
which Native Americans are the greatest proportion. There are six Indian
Reservations in the state of South Dakota. Over the past four years the
Department of Science at BHSU has equipped a molecular genetics laboratory that
supports research in the areas of conservation genetics, molecular systematics,
molecular ecology and basic genetic research primarily using genotyping and gene
sequencing (NSF proposal #9977226). This facility was recently designated as the
Western South Dakota DNA Core Facility (WSDDCF), serving not only university
research needs, but also other public and private organizations, such as South
Dakota Game Fish &amp; Parks and regional private ranchers. This facility has
also served as a training center for undergraduate students in genetics, cell
biology, microbiology, and for those students conducting independent research
projects in various areas of molecular genetics. Three new biology faculty
members (a molecular geneticist, a molecular ecologist and a functional
evolutionary ecologist) have been hired in the last three years whose research
benefits from the capabilities of the WSDDCF. The WSDDCF and the new Ecological
Genomics Laboratory will complement one another and provide opportunities for
cross-disciplinary research and collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;