* 0320824
* RUI: Acquisition of Protein Purification and Analysis Instrumentation to Enhance Biochemical Research and Education at the College of the Holy Cross
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Kenneth Mills, College of the Holy Cross
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 255,502.00

A grant has been awarded to the College of the Holy Cross under the joint
direction of Dr. Kenneth Mills and Dr. Robert Bellin to enhance both biochemical
research and undergraduate education. The experimental programs supported by
this grant reflect the diversity of research at the interface between biology
and chemistry at the College. Each of these research programs has at its core
the need for preparation of highly purified proteins and the use of sensitive
instrumentation for analysis of the prepared samples. As a result, this grant
will be used to acquire modern protein purification equipment in the form of
computer-driven fast protein liquid chromatography (FPLC) and high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) systems, as well as an up-to-date ultracentrifuge
and chemiluminescent imaging system. This equipment is essential for the
development and sustenance of modern biochemical research at the College.

The intellectual merit of this grant rests on the research and undergraduate
training conducted by four laboratories at the College that will make use of the
acquired equipment. Dr. Bellin's research explores the interactions that connect
specific proteins to the cell membrane via linkages to transmembrane proteins
called syndecans. These interactions are important for the structural integrity
of the cell and in some cases play a role in tumor suppression. The research in
Dr. Mills' lab focuses on the chemical mechanism of protein post-translational
rearrangement reactions, specifically those of inteins and hedgehog proteins.
These studies aim to examine the structural basis for and the evolution of
protein function as well as cell-to-cell signaling. Dr. Mary Morton's lab
investigates voltage-gated calcium channels and dystrophin-associated proteins
in mice. Her research is important in developing an understanding of muscle
architecture as well as providing useful information in the search for
treatments to combat Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Finally, Dr. Madeline Vargas
studies how hyperthermophilic organisms utilize iron in metabolic pathways and
can adapt to habitats as diverse as deep-sea vents and the human
gastrointestinal tract.

The broader impacts of the acquisition of this instrumentation include
improvements in both the scope and depth of biomolecular research at the
College. These improvements will raise the caliber of research training received
by the exclusively undergraduate student body at Holy Cross, especially students
who participate in the College's Biochemistry Concentration. Even beyond the
Biochemistry Concentration, this acquisition of modern equipment will have a
major impact on a large number of students at the College. Over 60% of the 650
Biology and Chemistry majors that have graduated from Holy Cross in the past
decade have participated in undergraduate research, many in areas related to
biomolecular science. The continued vitality of the strong Holy Cross tradition
of student research and the richness of the experience that these students take
with them to their graduate labs and careers will be greatly enhanced by their
ability to train and complete successful research projects on modern
instrumentation.