* 0321305
* SBIR Phase II:    On-Line Optoelectronic Sensing of Molten Metal Chemistry
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2008
* Leigh Peritz, wTe Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 10/31/2008
* USD 773,980.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
highly innovative, high-speed optoelectronic sensor system capable of
continuously monitoring molten metal alloy compositions during casting and
melting operations. The goal is to design and construct a commercially-viable
sensor system capable of performing highly-accurate quantitative measurement of
molten aluminum alloy compositions in an aggressive industrial setting.
Development of this sensor is among the highest priority technology needs
identified by both the metal casting industry and the aluminum industry in their
industry roadmaps of the future. In order to effectively compete, U.S. metal
industries must increase their use of low cost scrap and must also find ways to
increase production efficiency. The proposed sensor will acquire critical
compositional data thousands of times faster than current commercial methods and
will operate on a real-time basis without the need to place the sensor in
contact with the molten metal. At these speeds, a melt shop could produce one
extra metal production batch ('heat') per day, resulting in a 15% increase in
productivity.

The incorporation of this innovative optoelectronic sensor system will result in
a tremendous increase in production efficiency, providing for a 15% gain in
productivity. Thus, the $30 billion aluminum smelting industry could realize a
$4.5 billion increase in production output with little or no additional capital
investment other than the cost of the sensor system. In fact, the most immediate
broader impact of the proposed activity will be to enhance U.S. competitiveness
of aluminum casters and smelters because of this productivity improvement. In
addition, the proposed technology will have a significant positive effect on
process control and quality assurance, thereby providing further competitive
advantages. Broader impact to our society will also be brought about through
reduced emissions and energy savings resulting from shorter melting cycles.
Similar improvements would be possible for zinc, copper, brass, bronze, iron,
ceramic and glass industries that also have need for a similar continuous sensor
system to monitor and control composition and quality on a real-time basis.