* 0321663
* Microarray Resources for Maize Research
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* David Galbraith, University of Arizona
* Cooperative Agreement
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2007
* USD 3,876,861.00

Maize is the most economically important crop in the US and the premier organism
for addressing fundamental biological questions in monocots, especially the
cereals, which contribute 70% of humanity's diet. The robust scientific
community combined with the extensive genetic and genomic tools available and
accumulating, make maize an excellent experimental system. This project will
provide a low cost, comprehensive, public sector microarray resource for
expression analysis in the important crop plant maize (Zea mays L.).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives are: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Continue
producing maize cDNA amplicon arrays as needed by users.&lt;br/&gt;2) Produce an
array with 70-mer oligonucleotides representing the &gt;30,000 identifiable
unique maize genes, which should allow better discrimination among gene
duplicates (common in maize) relative to cDNA arrays. Provide community with
arrays and a hybridization service using a minimal cost recovery model.
&lt;br/&gt;3) Provide a website to disseminate project information and provide
all expression data generated by this project within a project-specific
relational database Zeamage, for Zea mays Gene Expression Database, with links
to rice and maize genome annotation. &lt;br/&gt;4) Perform expression profiling
with a subset of maize tissues to provide a baseline of data and detailed
protocols for the community. &lt;br/&gt;5) Utilize flexible Nimblegen system to
experimentally refine oligonucleotide design for the next generation of 70-mer
arrays to achieve better discrimination among gene family members and gene
duplications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of low cost arrays and
hybridization services provided by this project will enable a much larger number
of investigators to apply global gene expression profiling to their specific
applied or fundamental research programs on maize. Importantly, as ALL the data
will be quickly available within a public database, investigators at
institutions that do not have the resources to perform the experiments
themselves will have access to the data. In addition to training postdoctoral
associates and undergraduate students, several outreach components to train a
broad community of researchers to the latest in expression profiling technology
will be carried out. These activities include holding biannual three-day hands-
on microarray workshops, holding half-day workshops at annual meetings, hosting
visiting scientists at our facilities, and developing a interactive website and
other mechanisms for communication with end-users.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deliverables&lt;br/&gt;Accessible from
http://www.tigr.org:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Maize cDNA amplicon arrays.
&lt;br/&gt;2) Oligonucleotide arrays for at least &gt;30,000 unique maize
genes.&lt;br/&gt;3) A hybridization service.&lt;br/&gt;4) Zeamage database
containing expression profiles for a subset of maize tissues, detailed
protocols, with links to rice and maize genome annotation. &lt;br/&gt;