* 0321067
* Acquisition of Research-Grade Light Microscopy Instrumentation
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Sarah Gerken, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 08/31/2006
* USD 273,714.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Alaska Anchorage under the
direction of Dr. David Pfeiffer for the acquisition of research-grade light
microscopic instrumentation. This grant will improve basic but essential
research instrumentation in the Department of Biological Sciences at the
University of Alaska Anchorage (UAA). This department conducts a diverse range
of research activities, spanning molecular levels through ecological levels of
study. Two particularly strong research focus groups have emerged in this
department: Systematics & Ecology and Cell Biology & Physiology. A critical need
for research-grade light microscopic instrumentation now exists in each of these
core groups. The current need for this instrumentation has been fueled by recent
departmental growth but extends beyond the level of individual researchers to
the inter-departmental and institutional levels as well. UAA is striving to
integrate research and educational activities from different fields of science.
Central to this mission is having appropriate instrumentation in place that will
permit collaborative efforts between faculty working in different disciplines
and enhance opportunities for student involvement in research activities.

Independent research by faculty is one of the primary drivers for engaging the
interest of students in science classes. A suite of research-grade light
microscopic instrumentation will not only strengthen independent research by
faculty in this department, it will provide a set of tools for directly
involving undergraduate students in faculty supervised research. This use falls
in line with UAA's mission to achieve excellence in scientific education through
developing new ways to engage students in the process of learning. The
geographical position of UAA places it in a prime location to broaden the
participation of underrepresented students, such Alaskan Natives, in these
processes. Graduate student training will also directly benefit from this
instrumentation.