* 0321299
* Acquisition of Analytical Instrumentation for a Mobile Environmental Lab on the Pine Ridge Reservation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2003,10/31/2005
* Albrecht Schwalm, Oglala Lakota College
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 10/31/2005
* USD 214,805.00

0321299 Schwalm

Support from this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant will allow
for the acquisition of a suite of analytical instruments to be employed in local
environmental geosciences research, Oglala Lakota Tribal College undergraduate
student education, and regional K-12 outreach efforts on the Pine Ridge American
Indian Reservation in South Dakota. The Pine Ridge Reservation is the second
largest reservation in the U.S. with over 12 million acres and approximately
11,000 residents. Oglala Lakota Tribal College is a community governed four-year
academic institution with approximately 1300 students located in nine college
centers across the reservation. The analytical equipment will be used at Oglala
Lakota to equip a mobile field lab that will serve the college centers across
this large reservation for applied environmental research including studies of
pervasive and deleterious black mold spores in reservation homes and buildings,
base line research on the transport and fate of agricultural pesticides through
regional watersheds, and studies of methane and CO2 emissions from abandoned and
illegal landfills on the reservation. Major equipment to be purchased include:
1) a Membrane Interface Probe that is specifically designed to work on the
college's current GeoProbe coring system for in situ analyses of volatile
organic compounds in sediments and pore waters; 2) an aerosol monitoring system
for black mold studies; 3) a dual frequency GPS receiver for accurate sample
site positioning and integration into a developing GIS educational module; 4) a
combined water quality monitoring system that includes conductivity, dissolved
oxygen, temperature and turbidity sensors and; 5) an ATV and trailer to
complement the existing mobile van equipped for field-based analytical work on
this large reservation with few roads. ***

