* 0321324
* MRI: Acquisition of DNA analysis equipment for research and training in molecular ecology and evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Michael Webster, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 07/31/2006
* USD 483,979.00

A grant has been awarded to Washington State University under the direction of
Dr. Michael Webster for the purchase of genetic research instrumentation. The
instrumentation obtained - an automated DNA sequencer, a gel imager, and an
analytical computer cluster - will be available to the entire research community
at Washington State University, but will be used primarily for research in
ecological and evolutionary genetics. The incorporation of molecular genetic
technologies into ecological and evolutionary studies has allowed for sensitive
and powerful tests of ideas in these areas, and also has spurred new fields of
research. Washington State University (WSU) has invested heavily in growth in
these areas, and is emerging as a leader in these fields. The goal of acquiring
these new instruments is to allow WSU researchers to conduct sophisticated,
state-of-the-art research incorporating large amounts of genetic information
(e.g., information from multiple genes) from large numbers of individuals, and
also to utilize powerful statistical approaches for analysis of these
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support new and on-going ecological
and evolutionary research projects, as well as educational efforts, at
Washington State University. These projects use molecular techniques to address
questions in three general areas: (1) evolutionary systematics, (2) population
genetics and evolutionary ecology, and (3) evolutionary development and
genomics. Specific projects within these areas are numerous, and include
investigations of the evolutionary relationships among extant groups of
organisms, host/pathogen coevolution, the long-term consequences of introduced
populations and habitat fragmentation, evolution of the developmental system of
fish and insects, the dynamics of genome evolution in plants and genetic mapping
of ecologically useful traits in economically important organisms. In addition,
the application and analysis of genetic data made possible by the requested
instrumentation will substantially enhance the experiences of undergraduate
research collaborators as well as graduate student training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquired instrumentation also will have several
broader impacts. First, these instruments will serve as a nucleus to foster
collaboration among a group of researchers distributed across two colleges at
WSU, and thus will serve as a catalyst for formation of an inter-departmental
working group that will conduct research, jointly train graduate students, and
hold an annual research symposium. Second, data generated from the acquired
instruments also will enhance on-going public education efforts. Finally, this
instrumentation will increase the participation of under-represented groups by
increasing research opportunities for students from such groups. Participation
by such individuals will be actively encouraged through continued recruitment of
female graduate students, targeted recruitment of graduate students from
traditionally African American and Native American colleges, and inclusion of
students/faculty from regional Native American schools in the annual research
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;