* 0321187
* MRI/RUI:  Acquisition of a Pulsed Laser Deposition System for Research and Educational Training in Materials Science
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Bryan Breyfogle, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 177,000.00

This grant provides support for the acquisition of a pulsed laser deposition
system for research and educational training in materials science at Southwest
Missouri &lt;br/&gt;State University (SMSU). In recent years, a Pulsed Laser
Deposition (PLD) system has emerged as a vital experimental tool for both
research and education, particularly in materials science. This is due to its
unique performance, versatility and success in synthesis of advanced materials
and the development of cutting-edge technology. This technique has been
extensively used to prepare high quality thin films of oxides, ferroelectrics,
dielectrics, semiconductors, polymers, metals and alloys for applications in
electronic, magnetic and optical devices. A PLD system will enhance the
materials preparation facility within the University. In particular, the
instrument will be used to synthesize thin films of the following electronic
materials: (1) semiconductors for photovoltaic applications; (2) magnetic
semiconductors for spintronic devices; (3) organic semiconductors for
applications in infrared sensors and optoelectronic devices; (4) perovskite
ferroelectrics for nonvolatile ferroelectric random access memories; and (5)
perovskite manganites for micromagnetics and charge ordering phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in
areas of materials synthesis using the PLD system. The research and research
training activities using the PLD system will greatly enhance students skills
and experience in the synthesis of thin films allowing them to be better
prepared for career related jobs in industry and academia. Since the PLD
facility will be an integral part of undergraduate/graduate courses, it will
attract more students. A special summer workshop on the synthesis of electronic
materials and their applications in real life problems will be conducted for
students from community colleges, high schools in rural areas, and minority
schools and colleges. This effort will boost career prospects in the areas of
materials science of for many rural students and other underrepresented groups.
In addition to strengthening the Materials Science program, the proposed
equipment will broaden interdisciplinary cooperation between the other campus
science departments and enhance present and future collaborations with other
universities and research centers. The results from the proposed activities will
be published in peer reviewed journals and presented at interdisciplinary
conferences and scientific society meetings. This will enhance the scientific
and technological understanding within different branches of science. Finally,
the proposed activities have important applications in the areas of defense
informatics and bio technology that are of potential interest to society as it
relates to homeland security and in general. &lt;br/&gt;