* 0321284
* Acquisition of an X-Ray Diffractometer for Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Branton Campbell, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 203,000.00

This grant supports the acquisition of a Bruker-Nonius X8 APEX x-ray
diffractometer with a KYRO-FLEX low-temperature attachment, which will be used
as a structural characterization tool. The new area detector- equipped
diffractometer will enhance existing capabilities, create new educational
opportunities, and provide the means to initiate new research directions. The
PIs share a common interest in the synthesis and physical behavior of nanoporous
materials and bring a well-rounded combination of expertise to the
collaboration. A modern X-ray diffractometer will enable systematic exploration
of the synthesis and structural modification of porous metal-organic phases,
zeolites, zeolite framework analogues, and mesoporous structures. Due to highly
shape selective host-guest interactions, nanoporous materials have become
essential to basic technologies such as ion exchange, chemical separation and
heterogeneous catalysis. Research directions will include new synthetic routes,
the effects of framework defects and disorder on shape-selective processes, and
the role of structure-directing agents in effecting phase transitions and phase
stability. Structural information will be combined with other physical property
measurements including calorimetry, thermal gravimetry, ionic conductivity,
mass-spectrometry, and solid-state NMR. Because crystal size and quality are
often the principal bottlenecks to progress, the sensitivity of the APEX CCD
detector, coupled with state-of-the-art x-ray optics, will make it possible to
study unique samples that would previously have been abandoned or farmed out to
laboratories with more modern equipment. This highly versatile instrument is
suited to both single-crystal and powder diffraction applications and will be
used by the PIs for structure determination, phase identification, variable-
temperature structural analysis, and three-dimensional diffuse-scattering
studies. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Rapid data collection, the highly visual
nature of two-dimensional diffraction images, a user- friendly interface for
non-specialists, and modern analytical software make the instrument an excellent
educational tool for students. The PIs will use it to train both their graduate
and undergraduate students in the essentials of crystallography and diffraction.
The C&amp;B department has committed to devoting a portion of its Instrument
Analysis Laboratory course, which is required of all undergraduate chemistry
majors, to single-crystal and powder diffraction experiments. Furthermore, the
P&amp;A, C&amp;B, and geology departments have agreed to share responsibility
for a special topics course on Crystallography and Diffraction that will provide
specialized training on the new diffractometer. This course will be designed for
both upper-level undergraduates and graduate students, and will be offered once
every other year. The new instrument will impact both women and minority
students, as both the P&amp;A and C&amp;B departments regularly participate in
the university's program to recruit minority high school seniors and actively
recruit female research assistants from their undergraduate classes. To maximize
its benefit, the new diffractometer will also be made available to other
research groups at BYU and nearby Utah Valley State College.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;