* 0321625
* SBIR Phase II:  Real-Time Image Processing Based Motion Detection for Science and Mathematics Learning
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Paul Antonucci, Alberti's Window, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 10/31/2005
* USD 551,427.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will create a
software-based, real-time, single camera, direct-to-computer, two-dimensional
motion analysis system for education using image-processing technology. Image
processing has not previously been used in educational motion detection.
Compared to the commonly used methods--real-time one-dimensional graphing and
frame-by-frame analysis of stored video--this innovation has many advantages,
such as the simultaneous real-time display of video and graphs, multidimensional
operation, ability to operate over any distance scale, display of the shape and
orientation of objects, and the automatic generation of stroboscope-like images.
This innovation creates the opportunity to surpass in learning effectiveness and
ease-of-use the technologies now used widely in high school and college physics
for the study of motion. In addition it will potentially reach a much larger
group--mathematics classrooms from middle school through college. The system
will operate with ordinary classroom computers and ordinary digital video
cameras.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Used in conjunction with inquiry-based curricula,
Alberti's' Windows' system will be primarily used in physics and mathematics
education classes. Improving the teaching of physics and mathematics is basic to
science literacy and is essential to creating a technologically capable
workforce. Ultimately, the following potential markets can also be explored:
CAD/CAM, physiological/medical testing, sports, industrial monitoring and
control, videogames, and security.&lt;br/&gt;