* 0321046
* Acquisition of a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope for Multidiscipline Research and Research Training
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2006
* Susannah Gal, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Hansma
* 06/30/2006
* USD 288,346.00

A grant has been awarded to SUNY Binghamton under the direction of Dr. Dennis
McGee (PI), Susannah Gal, and Steven Tammariello (Co-PIs) to purchase a Laser
Scanning Confocal Microscope (LSCM). The LSCM has become an essential instrument
for modern research in the biological sciences and a variety of other fields.
This instrument is capable of high resolution imaging of fluorescent specimens
which is far superior to the conventional fluorescent microscope. Furthermore,
the LSCM and computer analysis can allow the generation of three-dimensional
images and advanced analysis of fluorescence data. The acquisition of this LSCM
will create a core equipment facility which will greatly facilitate the research
and research training capability at SUNY Binghamton across several departments
including biological sciences, chemistry, mechanical engineering, and
psychology.

A role for the LSCM in the research projects of twelve investigators have been
identified. These include determining the effect and localization of antifreeze
glycoproteins in cells, an investigation into the development and regulation of
bacterial biofilm formation by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, an analysis of protease
activity in plant and animal cells, and an evaluation of adult neurogenesis in
the cerebral and cerebellar cortex of animals. The LSCM will also be important
in studies on the effect of cell surface integrins on the co-localization of
intracellular signaling components, an examination of Pseudomonas putida gene
expression and biofilm formation on roots, investigating the molecular signaling
events associated with programmed cell death and the molecular mechanisms
involved in regulating the cell cycle in arthropod dormancy, and examining the
molecular basis for cell death in response to exposure to low temperatures.
Other studies proposed for using the LSCM include determining the role of immune
cells in ovarian development, investigating the neural basis for insect feeding
behavior, understanding the mechanisms of microfluid movement as related to
biosensors, microscale mixing and biofilm formation, and determining the
localization of proteases in seeds and plant tissues. The acquisition of the
LSCM will not only enhance the research of the participating users, but should
also foster new collaborations between users from different research areas and
enhance the recruitment of new faculty and quality graduate students. These
activities emphasize the important intellectual merit of this proposal. The LSCM
will also be an important part of graduate and undergraduate research training.
An existing upper level undergraduate Cell Biology Laboratory will be expanded
to include the LSCM so that numerous students will be exposed to this
technology. A new mini-course will also be developed to train graduate and
undergraduate students to use the LSCM in their research. In addition, a
workshop on LSCM will be developed to introduce and train university faculty and
visiting researchers in the use of this powerful research instrument.

The broader impacts of this proposal include the integration of experiments
using the LSCM into the above courses to expose large numbers of undergraduate
and graduate students to this state-of-the-art technology. This will facilitate
graduate and undergraduate participation in research and will better prepare
students to become part of our society as researchers and educators in the
biological and related sciences. Furthermore, use of the LSCM will be made
available to the university's preexisting efforts to attract students from
underrepresented groups into continuing their education to the baccalaureate and
post-baccalaureate level through a summer research program with the university
faculty. Therefore, acquisition of this instrument will have a positive impact
on numerous faculty research programs, the students working in these research
laboratories and numerous students participating in courses and summer research
programs which make use of the LSCM.