* 0321361
* Acquisition of a Time-of-Flight ICP-MS for Interdisciplinary Research in Archaeology, Geology, and Biology at CSULB
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,06/30/2005
* Richard Behl, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 207,523.00

Support from the National Science Foundation will be used to acquire a time-of-
flight inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometer (TOF-ICP-MS), which will be
added to a core of analytical instruments being assembled by a collaborative
team of faculty in the College of Liberal Arts (CLA) and the College of Natural
Sciences and Mathematics (CNSM) at California State University Long Beach
(CSULB). Analytical instruments funded by NSF MRI grants within this core
facility operated by our research group include a quadrupole ICP-MS, a laser
ablation system, an environmental SEM with attached EDX and WDS, and a low-mass
stable isotope mass-spectrometer. A thermoluminescence/optical luminescence
measurement system, funded by alternate sources, will be added in the near
future.

The TOF-ICP-MS complements the existing quadrupole ICP-MS by offering superior
transient-signal analysis (ideal for laser-ablation sample introduction) and
superior isotope ratio precision. These advantages will be exploited in a
variety of archaeological, geological, and biological research applications. In
archaeology, the TOF-ICP-MS instrument coupled to a laser ablation system will
enhance research into artifact provenance by improving macro- and micro-level
chemical characterization and by making it possible to combine elemental and
isotope-ratio characterization. In geology, the new instrument will be used in
investigations of paleoceanographic and tectonic history of the Neogene and
Quaternary California Margin. In biology, the high resolution isotopic ratioing
and simultaneous, high acquisition rate time-resolved analysis that can only be
provided by a TOF-ICP-MS will enhance ongoing investigations of how organisms
balance their metabolic requirements for essential metals against the
bioavailability of these metals in the environment. The broader impact of this
instrument acquisition will be to enhance the interdisciplinary education and
research environment at CSULB. CSULB, a non-Ph.D. granting institution, is the
second-largest university in California, and, in 2000, it was designated a MSI
(minority-serving institution) by the U.S. Department of Education. The PIs on
this project are members of a collaborative team of faculty in the CLA and CNSM
who are promoting interdisciplinary research and instruction in what can broadly
be labeled "historical sciences." Minimally, historical sciences include
geology, biology, geography, and archaeology, but we prefer to define the field
not by the existing disciplines it subsumes but rather as any scientific
investigation of historical and evolutionary phenomena, be they geological,
biological, or cultural. One way we are promoting interdisciplinary historical
science research and education is by supporting use of analytical instruments,
including the new TOF-ICP-MS, by a variety of student and faculty researchers.
Locally, students who major in archaeology, geology, biology, and other
sciences, many of whom are from underrepresented groups, will receive hands-on
experience with the state-of-the-art instrumentation in our laboratories. We
also plan to extend an existing short-term visitor program that will bring
collaborating researchers of any academic rank, from undergraduate to senior
faculty, to CSULB to use the TOF-ICP-MS and other instruments. The overall goal
we are pursuing through this instrument acquisition and other ongoing
initiatives is creation of an interdisciplinary center that will be a resource
for CSULB, the California State University System, and the broader community of
scientists investigating historical phenomena.

