* 0321979
* Kinetics and Mechanism of Catalytic Oxidation with Ozone
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* S. Ted Oyama, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 08/31/2008
* USD 335,000.00

This proposal deals with the destruction of volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
using a novel oxidant, ozone, which is economic at low VOC concentrations and
has good potential for practical applications. The research focuses on aspects
of fundamental importance in catalysis: the study of mechanism at a molecular
level, the treatment of nonuniform surfaces, and the understanding of the origin
of reactivity in oxides. The broader impact of the project is addressed in five
areas that include 1) high relevancy, 2) advanced training in science, 3)
recruitment of minorities, 4) support of undergraduate education, and 5) broad
dissemination of results. &lt;br/&gt;The aim of the work is to obtain molecular
level information about the various steps in the catalytic reactions. The
catalysts to be studied will be supported MnOx and VOx, which are highly active
catalysts for complete and partial oxidation. These will be characterized by
laser Raman spectroscopy (LRS), extended x-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS)
measurements, and ab initio molecular orbital calculations to provide
information such as atomic coordination, bond lengths, and vibrational
frequencies. The specific substrates will be methanol and acetone, which are
commonly used solvents. The mechanism studies will combine rate measurements at
a variety of conditions (partial pressure, temperature) together with LRS
measurements of adsorbed intermediates and theoretical calculations. Another
objective in the present work is to better understand the origin of reactivity
enhancement in catalytic oxidation reactions. The hypothesis that will be
investigated is whether for alcohol oxidation and ozone decomposition the
ability of the catalytic site to accept electrons in the rate-determining step
of the reaction is a key determinant of activity. This will be done using near-
edge x-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) measurements, which are ideal for
obtaining the density of unoccupied electronic states in metal centers, and
therefore, to probe the electron-accepting properties of the catalysts.
&lt;br/&gt;