* 0321616
* SBIR Phase II:   Large Area Platform Technology for Small Diameter Silicon Carbide
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2003,12/31/2006
* Lee Kareem, ZIN TECHNOLOGIES, INC
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 12/31/2006
* USD 781,906.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will optimize
the key technologies for deployment of high-temperature pressure sensors from
proven silicon carbide (SiC) sensor dies for harsh environment applications
within aerospace and automotive markets. These include wafer bonding and
planarization, electrical characterization, selection of integrated electronics
manufacturing methods, and temperature compensation algorithms. The Discrete
Wafer Array Process (DWAP) technique will be further developed to demonstrate
fabrication of SiC pressure sensors. Prototype platforms for demonstration of
low-cost and high volume manufacturability of single crystal SiC devices in
conventional foundries will be provided and the semiconductor-on-insulator (SOI)
technology provided by the DWAP concept will be leveraged to demonstrate
superior device performance. This work will focus on developing and optimizing
the necessary technical foundation of SiC sensor dies through electrical
characterization and interface electronic development, and fabrication of SiC
pressure sensor dies on 4-inch platform for testing by GE and Ford.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing demand for miniaturization presents unique
growth opportunities in the MEMS Market, which is estimated at $7Billion.
Combined skills in MEMS manufacturing processes, electronics system design,
algorithm development, and market access are required for success. The harsh
environment market segment, estimated at $4.5Billion by 2005 is poised to be a
major beneficiary of the technical and cost saving superiority of Silicon
Carbide (SiC) over Silicon (Si) as the primary semi-conducting material. The
pressure sensor sector of the market segment will grow from $3.5Billion by 2005
to $9.06Billion, with a Compounded Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 16.5%.
&lt;br/&gt;