* 0321492
* SGER:  Investigation of Auxetic Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2003,02/28/2005
* Alison Flatau, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 02/28/2005
* USD 80,922.00

PI: Alison Flatau&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Maryland&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Investigation of auxetic metals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This
SGER research project entails an investigation of metals that exhibit auxetic or
negative Poisson's ratio behavior and a feasibility study into engineering
applications that use this effect. An auxetic material is one that increases in
its lateral dimension in response to stretching or tensile loading. This novel
and counterintuitive behavior has been used to advantage in a variety of
composite structural systems, cellular foams, and polymers. However, metals that
exhibit auxetic properties are rare and require careful orientation of a
structural member relative to the molecular crystal lattice orientation for
observation of this effect. This research effort will include analysis and
measurement of mechanical properties such as elastic modulus and Poisson's ratio
in single crystal and textured polycrystal metals, with a particular focus iron-
aluminum alloys (Alfenol) and on a relatively new material, the iron-gallium
alloy known as Galfenol. Preliminary predictions of Poisson's ratio's for
Alfenol and Galfenol in a [110] orientation indicate respectively that values of
as low as -0.44 and -0.75 can be realized. The study will investigate these
materials and develop finite element models for use in identifying compositions
of auxetic metals with properties best suited for the design and development of
fasteners that function because of friction induced under tensile loading due to
transverse expansion resulting from the auxetic nature of the material.
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research offers the potential for a broad commercial
impact if successful, as the fastener application suggested offers an affordable
alternative to nut-and-bolt methods for joining structural members. If effective
as a single component fastener, there should be many uses in which two-component
nut-and-bolt connectors might be replaced, especially in space applications and
in microsystem applications, where there are inherent difficulties in
manipulation of the nut to secure a bolt. Additionally, the principal
investigator has a strong track record for engaging underrepresented
undergraduate students in laboratory research experiences both during the
academic year and summers, and will offer research opportunities for both women
and minorities students throughout the course of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;