* 0321053
* Glacial Assessment:  Past, Present and Future:  Acquisition of Essential Research Instrumentation
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Cornelis van der Veen, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 07/31/2006
* USD 354,170.00

This award supports a Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) purchase of equipment
for Ohio State University's Glacial Assessment Program (GAP). The program has
three major thrusts: 1) documenting ongoing and recent glacier change primarily
using geophysical methods including remote sensing; 2) assessing the recent
changes from a long-term perspective provided by high-resolution ice core-
derived climate histories; and 3) projecting future glacier changes by improving
modeling capability, and hence, predicting future climate forcing in terms of
snowfall and ablation. This proposal requests funds to augment GAP's ability to
investigate glacier changes in the past, present and future by enhancing OSU's
technical capability to make critical observations and analyses. More
specifically, the spectroradiometer will allow crucial field observations of the
spectral signature of periglacial landscapes, to serve as validation for
trimline mapping using multispectral satellite imagery. The gravity meter is
essential to make a more quantitative assessment of the mass balances of
Greenland, Antarctica and smaller glaciers and ice caps that strongly control
present and future sea level fluctuations. The mass spectrometer and ion
chromatographs provide critical augmentation to OSU's capability to reconstruct
past climate variability from ice cores recovered from glaciers and ice caps
from the equator to the poles and thereby disentangle the various mechanisms
forcing regional climates in the past. Finally, computer clusters will allow
better prediction of future climate change via the development of higher
resolution simulations of regional climate. The acquisition of the proposed
instrumentation is essential for BPRC to maintain its role as
an&lt;br/&gt;international leader in the study of global climate change and for
the P.I.s to direct their extensive collective knowledge and expertise on the
critical issue of the rapid and accelerating loss of glacier ice&lt;br/&gt;