* 0321974
* Bacterial Glycogen Biosynthesis:  Regulation and Biological Function
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2002,08/31/2003
* Tony Romeo, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2003
* USD 39,163.00

9726197 Romeo, T. The transition from exponential growth into stationary phase
by bacteria elicits extensive changes in biochemical and physiological
properties. This enhances resistance to a variety of stresses and promotes
survival in the environment. In order to understand the physiology of the
stationary phase, the factors which regulate these adaptations must be
identified and studied. Prior funding of this project (MCB 9218796) resulted in
the discovery and substantial elucidation of a mechanistically unique global
regulatory system, Csr (carbon storage regulator). Csr controls glycogen
synthesis and other stationary phase processes, several carbon metabolism
pathways, surface properties and virulence factors of certain plant pathogens.
Csr consists of two unconventional regulatory components: CsrA, a small RNA-
binding protein that binds to specific mRNA transcripts and facilitates their
decay, and CsrB, a -350 nucleotide structural RNA that binds to 18 CsrA subunits
and antagonizes CsrA activity. CsrB is one of a small but growing number of
trans-acting regulatory RNAs in bacteria, and its ability to sequester an mRNA
decay factor is a novel biological function for RNA. Objectives of the current
project are to i) Define the Csr modulon and control mechanisms. The effects of
csrA on a variety of metabolic and physiological processes will be examined
using enzyme assays, reporter gene constructs, and other approaches. The
regulatory circuitry and mechanisms by which CsrA mediates global control will
be investigated using genetic and in vivo transcription analyses. To determine
whether CsrA acts as a global mRNA decay factor via specific mRNA-binding, an
approach combining PCR, in vitro transcription and RNA mobility shift will be
developed. ii) Identify genes encoding additional Csr components and determine
their functions. Novel csr genes will be identified by transposon mutagenesis
and will be cloned and functionally characterized via the approaches which were
used to elucidate the biol ogical function of bacterial glycogen. Previous
studies indicate that glycogen does not promote viability during long-term
nutrient deprivation. Instead, it facilitates the acquisition of certain stress
resistance properties in the stationary phase. Studies to rigorously determine
the function of bacterial glycogen will be completed. The central role of Csr in
controlling bacterial metabolism, physiology and virulence, and its value as a
novel paradigm of genetic regulation present a compelling case for continued
investigation of this regulatory system. This project will advance fundamental
knowledge of the systems which have evolved for the intricate control of
bacterial metabolism and physiology, and for modulating messenger RNA decay, the
most recalcitrant of the principle gene regulatory processes. It will also
generate information and genetic tools for directing endogenous carbon flux
during fermentation / biotechnology applications.