* 0321365
* Development of a Stable, User-Friendly High-Power Terahertz Source:  Enhancements to the UCSB Free-Electron Lasers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Mark Sherwin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Bouldin
* 07/31/2007
* USD 425,000.00

This grant provides support for developing enhancements to a stable, user-
friendly high-power terahertz source, the Free-Electron Laser (FEL), at the
University of California, Santa Barbara. Scientific disciplines that make use of
terahertz radiation include astrophysics, earth science, biophysics, condensed
matter physics, and chemistry. Emergent technological applications include
imaging, biological and chemical agent detection, optical communications, remote
sensing, and ultrafast electronics. The UCSB Free-Electron Lasers and newly
renovated User's Lab stand out as unique facilities that enable measurements
that can be done nowhere else. Current scientific activity is predominantly in
the area of semiconductor physics. Activity related to semiconductors includes
the development of new sources and detectors of Terahertz radiation, the study
of new types of interactions between ultrastrong light and matter, Terahertz
modulation of light beams for optical communications, and quantum information
processing. In addition, there is a growing activity in biophysics.
Collaborations bring visitors from Europe and Japan as well as other
institutions in the U. S. The new enhancements will (1) modernize the control
system to improve the stability and reproducibility of all the UCSB FELs to make
them more user friendly for all operators, and to double the available frequency
range to 10 terahertz; (2) stabilize the frequency to eliminate pulse-to-pulse
frequency jitter, narrow the linewidth, and greatly reduce fluctuations in
intensity within a pulse to enhance existing applications of the FELs and new
applications, like electron spin resonance and high-resolution chemical
spectroscopy; (3) build a FEL spectrometer to accurately display the operating
frequency of the FEL's. Users will then have real-time feedback on FEL
frequency.

The enhancement of the UCSB FELs will provide new capabilities for the
development of science and technology at Terahertz frequencies. Terahertz
science and technology at UCSB cuts across many disciplines, including
semiconductor physics, optical communications, quantum information processing,
and biophysics. The enhancements will increase productivity of users of the FELs
and associated facilities, who include undergraduates, graduate students, post-
doctoral researchers, and faculty at UCSB, and junior and senior visitors from
other institutions in the U. S. and abroad. High-school students and teachers
also participate in research associated with the UCSB FELs. There is recently
increasing interest from private industry. The enhancements will be carried out
in large part by undergraduates and graduate students affording them an exciting
real-world research opportunity and valuable training.





