* 0321726
* Epigenetic Regulation of the Mutator System of Transposons
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,05/31/2009
* Michael Freeling, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 05/31/2009
* USD 986,783.00

Transposable elements, or transposons, are short stretches of DNA that can move
from place to place within genomes. Often they move into, and thus mutagenize,
other genes. Because of this propensity, transposons have become remarkably
useful mutagens, as they both mutate and "tag" genes, allowing for their rapid
recovery, particularly in large, unsequenced genomes such as maize.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In maize, the Mutator transposon system has become the
primary means by which genes are mutagenized and cloned. The system is composed
of a number of different classes of elements, all of which are regulated by the
MuDR class. Mutator (Mu) is remarkably active; elements can duplicate themselves
at frequencies exceeding one new insertion per element per generation, resulting
in massive increases in mutation frequencies. In order to exploit the systems
utility, it is necessary to understand its regulation. The aspect of Mu
regulation that is least understood involves epigenetic modification of
otherwise active MuDR elements. Epigenetic modification involves changes in gene
activity without changes in DNA sequence. In the case of Mutator these changes
can result in a heritable loss of activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to understand the nature of epigenetic shifts in Mutator system. The
project will exploit the availability of a minimal Mutator line, which, unlike
those lines used for mutagenesis, carries a single MuDR element at a known
chromosomal position. Mutations and chemical agents that either silence or
reactivate this single MuDR element will be used to dissect the molecular events
that correspond to these changes in Mutator activity. Using the minimal Mutator
system it will also be possible to separate the processes involved in the
initiation of silencing from those involved in its maintenance, an open question
for a variety of epigenetically regulated phenomena. In addition, the system
will be used to examine the effects of a large number of mutations in chromatin
remodeling genes in maize that are being developed at the University of Arizona
as part of a previously funded project. It is expected that this research will
make the Mutator system significantly more useful to the maize community, and
that it will illuminate a variety of questions concerning epigenetic silencing,
both in maize and in other organisms. Of particular and immediate use to the
maize community will be a locus we have identified designated Mu killer (Muk),
which can silence otherwise highly active and mutagenic maize Mu lines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lines carrying the Muk locus will be made available, along
with instructions as to their use. In addition, initial results of interactions
between mutations affecting chromatin structure and silenced MuDR elements will
be made public on the University of Arizona chromatin database(ChromDB:
http://www.chromdb.org/) as they become available.&lt;br/&gt;