* 0321298
* SBIR Phase II:  Detection Systems for High-Speed Optoelectronic Sortation of Low Z Metal Alloys
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2009
* Leigh Peritz, wTe Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2009
* USD 1,011,954.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
novel prototype optoelectronic sensing system for the high-speed identification
and sorting of metals, particularly aluminum alloys. The goal is to develop the
capability to sort aluminum into its exact alloy designations. The technology is
expected to sort materials in less than 50-milliseconds per item automatically
without operator intervention while the scrap is in motion on a high-speed
conveyor belt. The scrap recycling industry reports that more than 30 billion
pounds of nonferrous metals are produced each year in the U.S. alone. The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) reports that more than 10 billion pounds
of these nonferrous metals are discarded each year in landfills, because
recycling is either technically or economically impractical. Existing methods of
sortation that employ visual examination and hand sortation, or alternatively
employ heavy media separation, cannot sort aluminum by alloy type. Refining is
accomplished in smelting facilities that are expensive to build and often
polluting. Using advanced spectrographic detection techniques, including
computer analysis; the proposed technology will improve alloy identification
accuracy and automatically sort aluminum metal alloys at speeds never before
attainable. The commercial impact of this project will be increased scrap
utilization, increased scrap value, reduced pressure on non-renewable resources,
and reduced environmental pollution. The potential worldwide market exceeds $2
billion annually.