* 0322562
* Vitamin B6 Biosynthesis in Plants and Its Role In Stress Responses
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Margaret Daub, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 07/31/2007
* USD 405,000.00

The goals of this work are to characterize the pathways for vitamin B6
biosynthesis in plants and to demonstrate a role for this vitamin in plant
responses to environmental stress. Vitamin B6 is required in all organisms for
its essential role as an enzyme co-factor. Previous work identified the major de
novo biosynthetic pathway in fungi. These studies also provided evidence that
pyridoxine and its vitamers quench singlet oxygen and superoxide and have
antioxidant activity, results that support the hypothesis that B6 vitamers play
a heretofore unidentified role in cellular stress responses and antioxidant
defense. Preliminary work has demonstrated that genes in the de novo pyridoxine
biosynthetic pathway in Arabidopsis are upregulated in response to stress caused
by high light intensities, chilling, and drought. Tolerance or susceptibility to
these stresses has been strongly linked in plants, and this coordinated response
is also consistent with localization of pyridoxine biosynthesis in chloroplasts.
This research will investigate the role of pyridoxine in tolerance to high
light, chilling, and drought by overexpression of the de novo biosynthetic genes
in Arabidopsis and characterizing the response to these stresses. Green
fluorescent protein fusion constructs with epifluorescence and confocal
microscopy will be used to determine the cellular localization of the pathway
enzymes in cells. In addition, this research will characterize genes involved in
the vitamin B6 salvage pathway in Arabidopsis, the pathway that interconverts
between pyridoxine and pyridoxal and their phosphorylated derivatives. Analysis
of relative vitamer levels of T-DNA insertion knockout mutants and/or
overexpression lines will be used to confirm the salvage pathway genes. Genes
will be assayed for regulation in response to high light, chilling, drought, and
other oxidative stress-inducing conditions, and the response of knockout mutants
or overexpression lines will confirm the possible role of the salvage pathway in
oxidative stress responses. The results of this study will identify the genes
involved in the vitamin B6 de novo and salvage pathways in a model plant,
Arabidopsis, and demonstrate the cellular localization of the two pathways. This
study will also provide evidence for a new function for this important vitamin
in protecting plants and perhaps other organisms against environmental and
oxidative stresses. This research has the potential to lead to the development
of crop plants with improved ability to tolerate environmental stresses
including chilling, drought, and high light. This project will also benefit
teaching and the training of young scientists.

Vitamin B6 is an essential vitamin, required by all living organisms. Little is
known, however, about how organisms synthesize this vitamin. This research will
characterize the pathway for production of vitamin B6 in plants. Further, recent
evidence suggests that vitamin B6 may play a role (similar to vitamins C and E)
in protecting cells against toxicants and environmental stresses. This research
will investigate the importance of this vitamin in tolerance of plants to
environmental stresses, and has the potential to lead to the development of crop
plants with improved resistance to cold, drought, and salinity.