* 0322739
* Creating New Wealth by Improving the Fuzzy Front End of the Innovation Engine
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Peter Koen, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 07/31/2006
* USD 295,080.00

Abstract for NSF Grant 0322739 Koen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creating New Wealth by
Improving the Fuzzy Front End of the Innovation Engine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this proposal is to discover, significantly improve and disseminate
effective practices for the Fuzzy Front End (FFE) so as to increase the number
of commercially successful major products that may be fed into the New Product
Development (NPD) portion of the innovation engine in the Chemical, Food and
Beverage, Medical Device and Petroleum segments. The value of this proposal is
related to advancing knowledge in the FFE - which represents an under researched
area. The broader impact is the enablement of new scientific and technological
discoveries to be more quickly turned into products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
innovation process can be divided into three parts: 1. the FFE where product
concepts are created 2. the NPD portion where the product is developed and 3.
commercialization where the product is sold. Practices for the NPD portion have
been extensively investigated. However, most companies have found that the, now
efficient, NPD portion is being mostly fed with low profit and low risk
incremental projects. A better understanding of the FFE will allow more high
risk platform and radical projects to be introduced into the
NPD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal will be achieved in seven sequential steps:
1. perform case studies in the targeted segments; 2. develop a validated survey
with outcome measures with partner companies (i.e. Industrial Research
Institute, Cabot Corporation, Ethicon, ExxonMobil, LORD Corporation and Rich
Products); 3. survey the targeted segments; 4. determine the most effective
practices by visiting companies in the top 20% and compare them to a matched
pair in the 50% octal; 5. develop an assessment tool which companies can use to
compare their practices against the top 20%; 6. apply the methodologies in an
actual intervention using the assessment tool; and 7. develop traditional and
web enabled course material to disseminate the knowledge.