* 0322589
* RUI:  Incidental Nest Predation in Songbirds: Using Behavioral Indicators to Determine Ecological Processes and Scales
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Kenneth Schmidt, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 01/31/2005
* USD 78,204.00

0089588. Kenneth Schmidt. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predation rates and the
subsequent impact of predators on prey are thought to be determined mostly by
the population density of predators. Nonetheless, much predation by generalist
predators may occur when secondary prey types are encountered coincidentally by
a predator while searching for its primary prey. Such incidental predation is
determined by the behavioral responses of individual predators to the abundance
and distribution of alternative prey types, as well as to features of the
predator's environment. Incidental predation may be extremely common in
generalist, and to a smaller degree in specialist predators. Because such weak
interactions potentially stabilize community structure, they are of considerable
importance. More specifically, the rate of incidental predation may be related
to amount of enemy-free space (areas unutilized by predators). Understanding
this mechanism is critical because of its relationship to the strength of the
predator-prey interaction, as well because enemy-free space influences the
stability of predator-prey dynamics and the coexistence of multiple prey
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research examines incidental
predation in a community of breeding songbirds, whose eggs and nestlings are
preyed on by small mammals, primarily the white-footed mouse (Peromyscus
leucopus). It focuses on predation from the perspectives of individual behaviors
and population dynamics, as well as their repercussions to community-level
phenomena. The approach combines theoretical, observational, and experimental
components, ultimately to test explicit underlying mechanisms. More
specifically, the research involves (1) monitoring the density of common
vertebrates (white-footed mouse, eastern chipmunk, gray squirrel) which are nest
predators of songbirds (2) monitoring nest predation rates using artificial
songbird nests, and (3) monitoring the success of natural nests of selected
songbird species, (4) testing if enemy-free space is a key control of incidental
predation, (5) evaluating the utility of giving-up densities as indicators of
ecological patterns and processes at multiple spatial scales, and (6) estimating
the influence of population density and individual behavioral responses of
predators on the survival of nests of songbirds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;