* 0322505
* The Public Value of Social Policy Research
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,07/31/2005
* David Guston, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 07/31/2005
* USD 79,993.00

This project investigates the public value or societal outcomes of the research
funded by social policy agencies of the US federal government such as the
Departments of Education, Housing and Urban Development, Justice, Labor, and
some human services agencies within Health and Human Services. This research
studies agencies in Justice and Human Services. The research sponsored by social
policy agencies constitutes a significant sum, and it includes a wide array of
disciplines and a great share of the social science research the federal
government funds. Studying this research will broaden the scholarship of public
R&amp;D management beyond such traditional agencies as NIH and NSF, facilitating
the comparative study of techniques including merit review and technology
transfer. Moreover, the study may illuminate mechanisms for producing public
value from research and thus contribute to understanding the relationship
between sponsored research and societal outcomes more broadly. Examining the
"public value" of social policy research means studying the societal outcomes of
the research and the hypothesized causal links between mission-related research
programs and these outcomes. The study begins by scrutinizing public
articulations of the goals and objectives for the research and continues by
analyzing the procedural and logical connections between them and identifiable
societal outcomes. Sources for the articulation of goals and objectives include
authorizing legislation, mission statements, and strategic plans. Societal
outcomes include available, systematic social indicators, as well as ad hoc
indicators that policy makers and stakeholders have used in articulating the
societal problem triggering the need for the research program. Although the
agencies' responses to the Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) will be
an important resource, the researchers will not focus on evaluating that Act's
impact, per se, on the agencies or their research. Rather, they will concentrate
on asking how social policy agencies set priorities between current programs and
investing in research, how they manage research for societal outcomes, how they
transfer new knowledge and/or technologies from their sponsored research into
the pursuit of their missions, how they anticipate the linkages between their
research and societal outcomes, and what those outcomes may be. The research
will thus progress by a combination of documentary review and elite, semi-
structured interviews of agency personnel and grant recipients, as well as of
members of target and user communities. Many of the agencies studied have a
disproportionate impact on minority and disadvantaged groups, and the method of
study includes target, user, and client communities as
respondents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research funded by this proposal will
continue research previously funded by NSF at the pilot level. It will complete
the inquiry into research sponsored by the human services agencies of HHS and
begin and, it is hoped, complete the inquiry into the National Institute of
Justice at the Department of Justice. The team will train two graduate students
and, besides publication in scholarly journals, research findings will
supplement teaching in several graduate courses in the public policy program at
the Principal Investigator's institution. &lt;br/&gt;