* 0322783
* Multiattribute Decision Making in Centralized and Decentralized Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Tarunraj Singh, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Judy M. Vance
* 08/31/2007
* USD 390,870.00

In this project, the theoretical and practical challenges inherent in
multiattribute decision making in centralized and decentralized design processes
will be addressed. The intellectual advancements include developing a robust
approach to probabilistic, multiattribute decision making that uses decision
makers' stated preferences in a theoretically sound manner. The plan is to
develop provable conditions for determining whether decentralized design
processes are stable and convergent or not. Once these conditions are developed,
the plan is to use them to study how to effectively alter a decentralized
decision process in order to achieve better collective solutions than those
found by traditional sequential or iterative processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since decision making is recognized as a fundamental
construct in engineering design, the principles developed in this work will
impact a number of scientific communities, including design theory, operations
research, design automation, and control theory. In addition, the advancements
are important to multiattribute decision scenarios in industrial design
processes, from selecting a design concept, to determining a solution
configuration, to choosing materials, to selecting suppliers. The results will
be applicable across a wide range of design education activities, including
sophomore and senior product design courses, graduate level design courses, and
workshops on decision-based design. It is also anticipated that the developments
will foster further collaborations with researchers in decision sciences,
product marketing, and microeconomics. Lastly, the advancements will involve
undergraduate research students, high school students through a gifted math
program and summer workshops, and minority students in Science, Engineering and
Mathematics through two federally sponsored programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;