* 0322349
* A Systems Approach to the Visualization of Spatial Uncertainty
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Phaedon Kyriakidis, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 12/31/2005
* USD 69,951.00

Uncertainty is endemic in all stages of acquisition, processing, and
representation of spatial data; its proper modeling, its visual communication,
and the evaluation of its impact on decision-making are among the long-term
research challenges in Geographic Information Science (GIScience). Existing
approaches to the visualization of spatial uncertainty, however, typically
address only representational issues by using cartographic paradigms (e.g.,
variable line widths, or color saturation) to depict uncertain spatial data.
Such approaches do not offer a quantitative evaluation of the impact of
uncertain information on vision-related tasks without resorting to cumbersome
human subject tests. In this research, elements of spatial statistics and
computer vision are synthesized to develop a novel framework for the
visualization of uncertainty in spatial data (pertaining to fields of continuous
or categorical variables), thus advancing an all-important research frontier in
GIScience. The uncertainty visualization process is viewed from the perspective
of engineering systems: a map user constitutes a system, with input an uncertain
map and output a visual operation pertaining to spatial analysis. Given a
stochastic model for the spatial distribution of the attribute of interest
(inferred from sample measurements, related imagery and/or prior knowledge), the
system (map user) is excited by a suite of alternative synthetic maps (numerical
spatial realities), all of which are consistent with that stochastic model.
Concepts of geostatistics (random field theory) will be employed to construct
such alternative synthetic maps (simulated realizations). Efficient sampling
will be used to ensure that the finite set of alternative images span maximally
the population of possible images within the random field model adopted. Digital
image processing and computer vision algorithms will be employed as quantitative
proxies of the map user's low and mid-level visual perception tasks.
Quantitative visual uncertainty propagation will be accomplished by: a) applying
the above visual perception proxies on each simulated image, and b) recording
their outputs (e.g., boundary lengths of resulting regions, shape
characteristics of resulting spatial patterns/objects) over the set (ensemble)
of simulated realizations. The resulting distribution of vision-related
operation outputs will be quantitatively analyzed to evaluate, for example, the
perceived impact of reporting a particular single-map reality to the map user,
rather than visually (and quantitatively) exploring the space of all possible
realizations of such a map.

The development and dissemination of tools for modeling and visualization of
spatial uncertainty advocated in this proposal will offer multiple benefits to
GIScience, and as a result to society in general. The advocated systems approach
to the visualization of spatial uncertainty will contribute to a deeper
quantitative understanding of the impact of uncertain multidimensional
depictions of geographic phenomena on spatial analysis. The proposed research
plan, coupled with: a) presentations in relevant conferences, b) publications in
peer-refereed journals, c) development of a graduate-level seminar on the
visualization of spatial uncertainty at UCSB, and d) dissemination of computer
algorithms in the form of a public-domain MATLAB toolbox, will contribute to an
increased awareness of the scientific community and map users regarding the
quality of geospatial data, and consequently will enable their proper and cost-
effective utilization.