* 0322730
* Collaborative Research:     Interdisciplinary Investigation of Warm Forming of Magnesium Alloy Sheet
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Oana Cazacu, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 08/31/2006
* USD 61,301.00

The objective of this collaborative research project is to develop the
fundamental understanding necessary to design robust warm forming processes for
magnesium (Mg ) alloys, with emphasis on material behavior and process design.
Magnesium alloys offer great potential to reduce weight by displacing commonly
used materials. A problem that prevents greater exploitation of magnesium
alloys' light weight and good properties is their poor low-temperature
formability. A possible solution is warm forming, however, both practical and
fundamental issues remain. Process optimization relies heavily upon having a
good finite element (FE) modeling framework in order to determine how various
material and process parameters interact and affect the deformation process. Due
to the significant anisotropy and asymmetry in the mechanical behavior of
magnesium sheet, no readily available FE modeling framework exists. In this
work, the following approach will be employed: a polycrystal plasticity modeling
approach will be constrained by experimental data from a relatively small number
of mechanical tests to efficiently characterize the material's constitutive
behavior; a continuum model will be developed and implemented into an FE-code,
which captures the effects of mechanical twinning, in particular; finally, FE-
modeling will be used to design and implement warm forming tooling in existing
equipment. The design strategy will be subject to experimental validation using
a stamped part.

Due to the interdisciplinary nature of the work, this research combines the
microstructure, micromechanics, plasticity, process optimization, finite element
simulation, and experimental forming expertise of the three collaborating
institutions -- University of Virginia (UVA), Ohio State University (OSU), and
University of Florida (UF). Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit
from this interaction, as well as the interaction with the Institute of Metal
Forming (Hannover, Germany) and several industrial contributors (Sekely
Industries and Cyril Bath). Understanding the warm forming of anisotropic
materials will benefit numerous industries, by helping to enable the use of
numerous hard-to-form materials that have excellent properties in service.
Environmental benefits are anticipated through the increased incorporation of
lightweight materials into vehicles leading to decreased emissions of harmful
greenhouse gases.