* 0322900
* Micromachined Infrared  Spectometer
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Donald Butler, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2006
* USD 275,736.00

This proposal proposes to utilize the principal investigator's expertise in
micromachined uncooled infrared detectors to develop miniature, micromachined
optical spectrometers whose total dimensions are on the order of millimeters
that are capable of operating up to the long-wave infrared region (1-15 m). The
miniaturization of an optical spectrometer is challenging because high spectral
resolution generally requires large optical paths. In the case of a
micromachined optical spectrometer, the optical paths will be relatively short
limiting the spectral resolution. However, micromachining offers the ability to
mass-produce the devices at low cost. Some applications such as gas monitoring
do not require high spectral resolution; at least as a first line of defense,
local early warning sensor for monitoring the presence of a toxic gas in a
controlled working environment. The ability to have wearable, low cost optical
spectrometers would be advantageous to environmental safety and maintaining a
safe work place. Micromachined spectrometers could also monitor carbon dioxide
in buildings, serving as a sensor for ventilation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This investigation will
develop micromachined infrared spectrometers operating in the 1-15 m wavelength
range. Micromachined microbolometers will be used to detect the radiation such
that a single class of detector can measure the radiant energy over the entire
spectrum. Fabry-Perot and cavity interferometers will be investigated through
numerical simulation and experimental characterization. The infrared
microspectrometers will be designed and simulated using the
Corning&lt;br/&gt;Intellisense Intellisuite CAE tool. The performance limits and
design trade-offs for different spectrometer geometries will be investigated.
The infrared microspectrometers will be fabricated using the Kronos Foundry
Service and the fabrication facilities at the UTA Nanofab. A relatively new
material family, GeOx and SixGe1-xOy, will be investigated as the thermometer
employed in the microbolometer. Researchers at Univeridad Politecnica de Madrid,
Spain have measured the temperature coefficient of resistance (R -1 dR/dT) in
these materials to be as high as 4.2%/K and demonstrated good performance in
bulk micromachined microbolometers. These materials have the advantage of being
easily deposited by rf sputtering at room temperature and being oxides of
conventional integrated circuit materials. This investigation will seek to
further the investigation of the application of GeOx and SixGe1-xOy to uncooled
infrared detection and the use of surface micromachining with polyimide
sacrificial layers to demonstrate higher performance in the microbolometers
(detectivity goal of 10 8 to 10 9 cm Hz 1/2 /W). The results of this part of the
investigation will also impact microbolometer applications in night vision, in
addition to optical spectrometers applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The results of the investigation will be distributed widely through
traditional conference presentations and journal articles as well as by
publishing a web-based tutorial on micromachined spectrometers that is written
to target the general public rather than scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;