* 0322005
* Functional Analysis of B3 Domain Transcription Factors
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Donald McCarty, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Zhongchi Liu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 390,000.00

0322005&lt;br/&gt;McCarty&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In all likelihood, plants and
animals evolved multicellular structures independently. Plant genomes encode a
remarkable number of DNA binding proteins that have no obvious homologs in other
organisms. In many cases, these plant specific regulatory genes have been
implicated in plant specific signaling pathways. The implication is that
recruitment of novel transcription factors has played a major role in the
independent evolution of plant development. One important family of plant
specific transcription factors are identified as proteins containing the highly
conserved B3 DNA binding domain. Four major sub-families of B3 domain proteins
are identified in the Arabidopsis genome (VP1/ABI3, ARF, RAV and VPL groups).
The ARF and VP1/ABI3 groups have been implicated in auxin and abscisic acid
(ABA) hormone signaling pathways of plants, respectively. The functions of the
RAV and VPL families are unknown. This project focuses on analyzing the
functions of genes in the VP1/ABI3, RAV and VPL families. A common theme among
the B3 proteins is a bivalent structure coupling B3 to autonomous protein
interaction domains (VP1/ABI3 and ARF's) or to a second DNA binding domain
(RAV). A key long term goal is to understand how interactions of DNA binding
(B3) and protein-protein interaction (COAR) domains of the VP1 protein give rise
to the extraordinary complexity of VP1/ABI3 regulated gene expression observed
in the developing seed. The extensive genetics and resources available for
Arabidopsis will be applied to analysis of VP1 mutants that discriminate B3
dependent and B3 independent regulatory functions. One approach will be to
create mutant forms of VP1 that perturb B3 and its interaction with COAR and new
mutations in other genes that specifically affect B3 regulated functions. The
second objective will address the contribution of protein-protein interactions
mediated by the COAR domain. Finally, the current model for VP1 function raises
analogous questions concerning the role of B3 domains in other transcription
factor families including the ARF, RAV and VPL families. The third objective
focuses on developing tools for analysis of the RAV and VPL families of B3
transcription factors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;