* 0322850
* The Impacts of Dam-Related Flow Regulation on the Physical and Ecological Characteristics of Rivers
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Francis Magilligan, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/29/2008
* USD 250,086.00

Dams generate significant hydrogeomorphic alterations that have profoundly
altered and degraded river ecosystems. General agreement exists within the
aquatic community that particular nodes or zones within the riparian environment
reflect and record disturbance in important ways and become critical bio-
indicators of ecological integrity. These aquatic hotspots commonly occur where
hydrologic flow paths converge with some fundamental ecological and geochemical
component, such as at tributary junctions. Numerous previous studies have
chronicled the hydrologic, geomorphic, or ecological impacts of dams, but rarely
have these three responses been simultaneously evaluated in a watershed
perspective where multiple dams exist. Few comprehensive evaluations exist of
the hydrogeomorphic effects of dams that both examine whole watersheds and that
encompass an array of dam types and operation strategies. The main goals of this
research project are to elevate the analysis of dams away from a primarily
singular case study view and to specifically link the ecological impacts of dams
to the geomorphic response resulting from these hydrologic changes. Dams
fragment watersheds, and the normal spatial suite of geochemical, ecological,
and geomorphic processes are greatly disturbed along mainstems and at tributary
junctions with the mainstem. This project will evaluate sediment sources and
residence times at the event-to-decadal timescale in systems disturbed by
multiple dams. The project also will determine the length-scale and magnitude of
this disturbance on aquatic ecosystems at the watershed scale. Another main
objective of the project is to evaluate how different dam types and management
styles generate different sediment fluxes and resulting aquatic ecology. The
residence time of this sediment embedded in the channel bed will be documented
using short-lived radionuclides, such as 210-Pb and 7-Be. The project focuses
directly on the effects of dams on both sediment storage and the residence time
of bed sediment and their distinct or combined control on benthic community
structure. This research will be conducted on tributaries and mainstem sections
of the Upper Connecticut River watershed, a basin with a history of extensive
damming and where extensive base data exist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
has several important scientific and social components. Scientifically, the use
of fallout radionuclides has far-reaching implications. There is no known
quantitative expression of embeddedness, and these results could establish this
technique as the scientific standard not only for studies related to dams but
also for fisheries management in general. This research also is expected to have
significant benefits for society, as its results will be important for Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) relicensing and for National Environmental
Policy Act (NEPA) compliance. The research results also will help establish the
necessary base conditions for adaptive management strategies.&lt;br/&gt;