* 0322268
* Dissertation Research:  Trucking Country: Food, Farms, and Freight in America's Rural Industrial Landscape, 1945-1975
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Deborah Fitzgerald, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 07/31/2004
* USD 8,000.00

This is a Science and Technology Studies Dissertation Improvement Grant that
explores how systems of mass food production and consumption came to depend on
flexible highway transportation after World War II, transforming the lives and
landscapes of rural Americans in the process. At the end of World War II the
booming growth of suburbs, supermarkets, and highways created the conditions for
a streamlined food economy. Food processors and supermarkets teamed up to
rationalize the system for getting fresh food to suburban consumers. This
dissertation argues that trucks and highways provided the flexible
infrastructure that made this rationalization possible, connecting super-
productive farms and high-tech food processors to suburban supermarkets. The
dissertation uses three case studies (milk, beef, and frozen vegetables) to
explore how and why these changes in America's food distribution network came
about. Furthermore, long-haul trucks were part of an intricate web of
technologies, businesses, and political networks that not only helped to feed
Americans in new ways, but also helped to transform rural landscapes that had
once been dependent on railways. Trucking bound together federal agricultural
experts, food processors and supermarkets, truck manufacturers, and rural
working-class truck drivers in a political and economic system dedicated to
moving food smoothly to suburban consumers. "Trucking Country" seeks to bridge
the gap between the history of technology and the history of agriculture by
looking at the flow of food from producers to consumers. The dissertation
contributes to studies of transportation, technological systems, and
industrialization, which have constructed an incomplete history of industrial
America by generally ignoring rural technologies and the period after WWII.
Agricultural and rural historians, meanwhile, have tended to treat technological
change as an autonomous force that deterministically reconstructs rural life.
While historians of technology generally seek to understand technological change
within a broad social context, historians of agricultural technology have
generally focused only on technologies of production on farms. "Trucking
Country" opens up the "black box" of agricultural technology while
simultaneously pushing the history of technology farther afield. Importantly,
this integration leads to a significant contribution to "mainstream" American
history. Studying the flow of food between producers and consumers provides an
empirically rich understanding of postwar suburban consumer culture and its
consequences for the rest of the nation. The dissertation is thus intended to
reach a broad audience of readers who have yet to see a rigorous scholarly
treatment of the history of trucking in America. "Trucking Country" would
furthermore make significant contributions to contemporary political debates
about industrial agribusiness and transportation policies. An NSF grant would
support the achievement of these goals by providing funds for archival research
that would otherwise be impossible. Visits will be made to collect manuscript
materials and oral histories regarding dairy, beef, and frozen food processing,
agricultural organizations, federal agricultural transportation policymaking,
and the trucking industry.

