* 0322807
* Scientific Computing Research Environments for the Mathematical Sciences (SCREMS)
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2007
* David Chopp, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 01/31/2007
* USD 118,792.00

This project incorporates four different applications, which
are&lt;br/&gt;related through their common need for high-speed
computational&lt;br/&gt;capabilities. The first project involves the simulation
of growing&lt;br/&gt;bacterial biofilms. The simulation will couple the extended
finite&lt;br/&gt;element method with the level set method in order to capture
the&lt;br/&gt;interaction between the growing biofilm and the surrounding
fluid&lt;br/&gt;flow. The second project will solve a low Mach number model
for&lt;br/&gt;deflagrations in stellar envelopes. By filtering out sound waves
from&lt;br/&gt;the model, significantly larger time steps can be achieved than
are&lt;br/&gt;possible for full hydrodynamical models, thus making long
time&lt;br/&gt;computations feasible. The third project will study the role
of&lt;br/&gt;defects in the break-down of ordered structures.
Parallelized&lt;br/&gt;Monte-Carlo and Fourier spectral methods will be employed
to&lt;br/&gt;investigate defect trajectories in two paradigmatic systems,
a&lt;br/&gt;magnetic system and a dynamical system of coupled oscillators in
two&lt;br/&gt;dimensions. They exhibit spatially ordered as well as
disordered&lt;br/&gt;states. The goal is to identify to what extent various
statistical&lt;br/&gt;measures of the trajectories follow universal power laws.
The fourth&lt;br/&gt;project will use recently developed importance-sampling
methods for&lt;br/&gt;simulating rare events that set the performance of optical
fiber&lt;br/&gt;communication systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of these
projects will be felt across a broad spectrum of&lt;br/&gt;disciplines, and will
aid in the training and education of several&lt;br/&gt;graduate students and
postdoctoral research associates. In addition&lt;br/&gt;to the scientific areas
described above, the training will also&lt;br/&gt;include the efficient use of
high-performance parallel computing&lt;br/&gt;architectures. The study of
biofilms will improve our understanding&lt;br/&gt;of quourum sensing organisms,
and how to treat them. Such organisms&lt;br/&gt;are responsible for a number of
diseases, including diseases&lt;br/&gt;associated with cystic fibrosis and deep
burn wounds. The study of&lt;br/&gt;deflagrations in stellar envelopes will
improve our understanding of&lt;br/&gt;the dynamics of novae of white dwarfs and
the nature of X-ray bursts&lt;br/&gt;from neutron stars. Transitions from
ordered patterns to disordered&lt;br/&gt;states are observed in many physical
systems undergoing phase&lt;br/&gt;transitions as well as in dynamical systems
like arrays of coupled&lt;br/&gt;oscillators, various kinds of fluid flow, and
optical systems. Often&lt;br/&gt;defects in the patterns are striking features
of the disordered&lt;br/&gt;states. The research will elucidate the role the
defect dynamics play&lt;br/&gt;in the break-down of the ordered states. The
study of rare events in&lt;br/&gt;optical fiber communication systems will lead
to the construction of a&lt;br/&gt;set of simulation tools capable of predicting
the performance of&lt;br/&gt;lightwave communication
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;