* 0322579
* Causal Pluralism and Causal Inference, with Applications to Health and Status
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2004
* Nancy Cartwright, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 09/30/2004
* USD 114,993.00

There are a number of apparently competing philosophical accounts of causality
now, each suggesting a particular privileged method for testing for causality;
and each of these methods can be found in use across the sciences today. This
project argues that these accounts are not genuinely competing. Rather, they are
geared to describe different kinds of causal systems operating in different ways
or to answer different kinds of causal questions. This NSF Science and
Technology Studies Scholars Research Award aims to characterize the kinds of
causal systems and question to which a given method is appropriate, focusing
particularly on methods that look for invariance of causal relations under
intervention. It does so in the special context of the attempt to understand the
causal story responsible for the striking correlations between ill health and
low socio-economic status. Improvements in methods for causal research lead to
more reliable results on which we can base better policy. This is true not only
for questions of health and status of the kind studied in the project, but
across socioeconomic issues. No one methodological study or handful of studies
will make dramatic impact. But a concerted, continuing effort to understand
causality and to improve methods for causal inference, to which the proposed
research should contribute, should improve research results; and better research
results should mean sounder planning and policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;