* 0322051
* Biocomplexity of Hydrologically-Controlled Vegetation Dynamics:Quantitative Comparative Analysis-Everglades&amp;Cerrado Ecosystems under Soil Moisture&amp;Nutrient Spatiotemporal D
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Leonel Sternberg, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/2005
* USD 1,800,000.00

0322051&lt;br/&gt;Miralles-Wilhelm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Biocomplexity in
the Environment integrated research and education proposed project focuses on
the development of a spatiotemporal quantitative framework to study the
interactions between coexisting vegetation species and the hydrologic cycle, and
how these interactions aggregate from smaller scales, e.g., temporal: rainfall
event; spatial: individual plants, to larger scales, e.g., temporal:
seasonal/multiseasonal; spatial: ecosystem scale. Over the past 2-3 years, there
has been significant progress on analyzing the temporal dynamics of interacting
hydrologic-ecosystem processes. This research intends to advance these efforts
by incorporating spatial variability of these processes and interactions, a key
to answering the "where?" related questions in addition to the "when?" related
questions. The proposed research methodology is based on a systems-level
stochastic modeling and field experimental framework that has been used by the
PIs to aggregate physical, chemical and biological processes occurring at
several spatial and temporal scales, quantifying biogeochemical stocks and
fluxes as well as providing estimates of their uncertainty. Validation of this
eco-hydrological model will be accomplished through proposed field experimental
tests in the Everglades (Florida) and Cerrado (Brazil) ecosystems. This
comparative ecosystem approach offers the benefit of quantifying and
differentiating between general and site-specific eco-hydrological
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is a joint effort between
investigators at the University of Miami (UM, USA), the United States Geological
Survey (USGS), the Universidade de Brasilia (UNB, Brazil), and the University of
Buenos Aires (IFEVA/UBA, Argentina). The educational plan of the proposed
project focuses on preparing a new generation of ecosystem scientists and
practitioners who will acquire: (i) strong interdisciplinary science skills
applicable to ecosystem analysis, assessment and decision making; (ii) immersion
in diversity in terms of treating different ecosystems (dry, average and humid)
and in terms of geographical/cultural settings; (iii) exposure to environmental
ethics, as the research and education activities proposed herein seek to improve
our understanding of the interactions between hydrology and vegetation as a key
to sustainable management of ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;