* 0322956
* NR: Routing Overhead In Variable Topology Networks - A Theoretical Framework With Practical Implications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Alhussein Abouzeid, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop rigorous analysis leading to fundamental
understanding of the performance limits and design principles of routing
protocols in variable topology networks, in particular related to the routing
overhead as a key parameter of interest. For ad-hoc networks with frequent
topology changes, such overhead may become a significant limit on the
scalability and effective capacity. This research proposes to treat a variable
topology network as a physical system that exhibits random (topology) changes.
The minimum routing overhead is related to the minimum amount of information
needed to identify the current state of the system (i.e. the current network
topology). The distribution of topology changes is derived from the probability
distributions describing the individual node mobility. Thus, the routing
overhead can be related to the entropy rate of the system. Further, it is
differentiated between different types of routing protocols based on the subset
of changes that are relevant to the specific class of protocols under study. For
example, proactive protocols keep track of any topology change, while reactive
protocols track only the subset of the topology changes that affect nodes/links
actively participating in routing packets. In contrast to the previous work in
the ad-hoc networks routing area, this work develops a new analytic, rather than
simulative, study of routing overhead in variable topology networks and, a
general treatment that provides reference curves against which the routing
overhead of different competing protocols can be compared. The key new approach
is the concept of information theoretic characterization of network topology
variation.