* 0323305
* Negotiating New Development Hybrids: State Expertise and Civil Society Participation in Irrigation Design
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Sheila Jasanoff, Harvard University
* Fellowship Award
* Ronald Rainger
* 08/31/2005
* USD 84,000.00

During the past thirty years, the impact of international development efforts
has been limited by a lack of participatory planning and public accountability
from government agencies. This post-doctoral project evaluates how government
development paradigms are being replaced by new hybrids that combine state
technocratic expertise with meaningful citizen participation. Focusing on
irrigation development reforms in central India, the project builds on an NSF
supported dissertation thesis, titled "Some Water for All: People's Science
Lessons from the Krishna Valley in India". The thesis examines how grassroots
movements in India are fighting drought by designing irrigation projects that
integrate expert and locally-based knowledge toward the promotion of social
equity and environmental regeneration. &lt;br/&gt;The applicant will now add a
new layer to the dissertation work by concentrating on bureaucratic expertise.
The post-doctoral research will shift attention toward government officials. By
ethnographically examining the work of irrigation engineers employed by the
Maharashtra Krishna Valley Development Corporation (MKVDC), this research will
evaluate why and how state experts are reforming their rhetoric, and
administrative procedures, as a result of civil society pressure. The researcher
will create an institutional profile of the agency, as well as examine the role
key officers have played in the process of bureaucratic reform. &lt;br/&gt;In
terms of intellectual merit, the applicant's proposal innovatively integrates
theoretical approaches from the fields of political ecology and science and
technology studies (STS). Analytical tools from STS, including the social
construction of technology and actor-network theory, will be employed to bridge
the gaps between bureaucratic praxis and public critique. In particular, the
research will ask: How do certain norms of expertise guide decision-making
authority and create cultures of acceptance? Who is involved in knowledge and
technology production and why? How do community perceptions of knowledge get
reconciled with those produced by state professionals? Which institutional
characteristics render technology democratifiable? &lt;br/&gt;The applicant's
post-doctoral project will be sponsored by Professor Sheila Jasanoff of the
Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University. Under Professor Jasanoff's
mentorship, the applicant will engage with STS constructivist theories and
qualitative policy research methods. In addition to working with Professor
Jasanoff, the applicant will also collaborate with Harvard's Public
Infrastructure Program, the Environment and Natural Resources Program and the
Center for International Development. &lt;br/&gt;Of broader societal relevance,
the applicant's research will address how communities balance the need for
bureaucratic control and decision-making authority at the meso-level with
participatory approaches to technical research and development at the local
level. Building on the STS coursework she will undertake, and interactions with
a new network of policy-oriented scholars, the applicant will use the fellowship
period to consolidate the dissertation and post-doctoral research into one book.
As a symmetrical analysis of both bureaucratic practice and social movement
organizing, this book will make an important theoretical and empirical
contribution toward the re-invention of state development expertise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;