* 0323370
* Dissertation Research: Genomics and the Future of Aging
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Susan Harding, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2004
* USD 7,995.00

This ethnographic dissertation research project in Science and Technology
Studies asks how investigations into genes and genomes blend the resources of
the biological sciences and the computer industry to produce new meanings and
possibilities for human aging. It will examine how current efforts in genomics
open up prospects for more "successful" aging through the management of age-
related diseases and extensions in life span, bringing together discourses of
anti-aging with notions of reengineering and repair. It posits that the work of
aligning organic and computational materials and ideas in genomics research is
consequential for the development of biological theory, and that this is
especially worth analyzing in the field of human aging. Aging has long been
contested as a natural process that both invites and resists human intervention,
and it is now becoming an object of technological dreams, just as reproduction
has been for the past several decades. As in the case of reproduction, the
possibility of intervening in aging raises questions about how the categories of
the natural and normal are constituted and how they intersect and diverge. In a
postgenomic era, cultural concepts of nature and normality are grounded (in
part) in the mundane details of gene chips and other computational tools, which
biologists use to identify age-related genes and develop models of the aging
process. This project seeks to trace the relations that shape new visions of
successful aging around the combined mechanisms of genes and computers. It
focuses on the interpretive work of biologists, computer scientists, and others
who collaborate on the analysis of genomic data to produce meaningful, coherent
stories about what genes do. NSF funds support ethnographic research at a
research lab in molecular and cell biology, located in the San Francisco Bay
Area, which is led by a senior researcher in the biology of aging. Over a period
of 12 months, the researcher will engage with scientists whose work relies on
computational resources and access to engineering colleagues in order to
identify how the capabilities and constraints of local information technologies
are factored into experimental design Through its ethnographic approach, this
study explores the linkages between new biological facts and societal concerns
about health and youth, as they are articulated in the everyday practices of
working with materials as diverse as tissue cultures and database software. This
project offers benefits to society in fostering public discourse on the
implications of genomic research and new theories of human aging. Even as the
current science emphasizes more complexity and indeterminacy in genes and their
interactions, public discourse tends toward genetic determinism. A more nuanced
account of genomic analysis and discovery will help non-scientists understand
how to interpret new results and ask questions about the biosocial implications
of genomic knowledge. In addition, an anthropological perspective on the
blending of computation with biology can enhance the collaborative efforts of
practitioners in these fields.

