* 0323819
* EPNES: High Confidence Control of Electric Power Networks using Dynamic Incentive Mechanisms
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* John Ledyard, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 09/30/2006
* USD 500,000.00

We propose to develop a framework for designing incentives for electric power
networks and their associated markets that provides robust power generation
while rewarding efficiency and environmental friendliness. The key technical
thrusts are: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 1. Development of prototype economic
mechanisms for buying and selling &lt;br/&gt; power addressing non-steady state
performance and incorporating &lt;br/&gt; engineering considerations such as
production efficiency and &lt;br/&gt; environmental emissions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 2. Analysis and synthesis of information fusion and
feedback control &lt;br/&gt; mechanisms at the component, network, and market
levels providing high &lt;br/&gt; performance and robust operation in the
presence of uncertainty and &lt;br/&gt; faults. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 3.
Implementation of economics experiments to test engineering performance
&lt;br/&gt; and market volatility of representative power networks, using 20-30
&lt;br/&gt; human subjects and software agents interacting with a distributed
&lt;br/&gt; simulation of a large scale power system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
will combine methods from control, computation and economics in a unified
framework for market-based systems that is expected to be applicable to other
critical infrastructure problems involving interconnected economic, information,
and engineering systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will also develop elements of
a curriculum that will provide training to students in economics, computer
science, and engineering. These curriculum activities will be integrated into a
novel set of interdisciplinary courses that are being developed for the newly
formed Social and Information Systems Laboratory at Caltech. These courses will
provide necessary training for economic and information scientists who are
needed to analyze, design, implement and operate large scale social and
information systems. Participation of women and underrepresented minorities will
be specifically targeted and pursued through the summer undergraduate research
programs. &lt;br/&gt;