* 0323597
* DISTRIBUTED  RESEARCH RESOURCES: Instrumenting and Measuring Distributed Internet Applications: Trace Collection and Dissemination
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* James Kurose, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2007
* USD 332,998.00

This project, involving a two-pronged approach to the measurement of distributed
Internet applications, instruments applications and then uses these applications
to collect data. Researchers investigating applications, such as multiplayer
games and peer-to-peer systems, have been hampered by the lack of trace
workloads. Although web server traces are extensively available, traces of these
applications are not. To address these limitations, this project aims at
deploying some popular applications, gather detailed traces of their behavior,
and disseminate these traces to the research community. The effort involves two
synergistic components: &lt;br/&gt; Trace collection, where modern Internet
applications will be instrumented to gather application-, network-, and OS-level
traces of their behavior, and&lt;br/&gt; Trace dissemination, where a web-based
repository will be designed to disseminate the traces broadly to the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;Trace dissemination involves repository management, and
additional considerations such as privacy. The work, concentrating on
instrumenting and measuring the behavior of distributed applications, focuses
on:&lt;br/&gt; Measuring and Characterizing Networked Multiplayer
Games&lt;br/&gt; Measuring and Characterizing Peer-to-Peers (P2P)
Applications&lt;br/&gt; Measuring Low-Level Application Resource
Usage&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This trace
repository will serve as a resource to researchers nationwide and will enable or
aid a variety of research areas such as workload modeling of Internet
applications, design and performance tuning of current Internet applications,
protocol design, and the design of server operating systems and Internet hosting
platforms. Moreover, the trace workload will also be used in a distributed
system course to help students learn about the use of measurement data in
experimental computer science research.&lt;br/&gt;