* 0323496
* Conceptual Issues in the Dissemination and Reception of Genomics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Karola Stotz, University of Pittsburgh
* Fixed Amount Award
* Ronald Rainger
* 12/31/2005
* USD 114,907.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;SES 0323496&lt;br/&gt;Paul Griffiths, University of
Pittsburgh&lt;br/&gt;"Conceptual Issues in the Dissemination and Reception of
Genomics"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is intended as a US-UK
collaboration under the scheme announced by the Science in Society Programme of
the UK Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) and the Science and
Technology Studies program and Societal Dimensions of Engineering, Science, and
Technology program of NSF. The proposed research is designed to make use of the
complementary bases of knowledge and skills that exist in the ESRC Center for
Genomics in Society (EGenIS) at the University of Exeter, UK, and in the
Representing Genes Project (RGP) in the Department of History and Philosophy of
Science at the University of Pittsburgh. One of the three main strands of
research at EGenIS is genosemantics, defined as the study of the terminology
used in genomic science and how its meanings are transformed as the language of
science is adopted by other areas of expertise and by the general public. EGenIS
has a distinguished group of researchers with expertise in philosophical and
sociological inquiry who are engaged in discourse analysis of material obtained
in interviews and from relevant literature. &lt;br/&gt;The Representing Genes
project is an empirical study of claims from the literature in the history and
philosophy of molecular biology about conceptual diversity in the
conceptualization of genetic elements and their action by contemporary
biological researchers. The study takes the form of a web-based questionnaire
targeted at researchers in molecular biology. &lt;br/&gt; The proposed
collaboration is a study of the interaction between conceptualizations of
genetic elements and the process by which the results of genomics are
disseminated to wider audiences. It is expected that representations of the same
findings based on different conceptualizations of genetic elements and their
action will result in significantly different understandings on the part of
those wider audiences. It is further expected that the process of dissemination
will have systematic effects on which conceptualizations of genetic elements and
their activities are used to communicate findings to wider audiences.
&lt;br/&gt; The methodologies currently in use by the two groups will complement
one another in different aspects of this study. Findings concerning the
conceptualization of genetic elements and their action from the survey research
of the Representing Genes project will be used to guide qualitative research
into the dissemination of genomics. Discourse analysis will be used to enrich
and further explore the survey findings concerning conceptual diversity.
Techniques developed in the Representing Genes project will be used to actively
manipulate variables identified by discourse analyses as relevant to the
reception of genomic findings by wider audiences so as to test hypotheses about
the effect of those variables. &lt;br/&gt; The proposed study would involve
research experiences for undergraduates (REU), conducting literature based
studies of the dissemination of specific results in genomics. The University
Center for Social and Urban Research has agreed to provide physical space for
these students in a "lab" setting where they can interact on a regular basis
with the PI and Co-PI and with the HPS graduate students involved in the
Representing genes Project and in this study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;