* 0323276
* Collaborative Research:  Mid-Pliocene Global Warming: Analysis Using Three-Dimensional (3-D) Digital Data Sets and Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere Modeling Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2009
* Gary Dwyer, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2009
* USD 480,831.00

This award funds a data analysis and climate modeling effort by Columbia
University and Duke University to create 3D global data sets of mid-Pliocene
ocean temperature and salinity from which will emerge the most comprehensive
global reconstruction for any warm period of Earth's climate prior to the most
recent past. These universities are aided in their research efforts by
collaborators at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and
the US Geological Survey (USGS). The data sets will be used to drive numerical
simulations designed to explore the impact of climate forcing mechanisms and
feedbacks during the middle Pliocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estimates of middle
Pliocene global warming suggest that temperatures were approximately 2 degrees C
greater than today. This level of warming is within the range of scientific
estimates of global temperature increases for the 21st century. No other time
period in the past 3.0 million years approaches this level of warming.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The climate of the middle Pliocene displays numerous
characteristics akin to expectations of the coming century. For example,
microfaunal evidence indicates a reduced equator-to-pole temperature gradient
with the greatest warming at high latitudes. Furthermore, atmospheric
concentrations of carbon dioxide levels were elevated above pre-industrial
concentrations to levels approximately equivalent to those that the Earth's
atmosphere will attain by the end of this decade. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
studies suggest that higher levels of carbon dioxide or methane may have
triggered the warming in conjunction with altered ocean circulation. However, no
study has yet determined a specific set of forcings and feedbacks that led to
the change in ocean circulation. The data so far compiled suggest a combination
of increased greenhouse gases and altered ocean heat transports acted
concurrently through undetermined feedback
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The middle Pliocene world provides an
unequaled paleo-laboratory for testing the sensitivity of the physical models
that the science community relies upon for estimating potential future warming
impacts. It challenges the community's understanding of the sensitivity of key
components of the climate system and how the system is simulated (i.e., polar
vs. tropical sensitivity, the role of ocean circulation in a warming climate,
the hydrological impact of altered storm tracks, and the regional climate
impacts of modified atmospheric and oceanic energy transport
systems.)&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A significant product of this research is the
creation of new ocean data sets that can be used in paleoceanographic analyses
and for paleoclimate interpretation and model experiments. The new data will
include an update of the USGS Pliocene Research Interpretations and Synoptic
Mapping (PRISM) surface database, including a 15% increase in overall sites
available and the creation of gridded maximum and minimum sea surface
temperature (SST) fields to describe variability in Pliocene warm phases. These
data will improve the regional accuracy of climate simulations to allow
evaluation of synoptic-scale features, such as extra-tropical storm systems,
which are a dominant impact on mid-latitude hydrology. The computer simulations
to be completed by the researchers are designed to explore the impact of surface
conditions, greenhouse gas increases, and model physics on the ocean circulation
and global climate of the middle Pliocene. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will help improve the science community's understanding of climate processes and
impacts by using the warm Pliocene world as a proxy for possible future warm
climates. The project will provide a unique learning opportunity for post-
doctoral and university scholars early in their careers. The data resulting from
this project will be made available to the wider science community through
various publicly accessible websites. The information would also be made
available to a wide public audience through the researcher's activities with
elementary and secondary level educators via an Educational General Circulation
Model (GCM) developed by the team of researchers.