* 0323759
* Genomic Basis of Specificity in Glucosinolate Hydrolysis
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Daniel Kliebenstein, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Nara Gavini
* 08/31/2007
* USD 289,162.00

Plants produce a vast catalog of secondary metabolites, partly generated by
diverse structural modifications of common backbone structures. Glucosinolates,
low-molecular-weight, sulfur rich thioglucosides, are a prime example of how a
single molecular backbone can be modified to produce an amazing array of
secondary metabolites. A single species, Arabidopsis thaliana, can derive 30
different glucosinolates from the methionine glucosinolate backbone that can be
amplified to over 100 different compounds during glucosinolate hydrolysis. The
biological activity of a glucosinolate is fully realized after degradation by
the protein, myrosinase. This produces a series of different compounds such as
isothiocyanates, nitriles, and epithionitriles that differentially impact human
health. In Arabidopsis, a relative of many brassica vegetables, numerous genetic
loci determine the hydrolytic path of glucosinolates. One locus, ESM1,
previously defined only in genetic terms, will be cloned and characterized at
the molecular level. Further, the biochemical impact of ESM1 on glucosinolate
hydrolysis will be investigated.

Glucosinolate structural modifications serve to control diverse biological
activities that help the plant defend itself from insects, nematodes, fungi as
well as containing the potential to greatly benefit human nutrition when
modified in common Brassica crops. A key point in controlling glucosinolate
biological activity is at the hydrolysis step. This step controls the production
of compounds with dramatic differences in biological activity. For example, a
given glucosinolate's isothiocyanate exhibits stronger cancer prevention
activities and anti-insect/fungal activities than do the corresponding nitriles.
Characterizing the Arabidopsis glucosinolate hydrolytic system could impact
fields ranging from ecology to evolution to human nutrition. Additionally, the
ESM1 locus may be useful in producing crops with altered insect and pathogen
resistance as well as altered nutritional value for human consumption. Further,
involving undergraduates and postdoctoral researchers in this project will
expose them to a broad range of techniques and help to train them for their own
future research.

