* 0323738
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Structural Evolution of the Neoproterozoic Allaqi-Heiani Suture, Southern Egypt from Remote Sensing and Field Studies
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Mohamed Abdelsalam, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 23,970.00

0323738 &lt;br/&gt;Abdel-Salam&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a cooperative research between Dr. Mohamed Abdel-Salam, Center for
Lithospheric Studies at the University of Texas, Dallas and Dr. Hamed Dowidar,
Department of Geology, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt. They plan to conduct
field research to study the structural evolution of the Neoproterozoic Allaqi-
Heiani Suture in southern Egypt. This structure forms the northernmost arc-arc
suture in the Arabian-Nubian Shield that is marked by linear ophiolitic belt.
This project will test the hypothesis that the structural styles along the
suture change from a fold and thrust belt in the west where the suture trends
E-W to shortening zones and strike-slip fault system where the suture trends
N-S. Changes in structural styles might be due to the geometry of the orgon
front and/or superimposition of younger Neoproterozoic deformation similar to
that of the Hamisana Shear Zone. This hypothesis can be tested by remote sensing
and field studies. Research will be based on a two-month field trip guided by
orbital optical remote sensing imagery including the newly acquired Advanced
Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) data. Field
studies will be conducted in southern Egypt during December 2003 and January
2004. The results of this research will outline the evolution of an important
structure in the East African Orogen in addition to examining the utility of
ASTER data for supporting geological mapping in arid regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The results of using ASTER data in the planned
geologic and structural analysis are of broad importance, since this study is on
a new remote sensing platform. Examination of a well-exposed Neoproterozoic
suture and assessment of its variation in structural style by comparison with
modern convergent plate margins will also have broad implications as to the
nature and modernity of Neoproterozoic plate tectonics. The international
collaboration between scientists at Egyptian and U.S. universities will include
training in digital image processing and ASTER orbital optical remote sensing
analysis. The two collaborators have complementary expertise. Dr. Abdel-Salam
has experience in structural geology, geological remote sensing and the
Precambrian geology of NE Africa, including extensive work on the suture zones
of the Arabian-Nubian shield. The project also involves a Ph.D. student from the
University of Texas, Dallas who is doing his dissertation on the tectonic
evolution of the suture. The Egyptian collaborator has expertise in the
application of a variety of remote sensing techniques to geologic problems. The
project will provide an opportunity for an Egyptian scientist to visit UTD and
get trained in the principles of digital image processing and remote sensing
analysis as applied to geological studies.&lt;br/&gt;