* 0323510
* Engineering Genetic Control Mechanisms of Riboswitches
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2006
* Ronald Breaker, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 06/30/2006
* USD 635,463.00

0323510&lt;br/&gt;Ronald Breaker&lt;br/&gt;Yale
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering Genetic Control Mechanisms of
Riboswitches&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Precision genetic control is an essential
feature of living systems, as cells must respond to a multitude of biochemical
signals and environmental cues by varying genetic expression patterns. Most
known mechanisms of genetic control involve the use of protein factors that
sense chemical or physical stimuli and then modulate gene expression by
selectively interacting with the relevant DNA or messenger RNA sequence.
Recently, it has been discovered that portions of certain mRNAs, called
"riboswitches", serve as genetic regulation elements by forming direct RNA-
metabolite complexes. This newly established form of genetic control is a
critical mechanism by which biological information is accessed. Furthermore, the
design of new RNA switches for use in diverse applications such as molecular
sensing, designer genetic control and molecular computing could be enhanced by
reverse engineering of natural riboswitches. &lt;br/&gt;A rigorous investigation
of the biochemical properties of several metabolite-dependent riboswitches is
being conducted in order to expand our understanding of the various mechanisms
used by mRNAs to achieve metabolite recognition and genetic control. Several
powerful biochemical techniques including an "in-line probing" assay is being
used to give a detailed assessment of the structural changes that occur when
ligands interact with allosteric RNAs. This will permit the development of a
deeper understanding of how RNA acts to control genetic information.
Furthermore, mutation analyses and genetic expression assays is being used to
define the precise mechanisms by which ligand binding events are converted into
control of genetic information expression.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, riboswitches are
engineered to respond to other effector compounds that provide a means to more
conveniently and thoroughly manipulate gene control in living systems. Such
advances is providing enabling technologies for creating molecular computation
systems for in vitro and in vivo uses, and are synergistic with ongoing efforts
to create RNA logic gates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;