* 0323254
* Meeting the performance challenge of low wage workers who need to perform at a high wage standard;  engineering aggressive learning interventions into work
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Lia DiBello, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* John L. Naman
* 08/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 0323254 DiBello &lt;br/&gt;Institution: CUNY
Graduate School &lt;br/&gt;NSF Program: Innovation &amp; Organizational
Change&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: DiBello ,Lia &lt;br/&gt;Title: Meeting
the performance challenge of low wage workers who need to perform at a high wage
standard: engineering aggressive learning interventions into work
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research studies improvements in organizational
change interventions --- operational simulations and intense training exercises
--- to find more effective ways of "re-skilling" low wage workers to adapt to
changes in the competitive environment. It focuses on fundamental issues in
adult cognition and adult learning for low wage, low education workers in
service jobs, where there is a large difference between "school learning" and
ongoing learning of new skills in the workplace. The organizational partner is a
commercial facility that supports life sciences research. &lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of this research is potentially great importance to better manage rapid
cognitive change in support of changing organizational goals, especially among
low-wage workers. There is considerable potential for improving the contribution
and labor force potential of low-skill support workers, particularly in
scientific, engineering and medical areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;