* 0323471
* An Immersive Projection Environment for Collaborative Research in Visualization, Perception, Architectural Design and Computer Graphics
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Lee Anderson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 08/31/2005
* USD 130,222.00

This project, constructing a stereoscopic, high intensity, immersive projection
environment for interactive design, supports collaborative research in
visualization, perception, architectural design, and computer graphics. Through
collaborative efforts of computer scientists and architects, the work seeks to
develop and use tools that allow the intuitive creation, manipulation, and
display of data an images within a stereoscopic, high ambient intensity, multi-
user, immersive projection environment, to achieve fundamental breakthroughs
that facilitate the creative design process, and enhance the understanding of
science behind the art of effective visual representation. At the same time, new
algorithms for effective interactive rendering and manipulation of large scanned
environmental datasets and new tools for physically and perceptually realistic
color appearance rendering will be developed. The infrastructure contributes to
the following research:&lt;br/&gt; Harnessing the Fullest Potential of Virtual
Environment Technology for Research in Visualization and Design,&lt;br/&gt;
Developing New Tools for Conceptual Architectural Design in Immersive Virtual
Environments,&lt;br/&gt; New Tools for Efficient Rendering and Design
Conceptualization, and&lt;br/&gt; Computer Aided Color Appearance
Design.&lt;br/&gt;The first project aims at determining how to most effectively
harness the special potential of virtual environment displays for data
representation. Foremost will be efforts to investigate methods for facilitating
and exploiting the expanded spatial understanding afforded by immersive
displays, exploring the impact of employing a range of non-photorealistic
representational styles in immersive virtual environments. The second builds on
an immediate-mode modeling system and software, supporting the geometry creation
and manipulation, and texture, image and video insertion and manipulation. Goals
include offering the designer a space that supports designing (not just an empty
space in which to stand); investigating the kind of contextual environment that
best supports the design in its various stages; different aspects with different
scales; finest expression of ideas; support of the supply and generation of
information, text, image, video, and sound within the design environment;
support of symbols and representation within the virtual environment; and
determining those aspects of the design that are best done outside the
environment and the best way to bridge the two worlds. The third develops a tool
to allow modeling geometry on top of the finished sketch design, much like the
experience of working with tracing paper. The last uses the panoramic display
system to evaluate the results of computer aided color appearance design (CACAD)
research that was performed on either cathode ray tubes or other specialized
CACAD workstations. At the fundamental computer graphics level, this work is
expected to expand the state of the art in virtual reality by evaluating the
contribution that surface reflection makes to the illusion of "presence." The
work explores whether expensive surface finish samples and controlled observing
conditions can be replaced by computer graphics simulations and a "virtual color
proofing" system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the research will extend
to new courses in CS and architecture. The team formed the Digital Design
Consortium, an outreach effort involving community leaders.&lt;br/&gt;