* 0323336
* Astronomy During the Cold War: The Case of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (1955-1975)
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Patrick McCray, American Institute of Physics
* Fixed Amount Award
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2007
* USD 92,714.00

The proposed research will focus on the history of the Smithsonian Astrophysical
Observatory (SAO) between 1955 and 1980. A fundamental goal of the research is
to examine the extent to which the SAO's activities and institutional
development were products of Cold War interests and pressures. The research will
be done at several different and interrelated levels of analysis including:
Individual careers; Scientific research; Institutional; and Public involvement .
The proposed research expands on and continues previous studies done by the PIs
and is part of their broader research program. They expect to demonstrate the
degree to which the newly recreated SAO was the embodiment of a Cold War
scientific institution, designed by a small group of scientists with intimate
knowledge of how Washington worked, how the military services operated, and how
national security needs could be both translated seamlessly into and made
synonymous with, scientific research agendas. This research will take advantage
of a diverse array of available historical evidence. This includes material from
the personal records of astronomers as well as materials located in federal and
private archives. The PIs will also conduct targeted oral histories with
selected individuals; these interviews along with documentary evidence the PIs
collect will be donated to the Center for History of Physics and to the
Smithsonian's National Air and Space Museum Archives to serve as a resource for
other scholars. Previous studies have paid extensive attention to the relations
between science, technology, and the state during the Cold War. Overviews of
this research, however, have called for future studies to integrate material
from studies done at different levels of analysis for a single institution. The
research proposed here responds to these recommendations by studying several
facets of SAO history. This work will highlight the experiences of the astronomy
community by centering the study on one particular scientific institution and
will contribute to new historiographical approaches to thinking about science
and technology in the Cold War. The work proposed here will be disseminated to a
larger audience in several ways. PIs will prepare articles and at least one book
based on their research. Their work will be presented at conferences and public
talks. The PIs intend to use examples from the proposed research in his teaching
activities and the Co-PI will incorporate results in museum presentations and
exhibits which reach all segments of the national population.

