* 0323170
* Salmon Camp Research Team:  A Native American Technology, Research and Science Career Exposure Program
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Joseph Jones, Oregon Museum of Science and Industry
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia James
* 08/31/2008
* USD 728,561.00

The "Salmon Research Team: A Native American Technology, Research and Science
Career Exposure Program" is a three-year, youth-based ITEST project submitted by
the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry. The project seeks to provide advanced
information technology and natural science career exposure and training to 180
middle level and high school students. Mostly first-generation college-bound
students, the target audience represents the Native American community and those
with Native American affiliations in reservation, rural and urban areas.
Students will investigate computer modeling of complex ecological, hydrological
and geological problems associated with salmon recovery efforts. Field
experiences will be provided in three states: Oregon, Washington and northern
California. The participation of elders and tribal researchers will serve as a
bridge between advanced scientific technology and traditional ecological
knowledge to explore sustainable land management strategies. Students will work
closely with Native American and other scientists and resource managers
throughout the Northwest who use advanced technologies in salmon recovery
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student participation in IT-dependent science
enrichment and research activities involving natural science fields of
investigation will occur year round. Middle school students are expected to
receive at least 330 contact hours including a one-week summer research
experience, a one-week spring break program, and seven weekends of residential
programs during the school year. The high school component consists of 460
contact hours reflecting one additional week for the summer research experience.
In addition to watershed and salmon recovery related research, students will be
involved in other ancillary research projects. A vast array of partners are
positioned to support the field research experience including, for example, the
U.S. Department of the Interior, Redwood National State Park, College of Natural
Resources and Sciences at Humboldt State University, Confederated Tribes of the
Warm Springs, University of Oregon Institute of Marine Biology, University of
Washington Columbia Basin Research project, the Northwest Center for Sustainable
Resources at Chemeketa Community College and the Integrated Natural Resource
Technology program at Mt. Hood Community College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is intended to serve as a model for IT-based youth science programs that
address national and state education standards and are relevant to the cultural
experience of Native American students. Two mentors will provide continued
support to students: an academic mentor at the student's schools and a
professional mentor from a local university or natural resource agency.
Incentives will be provided for student participation including stipends and
internships. Career exposure and work-related skills are integrated throughout
the project activities and every program component. Creative strategies are used
to encourage family involvement including, for example, salmon bakes and museum
discounts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;