* 0323975
* Speed Bumps in the Carbon Cycle: Enzymatic Hydrolysis and Carbon Flow in Marine Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Carol Arnosti, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2008
* USD 399,934.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0323975&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most organic
carbon in marine systems originates from phytoplankton, which biosynthesize
cellular macromolecules such as proteins, lipid complexes, and polysaccharides
from CO2. These phytoplankton macromolecules are sequentially transformed and
for the most part remineralized back to CO2 as carbon passes through the marine
food web. Microbes play a key role in these remineralization processes, cycling
ca. 50% of marine primary productivity (Azam 1998). Although their importance is
clear, the specific rates and means by which microbes transform phytoplankton-
derived carbon to CO2 are largely unexplored. Microbial activities and the
carbon transformations they catalyze therefore are often relegated to the black
box. of carbon cycling, whose inner workings are
unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On this project, researchers at the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill will conduct investigations to illuminate the
workings of the black box by determining the rates and means by which carbon
initiates cycling through the activities of extracellular enzymes. The assertion
has been made that extracellular enzymatic hydrolysis is .the. rate-limiting
step in carbon cycling (e.g. Arrieta and Herndl 2002) Previous work (Arnosti et
al. 1994), however, demonstrates that this assertion is not a priori true: a
more differentiated perspective is required. In some cases, hydrolysis of a
given macromolecular substrate in the water column is extremely rapid, while the
same substrate is not detectably hydrolyzed in seawater at other locations
(Arnosti et al. submitted). There is also evidence for systematic differences in
the nature and rates of extracellular enzymatic activities of seawater and of
sedimentary heterotrophic microbes (Arnosti, 2000). What factors control these
differences? The proposed work is intended to examine systematically factors
that may control the patterns and activities of extracellular enzymes among
seawater and sedimentary microbial communities. In an effort to identify and
constrain some of the speed bumps. in the carbon cycle, enzymatic hydrolysis
will also be linked quantitatively with subsequent carbon transformation steps
in anoxic sediments, where knowledge of spatial and temporal connections of
carbon flow is particularly sparse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these
goals, field measurements of enzymatic hydrolysis rates and patterns will be
coupled with laboratory studies of specific factors that may affect enzyme
expression in heterotrophic microbial communities. Since measurements of enzyme
activities have been restricted by the limited number of commercially available
substrates and substrate proxies, this project will also expand the spectrum of
well-characterized phytoplankton macromolecules whose hydrolysis and subsequent
transformations can be studied in detail. These new substrates will be used in
field experiments as well as in laboratory investigations to quantitatively
measure carbon flow via transformations carried out by microbial communities in
anoxic sediments. &lt;br/&gt;