* 0323883
* CSE and Beyond Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2009
* Terrill Mead, Contra Costa Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2009
* USD 435,000.00

Contra Costa College is providing scholarships to low-income, academically
talented students who show interest and promise in majoring in computer science,
engineering, and mathematics. The objective is to award 72 two-year scholarships
to students who enroll full-time into a computer science, engineering, or
mathematics curriculum. Contra Costa College provides a student-support
infrastructure through its Center for Science Excellence (CSE) that facilitates
their successful graduation with an associate-level degree and transfer to a
four-year college or university. The student-support infrastructure of the
college coordinates formal study, work experience in science and technology, and
various science- and technology-based activities through a social support
system. It provides academic support in the form of mentoring, academic
workshops, tutoring, internship opportunities, leadership development,
scientific seminars, and field trips. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scholarship
awards are being distributed to the recipients during the first and second years
of enrollment at the College. Scholarship recipients enroll as full-time
students, are expected to maintain a minimum 3.0 grade point average, and follow
an educational plan prescribing a sequence of courses that enable them to
graduate and transfer to a baccalaureate-granting institution. National Science
Foundation scholarship money provides a unique opportunity for low-income
students to gain access to a support system that would not normally be possible
because of their need to concentrate their time on jobs rather than study.
Experience shows that gaining access to a coordinated support system of
mentoring, internships, and enrichment activities along with high academic
expectations is an important contribution to success for the students. Without
stipend or scholarship money, a large population of students is locked out of
the mathematics/science pipeline. Scholarship money for low-income community
college students is a beacon of hope for students who might not otherwise gain
access to programs in computer sciences, engineering, or mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;