* 0323463
* Unit Quantum Efficiency, Nondestructive, Photon Counting Detector
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2007
* John Howell, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 06/30/2007
* USD 348,147.00

EIA-0323463&lt;br/&gt;John Howell&lt;br/&gt;University of
Rochester&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unit Efficiency, nondestructive, photon counting
detector&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The startling behaviors that have led to the
dramatic slowing and stopping of light also have promise in the field of quantum
information. Following a theoretical proposal by Schmidt and Imamoglu, an ultra-
sensitive photon-counting detector is currently under construction. At the heart
of this experiment is electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT). EIT allows
a laser beam (probe beam), on resonance with an atomic transition, to pass
unattenuated through an atomic gas of the relevant atoms. However, when a signal
beam passes through the sample the EIT effects are dramatically changed. The
effects are so strong that single photons in the signal field can change the
macroscopic properties such as phase and attenuation of a classical probe beam.
Nondestructively counting photons with high efficiency is of great interest to
many quantum communications protocols.&lt;br/&gt; The experiment is in the
construction phase. The electronics are being developed that will allow two New
Focus Vortex lasers, one as the probe field and the other as the coupling field,
to be locked to the top of a resonance peak in a Doppler-free saturated
absorption spectrum of Rb 87. The effort is to achieve a linewidth stability on
the order of 100 KHz or better for both lasers. The locked lasers will then be
nearly collinearly passed through a relatively high buffer gas density vapor
cell. &lt;br/&gt;Two sources for the signal photons are in production. The first
source is from a third dramatically attenuated diode laser. The detector will
project the otherwise Poissonian distribution of the signal laser into pure
number states, which is an exciting result in and of itself. The second source
is from narrow band entangled photons. Concurrent with the construction of the
detector, is a narrow-band frequency-locked source of entangled photons, which
is an important part of the test of this detector. &lt;br/&gt;Two women, three
Hispanic and one African-American students are being trained under this project.
The investigators are also heavily involved in Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) and undergraduate teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;