* 0323271
* 7th Annual Green Chemistry and Engineering Conference Student Scholarships;  June 23-26, 2003;  Washington, DC
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2003,04/30/2004
* Mary Kirchhoff, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 04/30/2004
* USD 15,000.00

The American Chemical Society has partnered over the past several years with
NSF, EPA, and other federal funding agencies to support an annual Green
Chemistry and Engineering Conference. The topic of this meeting focuses on the
design, development, and implementation of chemical processes and products that
reduce or eliminate the use and generation of hazardous substances in a way that
is both feasible and economically viable. Green chemistry and engineering are
important tools in preventing pollution at the source and in providing solutions
to long-term global challenges.&lt;br/&gt;Student scholarships will be provided
by this NSF funding for participation in the 7th Annual Green Chemistry and
Engineering conference on June 23-26, 2003 at the National Academies in
Washington, DC. The theme of this year's meeting is "Green Chemistry and
Engineering: Integrating Sustainability, Safety, and Security": the role of
green chemistry and engineering in achieving a safe, secure, and sustainable
chemical industry and society will be emphasized. Technical and policy experts
will discuss green chemistry and engineering in the context of accident
prevention, sustainability, and chemical site security. The conference will
feature plenary speakers, expert panelists from industry, government, and
academia, and paper/poster presentations. Technical talks will be given in such
areas as alternative solvents, catalysis, and benign synthesis and processing.
The environmental, economic, and social benefits of greener technologies will be
addressed, particularly as they relate to this year's specific
theme.&lt;br/&gt;A diverse group of students from geographical locations across
the United States has received scholarships through NSF funding to attend these
meetings. Over 80% of the students have been involved in oral or poster
presentations. Students have an excellent opportunity to learn about the newest
research developments in their areas, dialog with other academic, industrial,
and governmental researchers, and advance their participation in professional
societies.&lt;br/&gt;