* 0323344
* EPNES: A Holistic Approach to the Design and Management of a Secure and Efficient Distributed Generation Power System
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Richard Hirsh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dagmar Niebur
* 08/31/2007
* USD 470,000.00

The research will create the conceptual foundation for designing and managing
distributed generation (DG) technologies for a secure, efficient, and
restructured electric utility system. Our interdisciplinary work, to be
coordinated by members of Virginia Tech's Consortium on Energy Restructuring,
will strive toward overcoming technical, business, and policy limitations in the
use of DG technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering researchers will
investigate the use of adaptive protection and power electronics modules to
enable secure and reliable operation. They will examine methods to modify system
operation to deal with threats from natural phenomena, terrorist attacks, and
load-generation changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Business researchers will employ
the engineering study's results to establish parameters for new business models
that can be used in a power grid with DG assets.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Social
science investigators will gather information on consumer and legislative
sentiments regarding characteristics of a DG system as defined by their
engineering and business colleagues. They also will study concerns held by
underrepresented groups, such as low-income and rural citizens, regarding the
use of DG technologies. Finally, they will explore constraints imposed by
government and opportunities made possible through the use of DG
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative work will lead to creation of
new grid-interface concepts, a framework for a business simulation model, and
documents detailing methods for fashioning successful models of secure and
efficient DG power systems that incorporate technical, business, and policy
considerations. The collaborators will also produce an outline for a minor field
of study in energy management to incorporate the interdisciplinary approaches
advanced in this research.&lt;br/&gt;