* 0323668
* Telephone Call Centers - Performance, Design and Control of Time Varying Queues
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* William Massey, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2007
* USD 325,000.00

This research plan aims to investigate four specific areas: (1) the analysis of
sojourn time distributions for call centers; (2) the modelling of contact
centers; (3) server staffing for call centers with finite buffers and impatient
customers; and (4) server staffing with non-Gaussian diffusion limits for some
Markovian service network models. The time varying queueing models to be
developed through their asymptotic analysis are guided by a desire to create an
operational analysis for call centers. The results will address the fundamental
problems of performance, design and control for these systems. One ultimate goal
of the methods is to create new simplifying algorithms that practitioners can
use. These new mathematical techniques will increase the understanding of time-
dependent behavior and give tools for creating new types of call centers. New
"rule of thumb" formulas and algorithms are needed for these challenges.
Developing a deeper analysis for a broader class of queueing models becomes an
important way to provide this insight. The majority of interactions between
major businesses and their customers happens through the communication medium of
call centers. This transfer of information helps businesses prosper by
increasing the sales of their products and getting the necessary feedback to be
more responsive to customer needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Thus, the growth of
call centers is driven by the growth of new businesses, the expansion of old
ones, as well as the speed, capacity and cost of information technology. Nearly
two-thirds of the cost for running call centers involves issues of staffing.
Hence any methodology that optimizes the staffing of call centers has a
significant impact on the efficient management of businesses. Traditionally
queueing theory has been an important tool in the design and performance of
service systems. However, these traditional queueing models do not begin to
describe all the detailed attributes found in the real world complexity of call
centers. Such systems can easily have time varying numbers agents, heterogeneous
types of customers needs and multiple skill sets for agents. Each of these
features points to a need to develop a richer class of tractable queueing models
for the operational design, performance and control of call centers.&lt;br/&gt;