* 0323617
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Surface Properties of Semiconductor and Metallic Nanocrystals
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Mostafa El-Sayed, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* DeAndra Beck
* 09/30/2009
* USD 45,460.00

0323617 &lt;br/&gt;Elsayed&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a cooperative research project between Dr. Mostafa El-Sayed, Department
of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
Georgia and Dr. Hassan Talaat, Department of Physics, Ain Shams University,
Cairo, Egypt. The project is to study the surface properties of semiconductor
and metallic nanocrystals. A great deal of research is being carried out to
synthesize and study the optical and nonradiative properties of metallic and
semiconductor nanoparticles. Due to their small size, many of their properties
are determined by the structural and dynamical properties of its surface. Yet
these are the least studied and thus the least understood. The PI is being
supported by the Division of Materials Research to synthesize and study the
optical and nonradiative properties of these particles and their assemblies. The
observed properties are very much surface dependent but it is not understood how
the surface structure quantitatively affects the nanoparticle properties. There
is need for understanding the structure and dynamical properties of the
surfaces. The PIs propose to jointly study the surfaces of different
semiconductor nanoparticles of different sizes and shapes. These have been
synthesized and their optical and relaxation properties have been studied at Ga
Tech and Ain Shams University. Self assembled semiconductor and metallic
nanostructures will be used. The correlation between the optical and electronic
relaxation properties and the surface properties could help us understand how
the surface affects the different properties of nanostructured
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The project will enable young US
scientists to learn about this new technique. In addition, their education about
Egypt and its young people will be valuable. In addition, this collaborative
research will give the young Egyptian students the opportunity to gain from
carrying scientific research at Georgia Tech. The Egyptian collaborator, Dr.
Hassan Talaat, received his graduate degrees in solid-state physics, and did
post doctorate and higher training studies in the United States. He is carrying
out an active research project in developing different Raman techniques to study
the surface and the interfaces of semiconductor and metallic materials. Using
surface plasmon polaritons, he is able to study the surface of metallic thin
films. Thus the collaboration provides synergistic benefits.&lt;br/&gt;