* 0324394
* Collaborative Research Utilizing NEES Facilities: Landslide Generated Tsunamis and Runup
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2008
* Philip Liu, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 01/31/2008
* USD 330,248.00

This research project seeks a better understanding of tsunamis, and the
associated runup, of tsunamis generated by near shore landslides, including sub-
aerial and submerged landslides. The project involves an integrated experimental
and theoretical (numerical) component to develop simulation models based on the
two-phase Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations and the discrete
element model (DEM). Besides the measurements of free surface elevations and
runup heights, optical techniques, such as Particle Imaging Velocimetry (PIV),
will be used to measure both fluid velocities and materials slide velocities in
detail. The large-scale experiments will be performed at the Oregon State
University NEES (Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation) wave basin.

The objectives are: (1) to characterize waves generated by three-dimensional
solid body slides, and during the inception, deformation, and propagation of
granular (material) landslides; (2) to parameterize the run-up and shoreward
inundation associated with tsunamis generated by granular and solid body
landslides; (3) to improve the capability of numerical models of the complex
dynamic interactions among tsunami, shoreline, and moving granular and solid
body slides; and (4) to establish benchmark problems for the study of waves
generated by granular and solid body slides with high quality experimental data
for validating numerical simulation models.

The research operates at the interface between several traditional fields of
science and engineering: fluid dynamics, solid mechanics, soil mechanics and
applied mathematics. It integrates analytical and experimental approaches with
measurements from experiments, leading to the rational development of new and
improved numerical models. In addition, the results of this study will be
incorporated into the revision of a CD-ROM; Tsunami: Understanding the Giant
Wave, which has been distributed to many high schools, science museums,
libraries, and research institutes. A web site will be established to
disseminate information on research progress and findings.