* 0324043
* Collaborative Proposal: Joint US/Norwegian Studies of Ice/Ocean Interaction in Frozen Fjords
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Miles McPhee, McPhee Research Company
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 08/31/2007
* USD 204,728.00

ABSTRACT McPhee OPP-0324043

Intellectual Merit: This research brings to bear modern oceanographic equipment
combined in novel ways to measure turbulent fluxes of momentum, heat, and salt
near the ice/ocean interface in the relatively controlled environment of ice-
covered fjords with tidal flow, in collaboration with Norwegian and other
American scientists. It builds on a well-documented record of making similar
measurements, which are rare in oceanography, using the data to address
fundamental issues of turbulent transport in ocean boundary layers. The first
phase of the project demonstrated observationally that double-diffusion of heat
and salt at the ice/ocean interface is fundamentally different when sea ice is
freezing compared with melting, because of the way crystal growth relieves
supercooling tendency (and potential frazil ice production) very near the
interface. It also led to development of a theory of false bottom formation and
migration that suggests the importance of the double diffusive process during
melting to the overall energy balance of pack ice. In extending the
collaboration, observational and modeling work will be used to (1) quantify the
exchange coefficicents for heat and salt at the ice ocean boundary; (2)
investigate the impact of horizontal changes in surface roughness and near
surface salinity on turbulent exchange; and (3) understand the formation and
downslope flow of brine-enhanced seawater formed in coastal, latent heat
polynyas.

Broader Impact: The collaborative nature of this work, and its close connection
with the University Courses on Svalbard (UNIS), has been beneficial in a number
of ways. The students are introduced to the concepts of polar air-sea-ice
interaction during a demanding lecture series describing the latest research,
and then observe and participate directly in deploying and monitoring state-of-
the-art instrumentation under polar conditions. It works both ways. Through the
course the Principal Investigator has had contact with bright, highly motivated
students (about equally divided among men and women) from a number of countries
including (besides Scandinavia) France, Germany, Great Britain, Poland, Japan,
and Russia. Several students from the UNIS course and collaborative work have
continued their interest in polar oceanographic and sea-ice research, and are
all pursuing advanced degrees at the doctoral level. The American and Norwegian
collaborators in this work are well aware of general heightened interest in both
the response and impact of polar regions (particularly sea ice and dense water
formation) on global climate. It is probably not an overstatement to say that we
share a sense of urgency in broadening our understanding of the fundamentals of
air-sea-ice interaction, so that the large scale models used to predict future
change incorporate the best physics.