* 0324898
* ITR: Dynamic Methods for Identifying, Visualizing, and Tracking Eddy Evolution in Experimental Turbulent Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Ellen Longmire, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Horst Henning Winter
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,280,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Information Technology Research (ITR) Medium
Proposals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
CTS-0324898&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Ivan Marusic, Victoria Interrante,
and Ellen Longmire&lt;br/&gt;University/Institution: University of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ITR: Dynamic methods for Identifying, Visualizing
and Tracking Eddy Evolution in Experimental Turbulent Flows&lt;br/&gt;This
research program unites data visualization and experimental fluid mechanics
specialists to investigate and understand the dynamic evolution of key physical
mechanisms in turbulent flows. To accomplish this, the evolving nature of
eddies, or vortex structures, fundamental building blocks in wall-bounded
turbulent flows, will be examined. Experiments will track, in real time, vortex
packets, which are structures that have been identified as a key mechanism in
producing skin-friction drag in these flows. A dual stereo-PIV system will be
traversed along the length of a water channel flow while implementing a feature-
identification scheme based on visualization tools to generate a feedback
signal. The experiments and feature detection strategies will provide answers to
unique and challenging questions about the generation, development, merging and
interaction, and breakdown of vortex packet structures and other dominant flow
features in wall turbulence. Multivariate visualization methods appropriate for
the novel experimental data will be developed. The methods will be applied to
see what structures exist, and how they develop and decay. Because vortex
packets are characterized by several parameters, the challenge is to present the
visualization in a meaningful and useful way to turbulence practitioners. The
multivariate visualizations will be optimized with special attention paid to
quantifying how and why different visual features, such as color, texture,
topography, and motion, work to convey information efficiently and effectively.
&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide, direct insight into the dynamic evolution
processes of key physical mechanisms in wall turbulence at moderate to high
Reynolds numbers. The new insight will constitute a major advance in the
fundamental understanding of turbulent boundary layer flows and can lead to new
drag reduction strategies and new turbulence simulation schemes. Also,
visualization methods suited to complex turbulent flows will be developed that
will prove useful to the broader turbulence community as well in researchers in
additional fields. This research will lead to unique movies of vortex evolution
that will be developed into an educational resource for graduate programs and
broader scientific audiences. In addition to graduate students, undergraduates
and high school physics teachers will participate in short-term investigations
during the summers. The teachers are expected to bring their experiences with
cutting edge measurement techniques and engineering applications back to the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;