* 0324142
* Computer Science and Mathematics Mentorship and Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Linda Keen, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Lance C. Perez
* 07/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

This project is providing a combination intensive mentoring and scholarships to
low-income, academically talented students in mathematics and computer science.
The objective is to increase retention of students in the Mathematics and
Computer Science department and prepare them for industry and government
internships that enhance their academic experience. By providing financial
support, computer equipment, and extra advising and group study activities, the
program is helping students focus on their academic studies and prepare them for
future jobs in computing and the mathematical sciences. This program targets the
stages at which our students have the highest attrition rate. For our
undergraduates, the program is directed at students who have completed the
introductory courses in their major. The specific goals for these students are
to finish their gateway courses, especially mathematics, computer science, and
English, and provide them with the necessary skills to get an internship and to
graduate in a timely fashion. For masters level students, the program is
focusing on addressing the barriers to pursuit of a graduate degree and the
transition from undergraduate to graduate work. To increase the number of well-
prepared graduates in CSEM fields, we are undertaking a program with the
following goals:&lt;br/&gt;o Financial Support: Alleviate the financial problems
for students entering their sophomore year or beginning their masters
degree.&lt;br/&gt;o Mentoring and Group Study: Address personal barriers to
continuation with academic support in the form of intensive one-on-one
interaction with computer science and mathematics faculty and with group
work.&lt;br/&gt;o Career Counseling: Increase students' competitiveness through
career counseling and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;o Internships: Strengthen students
experience and job readiness through internships in industry and on
campus.&lt;br/&gt;o Computer Equipment: Increase access to computers and
students' ability to use emerging systems by providing laptop
computers.&lt;br/&gt;