* 0324174
* CSEMS IV at CAL
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* George Johnson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 398,732.00

This work builds on previous and current CSEMS awards. CSEMS IV follows a single
cohort of freshman and sophomore students over a four-year period, and awards
scholarships to twenty-nine economically disadvantaged students, with a special
emphasis on students from underrepresented groups in engineering and science.
Recruitment of the CSEMS Scholars targets three groups: 1) freshmen admitted for
Fall 2003 or Spring 2004, 2) freshmen participating in the Multicultural
Engineering Program Summer 2003 Pre-Engineering Program, and 3) freshmen and
sophomores participating in academic workshops and mathematics placement testing
during summer orientation offered by the Coalition for Excellence and Diversity
in Mathematics, Science and Engineering. This group includes students from
majors in the College of Engineering, chemical engineering majors in the College
of Chemistry, and students in the College of Letters in Science who are
completing coursework to pursue (a) the computer science or mathematics majors
in the College of Letters and Science or (b) a major in the College of
Engineering. A committee of faculty and staff from Coalition academic support
programs, which employs a comprehensive approach in evaluating each student's
academic merit and professionalism, chooses students.

Intellectual Merit: CSEMS scholars participate in a variety of retention-related
activities tied to the existing student support infrastructure of the Center for
Underrepresented Engineering Students, the Coalition for Excellence and
Diversity in Mathematics, Science, and Engineering, the EECS Center for
Undergraduate Matters and other partner programs. This includes faculty
advising, academic excellence workshops, tutoring, mentoring, advising,
internships in industry and/or research experience, and assistance with graduate
school applications or job placement. A unifying theme of the CSEMS IV program
is the increase student retention by helping each student develop into a
committed member of the engineering and academic community.

Broader Impacts: There is an increasing shortfall in the number of qualified
students that are able to fill the need for computer science and engineering
professionals in the workforce. Students' financial troubles are increasingly
likely to interrupt and delay their degree completion. Financial need is perhaps
a more serious impediment to timely completion of engineering degrees -- the
technical course load is often not compatible with long hours of outside work.
Indeed, the scholarship support from the CSEMS IV program also facilitates
students' ability to enrich their educational experience with activities that
are not necessarily tied to financial obligations, such as undergraduate
research, tutoring, and teaching. By decreasing students' loan debt upon
graduation, these scholarships may also encourage students to pursue graduate
degrees before entering the technical workforce.