* 0324630
* Active Sensing Approach to Output-Based Control of Nonsmooth Dynamical Systems with Controlled Singularities
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Joseph Bentsman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 08/31/2007
* USD 212,953.00

A new class of systems, dynamical systems with active, or controlled,
singularities, and the corresponding rigorous modeling and optimal control
framework have been recently introduced by the PI and his colleagues. The main
characteristic of the systems in this class is the admission of impulsive
control action during the singular phases of their motion, such as
discontinuities and nonsmoothness, jumps in dimension, and others. This work,
however, revealed a fundamental knowledge gap that needs to be bridged to permit
practical controller implementation: correct statement and solution of the novel
problem of sensing in systems with controlled singularities, i.e. sensing in
systems with combined regular and very short duration singular motions, both
controlled. Upon further examining the impact games, one notices that the
advanced player puts considerable effort into maintaining the best possible
combination of the two sensing modes: the visual tracking and the contact
``feel'' of the ball. Thereby, the player controls the sensing environment of
the non-impact and impact phases of the game, respectively, at every instant of
the game. This strategy gives rise to the concept of active sensing in the
systems with controlled singularities, where the control in both phases is
chosen with the added goal of maximizing the information content of the state
observations. Active sensing in this class of systems is imperative, since
singular phases have very short duration, but critically affect the entire
system behavior. Thus, the concept proposed is important, and in combination
with the concepts indicated above, it offers the potential of drastically
improving the performance of systems with singularities. Active sensing and
output-based control of the entire two-phase system motion are expected to
require information-set, optimization, and multi-scale dynamic wavelet network
methods for synthesis of the ultra-high-speed time-localized state estimators
and controllers based on the short interval nonsmooth real-time measurements in
the singular phase, and rigorous embedding of the multi-scale models into the
discrete-continuous equations capable of representing sensing and control in
both singular and smooth motion phases. Thus, the objectives of the proposed
research are a) to develop a mathematical framework for active sensing in the
systems with controlled singularities, b) on the basis of this framework to
develop procedures for the design of active ultra-high-speed time-localized
state observers that utilize signals containing both smooth and impulsive data,
c) on the basis of the results of a) and b) to develop techniques\ for obtaining
the full input/state/output two-phase system model and designing the optimal
output-based open-loop and feedback control laws, with control actions applied
during both regular and singular motion, and d) to apply the procedures
developed to high speed fault clearing in power networks and boiler-turbine
units with fast valving, ultra-high performance electromechanical drives with
impulsive endpoint return motion, and modeling and control of impact-based
motions in MEMS. The broader impact of the research proposed stems from the fact
that singularities in system motion are critically important across a broad
range of technologically significant systems, such as power networks abruptly
affected by the fault-induced topological change, biped robots, fast positioning
systems with reverse motion, thin-film microactuator arrays, space vehicles with
impulsive propulsion, smart skins, and other systems. Due to rapid progress in
fast sensing/actuation the proposed activity has a potential of providing
qualitative jump in the performance of these systems.

