* 0324117
* Resources In support of Excellence (RISE): A USF/NSF Computer Science, Engineering, &amp; Mathematics Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Chris Tsokos, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

Resources In Support of Excellence (RISE) utilizes National Science Foundation's
scholarship funds in conjunction with aggressive recruitment and retention
programs and other supports to significantly increase the University of South
Florida's enrollment of talented low income, underrepresented, first generation,
adult, and transfer students in engineering, computer science, and mathematics.
The RISE program exceeds the offerings of the traditional student scholarship
programs by implementing programs and supports that focus on students'
developmental needs as they progress through their&lt;br/&gt;CSEMS degree
preparation programs as well as their career and professional development
training programs. Thus, the USF/NSF RISE Program recruits and selects a cohort
of 29 low-income talented undergraduate students that also includes ethnic
minorities and women, for the purpose of providing them with intensive supports
and mentorship that ensures success in the CSEMS disciplines. As part of this
goal, a cadre of mentors from CSEMS disciplines are selected to work as
discipline based counselors. An Advisory Board consisting of high tech
companies, USF administrators and faculty, and the school district oversees all
programmatic and management needs of project RISE. A multi-faceted approach is
used to attract different cadres of students from low-income and under
represented groups. This includes aggressively recruiting entering first year
students to targeting upper level students during the last 2 years of their
program in CSEMS based disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: Recent
studies have demonstrated the importance of some key support issues that make a
difference for our target group. Those include mentorship, financial supports,
internships, and a supportive environment. Given the target population,
investments in such supports help students achieve certain milestones that
ordinarily they would not have achieved on their own, including successful
completion of baccalaureate degrees, and becoming contributing members of the
CSEMS workforce.&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT: Investments in human resources for
science and technology education are essential underpinnings for social and
economic well being in a global, knowledge-based economy. Underrepresented
groups, including impoverished students across ethnic lines, ethnic minorities,
and women are sorely underrepresented among those holding terminal degrees as
part of CSEMS workforce and the professorate. By recruiting and preparing this
cadre of students to pursue and obtain undergraduate degrees in CSEMS
disciplines and by encouraging them to consider professional careers in those
areas as well exposing them to graduate education in CSEMS, we are helping to
build the capacity that our nation sorely needs to sustain its science,
technology, and engineering infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;