* 0324906
* ITR Medium Award:     Computational Complexity Theory 2003
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Avi Wigderson, Institute For Advanced Study
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,500,000.00

This proposal represents a combination of ambitious&lt;br/&gt;research and
educational objectives, described below.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research we
propose is on the fundamental problems of&lt;br/&gt;computational complexity
theory, with special focus on the cross&lt;br/&gt;interactions between them. In
particular, we will concentrate on&lt;br/&gt;the following three
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The power of randomness in computation. This
includes&lt;br/&gt;pseudorandomness, derandomization of probabilistic
algorithms,&lt;br/&gt;explicit constructions of random-like objects such as
expanders and&lt;br/&gt;extractors, and their applications in data
structures,&lt;br/&gt;algorithms, networks, codes and
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complexity of proofs and search for proofs.
&lt;br/&gt;This includes understanding the power&lt;br/&gt;and limitations of
natural logical, algebraic and combinatorial proof&lt;br/&gt;systems. It also
includes relating these to understanding natural&lt;br/&gt;search heuristics for
optimization problems, to automated theorem&lt;br/&gt;proving, and to the
limitations of&lt;br/&gt;natural attacks on the P vs. NP
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The power and limitations of various computational
models.&lt;br/&gt;This includes Boolean and arithmetic circuits, quantum
computations,&lt;br/&gt;branching programs and (classical and quantum)
communication complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational agenda of the IAS
in general, and of the Theoretical&lt;br/&gt;Computer Science program in the
School of Mathematics in particular,&lt;br/&gt;is turning
the&lt;br/&gt;brightest fresh PhDs of today into scientific leaders of
tomorrow.&lt;br/&gt;This is facilitated by&lt;br/&gt;an extensive program of
permanent, long and short term presence of top&lt;br/&gt;leaders in the field at
the school, together with several&lt;br/&gt;extensive and diverse
seminar&lt;br/&gt;series, in a highly interactive environment with no duties
except&lt;br/&gt;pursuing research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We note that our
program at the IAS (partly with NSF support) &lt;br/&gt;has already a proven
track record of excellence in both objectives.&lt;br/&gt;