* 0324889
* ITR: Adaptive and Real-Time Geologic Mapping, Analysis and Design of Underground Space (AMADEUS)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,01/31/2009
* Marte Gutierrez, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 01/31/2009
* USD 1,067,117.00

Underground excavations are used for a wide variety of civilian and military
purposes, including mining, road &amp; railway tunnels, and caverns. Permanent
storage of the current U.S. stockpile of nuclear wastes will utilize large
underground excavations. With increasing world population, demand for
underground construction is expected to accelerate in the future. From an
Information Technology (IT) viewpoint, design and construction of underground
facilities are just emerging from the dark ages. Rock failure in underground
mines and tunnel construction continue to claim lives, and the tunneling
industry is still beset by frequent failures. Computational modeling can lead to
more rational designs for underground excavations than what is provided by
traditional rock mass classification systems and empirical design procedures.
The key problem in using computer models to design underground excavations is
the paucity of information on site geology, rock mass properties and in situ
stresses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two major research objectives for this
project are 1) to design and implement an IT-based system called AMADEUS for
real-time and adaptive geologic mapping, analysis, and design of underground
space, and 2) to enhance teaching efforts related to engineering geology,
mining, rock mechanics and computer science. Advances in IT, particularly in
digital imaging, data management, visualization and computation can
significantly improve analysis, design and construction of underground
excavations. Using IT, real-time data on geology and excavation response can be
gathered during the construction using non-intrusive techniques which do not
require expensive and time-consuming instrumentation. The real-time data will
then be used to update the geological and computational models of the
excavation, and to determine the optimal rate of excavation, excavation sequence
and structural support. Virtual environment (VE) systems will be used to allow
virtual walk-through inside an excavation, observe geologic conditions, perform
virtual tunneling operations, and investigate stability of the excavation via
computer simulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major intellectual merits of the
project include development of 1) a digital imaging and analysis system for
geologic characterization of rock exposures, 2) a remote measuring system for
monitoring tunnel deformation during construction, 3) a computer tomography
system for defining stress changes within the rock due to excavation, 4) a rock
mass modeling system for constructing 3D geologic/geomechanical models from the
data acquired by the data gathering tasks, and 5) a virtual environment (VE) for
visualizing and interacting with the geologic/geomechanical models. The broader
impacts of the project include educational opportunities for K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students. The 3D, interactive and immersive VE to be
developed in the project will enhance the educational experience of students.
Minorities, women, and individuals from other underrepresented groups will be
recruited to participate in the research by working with established national
and University programs, and through contact with K-12 schools in the
Appalachian region. The research results will be disseminated rapidly and
broadly through 1) the worldwide web, 2) geotechnical and computer science print
media, 3) conference presentations, and 4) demonstrations of AMADEUS to mine
operators, contractors and engineers. As an integrated system, AMADEUS will
result in significant contributions to the safe, efficient and economical
construction and utilization of underground space.&lt;br/&gt;