* 0324471
* Study of the Effects of Non-Structural Building Elements and Human-Structure Interaction on the Dynamic Behavior of Floors Subjected to Human Movements
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2005,08/31/2010
* Mehdi Setareh, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2010
* USD 346,000.00

Study of the Effects of Non-Structural Building Elements and Human-Structure
Interaction on the Dynamic Behavior of Floors Subjected to Human
Movements&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mehdi Setareh, and Thomas M.
Murray&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances
in the development of higher strength materials coupled with more efficient
construction techniques, more accurate computer-assisted structural analysis and
design, new design methods, and more common use of long-span structures by
architects have resulted in many floors that are susceptible to annoying floor
vibrations due to walking, jumping, dancing, and similar
activities.&lt;br/&gt;Even though this problem has been studied during the past
thirty years, problem floors have become an increasingly common occurrence.
These problems are mainly due to a lack of accurate definition of the dynamic
parameters of floors, which in turn have caused poor correlations between the
levels of measured and predicted vibrations by various design guides and
particularly finite element analyses. Two major issues that have been mainly
ignored in previous research are the effects of non-structural elements and the
effects of the interaction of occupants and structure on the floor system. Most
non-structural building elements are designed and detailed by non-engineers,
mainly architects. Unfortunately, there is a lack of awareness of this problem
among architects. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research project intends to address
the above problems. A two-story structure will be constructed at the Virginia
Tech Research Center to act as a full-scale test model for a series of dynamic
tests representative of the analytical excitations. It is estimated that the
construction of the testing facility will be completed within the first eighteen
months from the project starting date. A short pilot study to consider the
effects of the non-structural elements and human-structure interactions will be
conducted during the remainder of this two-year research effort.&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this project are: First, the test structure will be a
permanent center for the study of floor vibrations. Industries interested in the
development of new products to address this problem will be able to use the
facility to test their products. This will be a collaborative effort between the
College of Architecture and Urban Studies and the College of Engineering of
Virginia Tech. Students in the architecture and civil engineering programs will
have access to this facility for their research projects, and help them
understand the different aspects of this problem. The PIs will incorporate the
results of this research into their architecture and civil engineering courses.
All efforts will be made to involve students in the under-represented groups and
minorities in this research. In addition, undergraduate students will be
included through the NSF-REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;