* 0324669
* Fabric-Reinforced Cement Composites by Pultrusion: Manufacturing, Properties, and Modeling Aspects
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Barzin Mobasher, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 10/31/2007
* USD 219,789.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The research is aimed at developing a novel cost-effective
method for the production of&lt;br/&gt;high performance thin-sheet fabric-
reinforced cement composites. Thin elements (about 10 mm
thickness)&lt;br/&gt;represent a major category of cement-based composites and
may be used as wall panels, exterior siding,&lt;br/&gt;tiles, roofing members,
and pressure pipes. For such elements addition of reinforcement is essential
in&lt;br/&gt;order to improve the tensile and flexural performance. The proposed
fabric-cement systems have the&lt;br/&gt;potential to be used as structural load
bearing members, thus competing with other board type materials&lt;br/&gt;such
as wood, synthetics, or metals.&lt;br/&gt; The challenge in developing an
industrial production method to produce&lt;br/&gt;thin sheet cement elements
with fabrics is not only technological, but also scientific, as it is
demonstrated&lt;br/&gt;that the production method can have substantial impact on
the properties of the final product. To&lt;br/&gt;practically use fabric-cement
composites, an industrial cost-effective production process such as
the&lt;br/&gt;pultrusion process is proposed here. The main scientific goals of
this research are: 1) development of the&lt;br/&gt;pultrusion processing for
fabric reinforced cement composites, 2) development of cement mixtures
with&lt;br/&gt;appropriate rheology for the process, and optimal mechanical
performance, and 3) optimization of fabric&lt;br/&gt;materials and structure for
various new and retrofit type products, and 4) development of
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;approaches to help the designers with implementation,
commercialization, and use of these materials.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
and&lt;br/&gt;educational components of this work will involve the interaction
of two senior personnel with several&lt;br/&gt;students in a project that is
addressed at an international level. The potential for developing new
durable,&lt;br/&gt;strong, environmentally friendly, and economical,
construction materials is a global challenge as we look&lt;br/&gt;at the
diminishing energy and scarce natural resources. The promising combination of
fabric&lt;br/&gt;reinforcement in cement composite products and the pultrusion
process is expected to lead to an effective&lt;br/&gt;novel technique to produce
a new class of high performance fabric-cement composite materials.
Such&lt;br/&gt;breakthrough may open the way for a multitude of new products and
applications. It will also address an&lt;br/&gt;economical means of retrofitting
existing reinforced concrete structures and masonry walls. The
short&lt;br/&gt;term objectives include the development of economical materials
and processes to manufacture them. The&lt;br/&gt;long term objective of this
project is to present to the engineering community an alternative
building&lt;br/&gt;material fit for the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;