* 0324883
* Collaborative Research:  A Digital Video Collaboratory to Integrate IT Innovations in Video Analysis, Sharing and Collaboration into Scientific Research Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Brian MacWhinney, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 384,217.00

The proposed effort will build upon prior work by participating institutions in
audio and video capture, analysis and collaboration, allowing each institution
to make progress more quickly by leveraging each other's respective strengths,
capabilities and prior work. The project brings together NSF-funded efforts
involving multimedia data in the human sciences: the DIVER project housed at
Stanford University, and the TalkBank Project, housed at CMU and the University
of Pennsylvania, as well as NSF Middleware and Grid projects. The proposed
project will adopt a two-track research approach to designing and implementing
the Collaboratory. The first project track is to develop a virtual video
repository and video analysis community portal. The second track will produce an
open community toolkit that greatly expands generality and capabilities for
video analysis, video input and output. In addition to these goals of moving
from local to distributed users, tools and data will evolve in an ongoing
process of user testing, piloting, and software packaging, involving the
community and refining the tools based on their experiences. Project results at
each interim milestone will be disseminated broadly for enhancing scientific and
technological understanding, especially to conferences and journals and
complemented by an open website for sharing ongoing research, technical
developments, technical reports and software releases to be downloaded to user
communities. Video Collaboratory toolkits will be made available to
participating institutions with efforts made to spur adoption that will
facilitate multiple communities using collaborative commentary around video.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial focus of our project is the human sciences,
with the aim of leveraging video records to enhance the learning sciences,
education, teaching and training. We also expect that video application and
infrastructure work can provide significant support to the physical sciences,
since video is an important data type for scientific visualization and primary
empirical data, and several Grid initiatives use video databases integrally. We
anticipate producing open-source video software that can be utilized in the
current Grid and Middleware platform initiatives. This could enable a new
primary software layer, a set of standards for video analysis and collaboration
middleware, and the potential for a substantial broader impact as an outcome of
this work. &lt;br/&gt;