* 0324779
* Collaborative Research-ITR-High Order Partial Differential Equations: Theory, Computational Tools, and Applications in Image Processing, Computer Graphics, Biology, and Fluids
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2010
* Guillermo Sapiro, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2010
* USD 399,998.00

This project seeks to develop a comprehensive research and education program in
the area of computational&lt;br/&gt;methods and simulations of physical systems
described by high order Partial Differential Equations (PDEs). The program will
unify algorithmic, visualization, theoretical, and experimental efforts as well
as address applications in areas of science and technology, including computer
graphics, image processing, biology, and fluids.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of
the proposed activity&lt;br/&gt;This project advances knowledge in the area of
high order PDEs, with particular emphasis on curved surface data, and produces
enabling technology to address fundamental problems in biology, image
processing, computer graphics, and fluids in general. The novel science is in
the computational&lt;br/&gt;techniques, experimental research, and diverse
applications addressed by a multi-disciplinary team. This&lt;br/&gt;project
brings together the five fields of computer science, applied mathematics,
mechanical engineering, physics, and electrical and computer
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the proposed activity&lt;br/&gt;With
the increasing interest in high order PDEs, the computational tools and
experience resulting from this project impact beyond the particular applications
in this proposal. Students will receive unusually
broad&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary training and the workshop planned further
brings experts from different fields together. New public domain software
incorporating the developed algorithms enables researchers from different fields
using higher order PDEs to perform state-of-the-art numerical simulations and
graphics rendering of their application of interest.&lt;br/&gt;Educational
initiatives of this research program include: (1) new interdisciplinary training
of graduate students and postdocs through co-mentoring by PIs in different
fields; (2) new interdisciplinary courses in computer graphics, numerical
analysis, and modeling/simulation of physical phenomena described by higher
order PDEs; (3) a workshop bringing together for the first time diverse
scientific researchers using high order PDEs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;