* 0324542
* Collaborative Research: Behavior of Braced Steel Frames With Innovative Bracing Schemes - A NEES Collaboratory Project
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Reginald DesRoches, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 08/31/2007
* USD 218,420.00

PI: Leon. Georgia Tech

The 1994 Northridge and 1995 Kobe earthquakes showed that new technologies and
structural configurations are needed to limit damage to steel structures
subjected to moderate and large ground motions. In this context, the need to
provide additional stiffness to modern frame configurations is clear, leading to
a renewed interest in braced frame configurations. Braced frames, however, are
regarded as not being very ductile because buckling of individual braces quickly
leads to formation of story mechanisms. The additional need for stiffness and
ductility for modern structures is compounded by the trends towards lighter
structures, more compact lateral-load resisting systems and the advent of
performance-based design. To solve the traditional problems associated with
conventional braced frames, a new class of bracing systems, known as a zipper
frames, will be developed and tested as part of this proposed work. This
proposal represents the first phase of a two-phase collaborative approach to the
problem. In the experimental portion of the first phase, four laboratories
(Georgia Tech (GT), U. at Buffalo (UB), U. of California at Berkeley (UCB), and
the U. of Colorado at Boulder (CU)) will conduct studies on the behavior of
whole systems, subassemblages, and individual elements. These will be tested
under a variety of load regimes, ranging from shake table tests to quasi-static
ones, in order to provide comprehensive data on which to base design
recommendations. In the analytical part of the first phase, the four
universities listed above, plus Florida A&M (FAMU) and Imperial College-London
(IC), will conduct extensive analytical studies to provide (1) a basis and a
complement to the experimental work, (2) a testbed for the NEESgrid portion of
the NEES Consortium, and (3) new, simplified and comprehensive models for use in
design. As the final task for the first phase, GT and FAMU researchers will
develop the proposal for the second phase, which will deal with the use of
advanced materials and active controls in braced steel structures.

The intellectual merit in the proposed research is that it will provide a unique
database of information on the behavior of zipper frames, and will provide
results from proof-of-concept studies on a new class of bracing systems. In
addition, the research will lead to the development of analytical models that
can be implemented into existing seismic analysis programs. The research will
develop analytical tools and methodologies to allow practicing engineers to
determine potential benefits of a variety of applications of zipper frames.

The project also intends provide initial shakedown studies for the NEES
Consortium and in particular to test the flexibility and robustness of the
NEESgrid system. In addition, it will provide valuable lessons from both the
logistical and technical standpoints for future NEES collaborations. The project
will link three NEES sites, one well-established program (GT), one developing
program (FAMU) and international partner (IC) as a test case for future grand
challenge collaborations. The project has been divided into two phases so that
two younger remote researchers (Dr. DesRoches from GT and Dr. Abdullah from
FAMU) will benefit from the work on the first phase in order to develop the
technical expertise in pseudo-dynamic and shake table testing that they will
need for the second phase. This intends to be a model for future NEES projects
in which researchers from remote sites will be able to gain valuable experience
and mentoring from established researchers/sites.

The research proposed depends strongly on the collaboration between researchers
at five sites. To fully maximize the potential impact of this project, a strong
education component of the program is proposed. To complement the collaborative
research program, that includes a very large exchange of graduate students, a
NEES undergraduate research program will be developed. The program will consist
of three components; an undergraduate research experience at the sites, a summer
undergraduate research exchange program, and a 2-day student symposium. Students
from traditionally underrepresented groups will be specifically targeted for the
undergraduate research program. The broader impact of the proposed research is
that is will provide important information for the design community on the
performance of braced frame construction. In addition, the proposed study will
serve as a model for future collaborative research using NEES.