* 0324046
* A Comprehensive Scholarship Program to Support Students in High-Technology Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Corrado Poli, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Bert Holmes
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

The Departments of Computer Science, Mathematics and Statistics, and the College
of Engineering at the University of Massachusetts Amherst have previously been
awarded two NSF CSEMS grants; $495,000 in January 2000 and 2001 supporting 40
students per year with $3,125 scholarships; and a second grant of $400,000 in
2002 supporting 29 students per year with $3,125 scholarships. The CSEMS Program
at UMass, which gives preference for transfer and upper-level students, has
successfully supported economically disadvantaged students with above-average
percentages recruited from under-represented groups. To date, 22 students have
graduated with support from the CSEMS Program and 27 additional scholars in May
2003.

This proposal increases the number of baccalaureate degrees in CSEM fields by
building a new cohort starting with 29 freshmen in fall 2003. These students,
selected for their exceptional academic promise but financial limitations, are
supported with annual scholarships of $3,125 for four years -- from their first
year through graduation. Particular attention is paid to the recruitment of
women, minorities and persons with disabilities.

The newest CSEMS cohort are participating in a faculty-driven, comprehensive
mentoring program combining the key elements of 1) recruitment, 2) financial
support, 3) close monitoring and communication, 4) special opportunities and 5)
academic and personal support resources.