* 0324543
* Desiccation Cracks and Their Effect on Permeability in Clays
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,04/30/2008
* Fred Boadu, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 04/30/2008
* USD 300,406.00

Hydraulic soil barriers play a very important role in geoenvironmental
engineering by isolating a variety of wastes from the biosphere, including
sources of drinking water. For that reason, cracking of such barriers poses a
major challenge for engineers. Indeed, the resulting permeability increase may
easily undermine the very purpose of constructing a barrier. The use of low
permeability hydraulic barriers, such as landfill clay liners or top covers is
mandated by the EPA recommendations regarding landfills in the US.
&lt;br/&gt;Cracks in compacted clay barriers may form during construction due to
desiccation when clay is left unprotected against evaporation. Drying may also
occur due to the elevated temperatures in the landfill. Evaporation may also
cause cracking of liners at the contact with the unsaturated soil beneath.
Eventually, cracks may form networks for preferential water flow, and may
increase dramatically contaminant transport into the aquifer. Despite intense
research in this area, cracking remains difficult to prevent, and cracked soil
permeability is difficult to control and predict. To engineer better barriers
using compacted soils, a better understanding is needed of fundamental
mechanisms of desiccation cracking and related changes in permeability.
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research is to investigate such mechanisms as coupled
physico-chemical and hydro-mechanical phenomena. Experiments with clay shrinkage
due to water mass loss during drying, on the one hand, and with hardening of the
unsaturated clay soil due to capillary force growth, on the other, will be
conducted. Advantage will be taken of substantial advances made in recent years
in the mechanics of unsaturated soils. Critical physical variables controlling
the behavior of unsaturated soils include suction, saturation degree, humidity,
clay fraction and the effect of its water chemistry. The mechanisms of possible
suppression of cracking will also be addressed. &lt;br/&gt;Experiments involving
changes in permeability to water and air concomitant to the formation of cracks
and crack networks will be performed in a suitably adapted oedometer. Micro-
geophysical techniques of measuring acoustic emission during cracking and other
non-invasive methods will be applied to monitor cracking progress. The acquired
data from the experiments will be used to establish models allowing engineers to
predict advective transport of contaminants through a liner subjected to a
certain degree of cracking. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this work is in
addressing fundamental properties of drying soils that remain unexplained and
poorly controlled. This research requires an interdisciplinary approach, with
the use of mechanics of geomaterials, soil physics, micro-geophysics and
hydrology. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impact of the work will be reached via several
avenues. First, undergraduate students will be engaged in the lab activities,
which proves to be to great advantage to both sides. Second, student members of
underrepresented minorities and African students have found a niche at Duke
University in the Soil Mechanics area. They will be part of this project and
will attract other students from this group. Third, the obtained results will
attract attention of engineers in tropical countries, for which the cracking
soils are inherent. They will also be of interest to eco-hydrologists and
agricultural soil scientists.&lt;br/&gt;The Duke University team will form a
partnership with researchers at Swiss Federal Polytechnic Institute at Lausanne,
who have very similar interests. &lt;br/&gt;