* 0324607
* Nondestructive Evaluation of FRP-Confined Concrete Using Microwave
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/2003,02/29/2008
* Oral Buyukozturk, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Mahendra P. Singh
* 02/29/2008
* USD 300,308.00

Nondestructive Evaluation of FRP-Confined Concrete Using Microwave, CMS project
0324607

PI: Oral Buyukozturk, MIT

Fiber-reinforced plastic (FRP) composite jacketing systems have emerged as an
alternative to traditional construction, strengthening, and repair of reinforced
concrete columns and bridge piers. A large number of projects, both public and
private, have gone after such technology and escalating deployment has been
expected, especially in seismically active regions. Yet, an efficient and
effective structural evaluation technology that is capable of assessing the
concrete conditions inside the FRP jacketing systems is lacking. It is clear
that a reliable concrete imaging technology needs to be soon developed to catch
up with the surging industrial applications.

The objective of this research is to develop and apply effective nondestructive
evaluation (NDE) imaging techniques to visualize and quantify damages such as
FRP delaminations and concrete cracking and crumbling in FRP-confined reinforced
concrete members using wideband radar. To achieve the objective, theoretical
models and design of image reconstruction algorithms will be developed for
automatic processing of measured data in parallel with experimental studies of
physical models both in laboratory and field settings. A database of
electromagnetic (EM) properties of various FRP, concrete, and FRP- concrete
hybrid media will also be established to facilitate these developments. The
research plan consists of four major tasks: (a) Numerical modeling of wave
propagation and scattering, (b) Determination of dielectric properties of FRP,
concrete, and FRP-concrete hybrid media, (c) Physical radar measurement, and (d)
Signal processing and image reconstruction. The four tasks are closely knitted
in nature and will be conducted in an iterative and evolutionary fashion.

For this proposed work, a novel data focusing methodology using wideband radar
is proposed for an effective detection of various damage mechanisms associated
with the FRP bonded and confined reinforced concrete systems. Owing to the
novelty of using wideband radar to detect damages of FRPconfined concrete, a
one-year exploratory study has been underway since September 2002 under the NSF
Small Grant Exploratory Research (SGER) program to initially demonstrate the
potential capability of the herein proposed methodology. From this exploratory
work thus far, promising results have been obtained. With this present proposal,
funding is sought to fully develop the methodology and perform a comprehensive
theoretical/experimental research toward achieving the objectives as stated
above. Considering its non-traditional civil engineering nature, this project
will synthesize the knowledge and understanding that has been developed in the
areas of structural engineering, material science, electrical engineering and
computer science. This multidisciplinary research project will be performed with
collaboration of Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Department
of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Research Laboratory of
Electronics, and Lincoln Laboratory of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.

It is envisioned that the proposed work will significantly advance scientific
knowledge in the areas of computer simulation, innovative imaging concepts,
signal processing and image reconstruction, and laboratory methodologies dealing
with radar measurements. Development of knowledge as a basis for manufacturing
an effective equipment in this field will directly impact the profession, and
benefit engineers, transportation infrastructure communities, and decision-
making authorities worldwide. Application of the knowledge and technology
developed will help ensure public safety against unanticipated failures of
structural systems repaired or renewed using FRP composites. Developed knowledge
and methodologies will be integrated into education via course curriculums and
professional workshops. Every effort will be made to encourage female and
minority student participation in the conduct of the proposed research.