* 0324733
* Collaborative Research: Unravelling the Dynamics of Mating-System Evolution in Tribe Collinsieae (Scrophulariaceae s.l.)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Bruce Baldwin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 12/31/2008
* USD 192,259.00

This study addresses fundamental questions about the evolution of plant mating
systems: (1) Why does self-pollination evolve? (2) Is selfing an evolutionary
dead-end? (3) Can selfing vs. outbreeding strategies be reliably identified by
particular floral features, such as timing of self-pollination? (4) Does
evolution of particular mating systems lead to predictable changes in floral
characteristics? The investigators will focus on an ideal system for
investigating the above questions--the tribe Collinsieae, a diverse group of
native, annual herbs that show evidence of repeated evolutionary shifts between
selfing and outbreeding strategies. The research will involve field and
laboratory studies to resolve precisely the mating systems of populations
throughout the tribe, using genetic, developmental, and ecological data, and to
reconstruct the dynamic history of mating-system change in the group.

Evolution of selfing is of special interest to biologists and geneticists, who
have long recognized that it can rapidly cause the loss of genetic variation,
expression of deleterious traits, and loss of evolutionary potential. Different
(conflicting) hypotheses proposed to explain evolution of selfing strategies
have not been adequately tested and the basic question of whether selfing
lineages can spawn outbreeding lines with long-term evolutionary prospects
remains unanswered. Resolving these issues would greatly advance evolutionary
biology and is a primary goal of this investigation.