* 0324891
* ITR:     Collaborative Research:     A Multi-Level Approach to Power-Efficient Opto-Electronic Interconnection Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Li-Shiuan Peh, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2008
* USD 512,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Interconnection network fabrics are becoming an
ever-more critical &lt;br/&gt;communication backbone of many digital systems,
providing the means for &lt;br/&gt;systems to scale up in capacity. As these
systems become &lt;br/&gt;power-constrained, networks stand to be the weakest
link, unless there &lt;br/&gt;is a shift from prior performance-driven
approaches to one that focuses &lt;br/&gt;on the power efficiency of
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes a multi-level approach to
power-efficient interconnection &lt;br/&gt;networks that synergistically bridges
research in circuits, architecture &lt;br/&gt;and software, providing a complete
solution that will make power-aware &lt;br/&gt;network fabrics a reality.
Research into novel low-power circuit &lt;br/&gt;techniques develops basic
network building blocks for new&lt;br/&gt;power-efficient network architecture
designs. New link and switch &lt;br/&gt;mechanisms uncovered at the circuit-
level are leveraged for &lt;br/&gt;run-time architectural tradeoffs in network
power and performance. &lt;br/&gt;Higher up in the hierarchy, the software level
closest to users &lt;br/&gt;analyzes and factors in user power-performance
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research targets a diverse range of
systems -- (1) both &lt;br/&gt;general-purpose and embedded systems; (2) both
electrical and optical &lt;br/&gt;networking technologies, seeking to determine
the optimal choice between &lt;br/&gt;optical versus electrical interconnection
at each level in the network &lt;br/&gt;hierarchy from a power perspective; (3)
from tiny on-chip networks to&lt;br/&gt;data center-wide chassis-to-chassis
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is integrated into the education
curriculum, &lt;br/&gt;through existing and new graduate courses, and in
undergraduate research &lt;br/&gt;programs. The project seeks to further broaden
the participation of &lt;br/&gt;underrepresented groups in research activities.
As a pioneering effort in&lt;br/&gt;power-efficient interconnection networks,
the project seeks to&lt;br/&gt;facilitate future research and education in this
area through the &lt;br/&gt;release of simulation tools and other
results.&lt;br/&gt;