* 0324184
* Scholarships for Financially Disadvantaged Students in Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* John Fix, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 198,000.00

The intellectual merit of this project is the achievement of baccalaureate
degrees in computer science, engineering, and mathematics by academically
talented but financially needy students. The project achieves this goal
by:&lt;br/&gt;1) Providing financial aid to academically talented, financially
needy students through 32 scholarships with an annual value of $2,500 over a
two-year period;&lt;br/&gt;2) Improving education in CSEM disciplines by
creating supportive environments for these students through changes in
organizational culture and practices;&lt;br/&gt;3) Increasing retention of
students to degree achievement by encouraging preparation for CSEM careers
through student development initiatives;&lt;br/&gt;4) Improving professional
development and employment of students by providing enriched research
experiences, mentoring, and support in employment placement; and&lt;br/&gt;5)
Strengthening university-industry partnerships through collaborative
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a collaboration of the
College of Engineering, College of Science, Teledyne Brown Engineering, and the
Alabama Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP). The project
receives continued support from Teledyne Brown Engineering; serves a region of
the Deep South with a large pool of eligible students; and enhances Huntsville,
Alabama, a growing technology-based city.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
builds on the success of prior CSEMS support that University of Alabama
Huntsville (UAH) received under Award No. 0094906 in 2000. UAH envisions broader
impact by retaining CSEM Scholars who are transfer students at a rate that is 20
percent greater than a comparable transfer cohort; retaining CSEM Scholars who
are continuing students at a rate that is 20 percent greater than a comparable
cohort of continuing UAH students; and attaining a placement rate of CSEM
Scholars in CSEM jobs or graduate school at a rate of at least 90 percent within
three months of graduation. &lt;br/&gt;