* 0324003
* Technology Opportunity Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Judith Donnelly, Three Rivers Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2008
* USD 408,820.00

The Technology Opportunity Project (TOP) provides an innovative pathway for
economically disadvantaged, academically talented students to successfully
complete an associate degree in engineering technology or computer science. The
program is&lt;br/&gt;integrated into the network built upon the Tech Prep
School-to-Career program at the college, a well established partnership of 20
high schools and the college. The promotion of the program is accomplished by a
project team of college faculty, counselors and administrators assisted by a
network of high school teachers and counselors, local industry and community
groups. Throughout their college program of study, TOP Scholars are mentored by
a faculty member to ensure they make full use of available support services,
including a range of workshops , short courses, and peer tutoring offered by the
Tutoring and Academic Success Center. The cohort of TOP scholarship students
forms a clearly identifiable learning community, with program specific
enrichment opportunities such as group meetings and industry tours and speakers.
Upon graduation, students are assisted by the Career Placement Office and full
time Transfer Counselor to secure placement in the workforce or in a four -year
engineering, physics or computer science program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals
of the project are&lt;br/&gt;1. to increase the number of academically- talented
and low-income students who complete associate degree programs in computer
science and technology; &lt;br/&gt;2. to increase the number of women and
minority students in these programs;&lt;br/&gt;3. to create a partnership of
educators and industry to enhance the experience and participation of
scholarship students; and &lt;br/&gt;4. to establish a system to document the
impact of the TOP Scholars program on participants in order to affect continuous
program improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
program is that a pathway is being created to enable economically disadvantaged,
mostly first generation college students to successfully earn&lt;br/&gt;a
college degree and transition to employment in computer science or technology or
to a four year institution. The broader impact is that a community of scholars
is being formed, mentored by faculty and community members, which enhances the
vitality of the Technology Department. Support services created for TOP scholars
serve as a model for student retention in all college programs.&lt;br/&gt;