* 0324100
* Rewarding Achievement and Promoting Success:  Strategic Support to Foster Tomorrow's Diverse Engineers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Betsy Willis, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Lance C. Perez
* 08/31/2008
* USD 385,000.00

The Rewarding Achievement and Promoting Success (RAPS) program at Southern
Methodist University (SMU) supports 28 freshmen and sophomore students across
the School of Engineering (SoE). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims
to:&lt;br/&gt;1) increase the diversity (ethnicity, gender, background) of the
freshman class,&lt;br/&gt;2) increase retention rates of first- and second-year
students,&lt;br/&gt;3) equip students with soft skills,&lt;br/&gt;4) increase
employment opportunities, and&lt;br/&gt;5) strengthen the university-community
relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RAPS Program includes an outreach components
that impact community agencies and high school
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RAPS Program will record quantitative data
that is tied to the objectives of the program and conduct evaluations of student
support activities. The results of the program will be disseminated internally
throughout the university and has the potential to serve as a model program for
the first-year experience of all students. Additionally, the RAPS Program will
impact the SoE projected student growth and the Gender Parity
Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute for Engineering Education and the
Texas Engineering Education Pipeline will be instrumental in external
dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;