* 0324769
* Mechanisms of Olfactory Sensory Axon Target Recognition
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Qizhi Gong, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* James Deshler
* 07/31/2009
* USD 599,500.00

Recent studies have made remarkable progress toward understanding the cellular
and molecular mechanisms of synapse formation in the central nervous system. It
has been demonstrated that presynaptic vesicles and proteins are preassembled
into packets and transported along axons to newly formed axon-dendritic sites.
Similarly, postsynaptic glutamate receptor subunits have also been found in
mobile transport packets and recruited to nascent axon-dendritic sites. Although
these imaging studies suggest a rapid time course for the formation of a new
synapse (minutes to hours rather than days to weeks), it is unknown whether
active neurotransmission is occurring across these nascent synapses. Dr. Gong's
proposal takes a novel approach by using a single-synapse-recording system to
monitor the functional appearance of evoked synaptic transmission at individual
glutamatergic synapses in rat hippocampal culture. Local signaling pathways
during synaptic remodeling of nascent synapses will be explored by a combination
of patch clamp recording, fluorescence imaging, and molecular biology
techniques. These studies should provide a clear view of the functional time
course of synaptogenesis at central synapses. It will improve our understanding
about how neural networks are built and remodeled during brain development.

The PI's long-term career goal is to explore the cellular and molecular
mechanisms of learning and memory, focusing on synaptogenesis and synaptic
plasticity. This proposal aims at a better understanding of functional formation
of synapses, the fundamental units of our brain. Synaptogenesis at early
developmental stages helps wire and integrate individual neurons into functional
circuits. At later stages, new synapses form continuously while others are
eliminated from the synaptic network. This plasticity of synaptic connections is
believed to be important during learning and memory. Therefore, Dr. Gong's
research on functional synapse formation and synaptic remodeling will broadly
enhance the understanding of neural development and learning and memory. One
important element of this proposal involves training of graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as postdoctoral researchers. Insight gained
through this research will also be integrated into the PI's teaching of
Developmental Neurobiology course offering to graduate and undergraduate
students.

