* 0324558
* NEES Experimental Project for Verifying Full-Scale Semiactive Control of Nonlinear Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,03/31/2006
* Richard Christenson, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 03/31/2006
* USD 223,811.00

PI: Robert Christenson, Colorado School of Mines

The objective of this proposed research is to investigate and advance the
mitigation of structural damage due to natural and man-made hazards through the
innovative full-scale experimental verification of semiactive control applied to
structures exhibiting nonlinear behavior. The research will make use of the
George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
shared-use Fast Hybrid Test system at the University of Colorado at Boulder.
Intellectual Merit: Newly developed semiactive technology shows promise in
protecting civil structures. Semiactive control provides supplemental damping to
more efficiently dissipate the energy due to dynamic loads and increases the
safety and performance of the structure. Semiactive damping has typically been
designed for and applied to linear structures. Civil structures, however, are
typically designed to yield, thus behaving nonlinearly during extreme dynamic
loading. The inherent stability of a semiactive device allows this technology to
be applied to structures which, regardless of the added control, may experience
damage during severe conditions. The low power requirements of semiactive
devices ensure that during a major event when external power may not be
available the semiactive device can continue to fully function using an
alternate power source. Despite these advantages, semiactive control in the
presence of nonlinear structural behavior has received limited attention and has
yet to be demonstrated experimentally. The objectives of this proposal are to
investigate and advance the mitigation of structural damage due to natural and
man-made hazards. Innovative research is proposed to further advance the state
of knowledge and acceptance of semiactive technology. This is accomplished
through experimental research verifying semiactive control strategies for
buildings exhibiting nonlinear behavior during large seismic events. The
research will utilize the NEES shared-use Fast Hybrid Test system at the
University of Colorado at Boulder to perform full-scale experimental
verification. The experiment will employ hybrid testing of a semiactive 180 kN
magnetorheological fluid (MR) damper while simulating in real-time the nonlinear
response of a building structure subjected to suites of simulated and recorded
earthquakes. Broader Impacts: Structural performance is critical to the safety
and economic viability of society as observed in recent disasters. In 1999, the
National Science Foundation (NSF) launched NEES to transform the nation's
ability to carry out earthquake engineering research. The NEES facilities will
be operational in October 2004. The proposed research can potentially have a
significant impact on the advancement of semiactive control and hazard
mitigation for civil structures. Successful completion of this research will
lead to further studies involving physical building models and actual
structures. The proposed use of the NEES shared-use site at the University of
Colorado at Boulder will provide the PI with the means to efficiently and cost-
effectively perform full-scale experimental verification of semiactive control
for nonlinear building structures. The full-scale semiactive structural control
experiment will be made available to interested researchers for a period of time
at the end of the project. This will impact the ease at which additional
researchers' semiactive control strategies can be experimentally verified, thus
advancing the overall state of research in semiactive control for civil
structures.