* 0324955
* ITR: Framework for Integrating Geospatial and Online Data to Respond to Unexpected Events
* CSE,IIS
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2008
* John Wilson, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/2008
* USD 1,230,000.00

Much of the work on information integration has focused on the dynamic
integration of structured data sources, such as databases or XML data. With more
complex geospatial data types, such as satellite imagery, maps, and vector data,
researchers have focused on limited types of integration, such as combining
vector data with imagery. With the enormous amount of geospatial data now
available and the huge amount of data available on the Web, there is a terrific
opportunity to exploit the integration of these two types of information
sources. We plan to address this challenge by developing a general framework for
integrating online and geospatial data sources. The resulting framework will
support general operations for processing and joining the various source types,
query processing that integrates data over a wide range of source types, and
optimization techniques that manage the tradeoffs between accuracy and
efficiency. The overall project will provide a significant advance in the
ability to rapidly integrate and exploit the wide variety of geospatial and
online sources that are available today. This research will be conducted as part
of University of Southern California's Center for Research on Unexpected Events
and will greatly improve our nation's ability to respond to unexpected
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;