* 0325218
* ITR: Institute for the Theory of Advanced Materials in Information Technology
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Steven Louie, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2005
* USD 1,158,400.00

This award was made on a 'medium' category proposal submitted in response to the
ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. The Division of Materials Research and the
Advanced Computational Infrastructure and Research Division provide funding to
establish an Institute for the Theory of Advanced Materials in Information
Technology which performs computational and theoretical research to advance
significantly the ability to predict and understand the properties of advanced
materials in information technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silicon based
technology dominates the ongoing miniaturization of electronic components. For
the past thirty years, Moore's law has characterized progress. However, Moore's
law cannot hold indefinitely. There are serious scientific and technological
issues that must be resolved as device features shrink to nanoscale dimensions
where quantum mechanical effects become important. For example, design rules for
transport based on simple Ohmic behavior and field-effect transistor digital
function will become suspect as a consequence of quantum effects. An Institute
for the Theory of Advanced Materials in Information Technology will be
constructed and dedicated to focus research on better understanding and
predicting these effects in electronic materials. New materials other than
silicon will be explored theoretically and computationally for the construction
of electronic devices at small dimensions. The Institute aims to promote
innovations in new materials and to advance research related to information
technology. Representative research areas within the institute will include the
study of organic and plastic semiconductors, low-k dielectrics, dilute magnetic
semiconductors and spintronic devices, carbon nanotubes, and nanowires. Research
activities will also include examining multiscale phenomena and developing high
performance algorithms targeted at simulating and modeling the properties of
advanced materials. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The Institute will
provide a focal point in the community for the creation of new knowledge and
computational tools for advanced electronic materials. Through computational
materials research, it will contribute to the future directions of CMOS
technology and to developing new technologies. It will provide educational
experiences for postdoctoral fellows, graduate students and undergraduates. The
institute will use the Internet to allow the broader computational materials
research community access to state of the art source codes. The Institute will
sponsor a visitor program, which will include a strong international component,
and it will host an annual workshop. Through the visitor program, researchers
will have access to high performance computational platforms and algorithms for
the simulation of materials. The Institute will facilitate research and
education collaborations with students and faculty from underrepresented groups.
In particular, a mentoring program for faculty-student teams from four-year
colleges and tribal colleges will be initiated. The Institute will partner with
the private sector on both technological and scientific projects to integrate
research into broader programs and activities of direct national interest. An
Industrial Advisory board will be established within the Institute to ensure
that the research activities are appropriate and relevant for current
technological needs. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award was made on a 'medium'
category proposal submitted in response to the ITR solicitation, NSF-02-168. The
Division of Materials Research and the Advanced Computational Infrastructure and
Research Division provide funding to establish an Institute for the Theory of
Advanced Materials in Information Technology which performs computational and
theoretical research to advance significantly the ability to predict and
understand the properties of advanced materials in information technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silicon based technology dominates the ongoing
miniaturization of electronic components. For the past thirty years, Moore's law
has characterized progress. However, Moore's law cannot hold indefinitely. There
are serious scientific and technological issues that must be resolved as device
features shrink to nanoscale dimensions where quantum mechanical effects become
important. For example, design rules for transport based on simple Ohmic
behavior and field-effect transistor digital function will become suspect as a
consequence of quantum effects. An Institute for the Theory of Advanced
Materials in Information Technology will be constructed and dedicated to focus
research on better understanding and predicting these effects in electronic
materials. New materials other than silicon will be explored theoretically and
computationally for the construction of electronic devices at small dimensions.
The Institute aims to promote innovations in new materials and to advance
research related to information technology. Representative research areas within
the institute will include the study of organic and plastic semiconductors,
low-k dielectrics, dilute magnetic semiconductors and spintronic devices, carbon
nanotubes, and nanowires. Research activities will also include examining
multiscale phenomena and developing high performance algorithms targeted at
simulating and modeling the properties of advanced materials. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The Institute will provide a focal point in the
community for the creation of new knowledge and computational tools for advanced
electronic materials. Through computational materials research, it will
contribute to the future directions of CMOS technology and to developing new
technologies. It will provide educational experiences for postdoctoral fellows,
graduate students and undergraduates. The institute will use the Internet to
allow the broader computational materials research community access to state of
the art source codes. The Institute will sponsor a visitor program, which will
include a strong international component, and it will host an annual workshop.
Through the visitor program, researchers will have access to high performance
computational platforms and algorithms for the simulation of materials. The
Institute will facilitate research and education collaborations with students
and faculty from underrepresented groups. In particular, a mentoring program for
faculty-student teams from four-year colleges and tribal colleges will be
initiated. The Institute will partner with the private sector on both
technological and scientific projects to integrate research into broader
programs and activities of direct national interest. An Industrial Advisory
board will be established within the Institute to ensure that the research
activities are appropriate and relevant for current technological needs. &lt;br/
&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;