* 0325553
* ITR: Science and Software for Predictive Simulation of Chemo-Mechanical Phenomena in Real Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Hai-Ping Cheng, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2008
* USD 2,500,000.00

This award is in response to a medium proposal submitted to the FY03 Information
Technology Research (ITR) Solicitation. It is jointly supported by the Division
of Materials Research and the Chemistry Division. In addition to primary
research at Florida, research will also be done at MIT and
Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Themes that distinguish this research on molecular
simulations are that it is quantum mechanically based; predictive; chemically
accurate; and, electronic state specific. The initial focus will be on the
effect of water on the properties of a silica nanorod and on electron transport
in nanostructures. Computer modeling of materials can be no better than the
forces used to describe the interaction among the atoms involved. These are
usually based on classical physics, which permits the rapid generation of forces
required for large-scale simulations. But because bond breaking and formation,
optical properties, and chemical reactions are poorly described classically,
reliable modeling must ultimately be based on quantum mechanics (QM). But
quantum calculations are computationally intensive, leading to a multi-scale
approach in which quantum mechanics is used in critical regions, which are then
embedded in a classical simulation. The inclusion of quantum mechanics is
necessary to make materials modeling predictive enough to guide
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simulations must be chemically accurate, a
necessary feature if modeling is to succeed on long unsolved problems such as
the reason why silica, when wet, is weaker by several orders of magnitude than
when dry, while addition of ammonia to silica shows no such effect. A proper,
quantum mechanically based simulation should reflect these differences,
qualitatively and quantitatively. Another theme is that, by using QM in the
simulations, electron state specificity is achieved. Classical models do not
distinguish between ground and excited electronic states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
transfer Hamiltonian (TH), developed in work preparatory to this research, has a
functional form that permits simplified QM to retain predictive quality at
increased computation speed, and is a generalization of the frequently used
tight-binding (TB) approximation that cures TB's inability to describe bond
breaking. The TH differs from the popular density functional theory methods in
that it fits to the true QM Hamiltonian rather than to densities or energies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interface between quantum regions and their classical
embedding will be quantified using a density-operator Liouville-von Neumann
dynamics that offers a framework for separating a fully QM system into two
parts, modeling one in a classical or dielectric
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key results of the project will be new
theoretical methods for chemically accurate and realistic materials modeling,
and their software implementation, applied to challenging problems. A large
number of graduate students and postdoctoral associates will be supported, as
well as undergraduate students with an emphasis on underrepresented groups.
Sessions on materials simulation results will be integrated into the annual
Sanibel meetings. Software produced will be made available to the wider
community through the Materials Computation Center at the University of
Illinois.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is in response to a medium proposal
submitted to the FY03 Information Technology Research (ITR) Solicitation. It is
jointly supported by the Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry
Division. In addition to primary research at Florida, research will also be done
at MIT and Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Themes that distinguish this research
on molecular simulations are that it is quantum mechanically based; predictive;
chemically accurate; and, electronic state specific. The initial focus will be
on the effect of water on the properties of a silica nanorod and on electron
transport in nanostructures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key results of the
project will be new theoretical methods for chemically accurate and realistic
materials modeling, and their software implementation, applied to challenging
problems. A large number of graduate students and postdoctoral associates will
be supported, as well as undergraduate students with an emphasis on
underrepresented groups. Sessions on materials simulation results will be
integrated into the annual Sanibel meetings. Software produced will be made
available to the wider community through the Materials Computation Center at the
University of Illinois.&lt;br/&gt;