* 0325260
* ITR:    Collaborative Research:     Distributed Information Fusion Networks for Threat Detection and Assessment
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Kamal Premaratne, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Frank Olken
* 07/31/2007
* USD 405,647.00

Information available for security threat detection/assessment is often
generated from distributed heterogeneous sources. Although it may possess a
significant qualitative component and lack sufficient time synchrony, this data
may provide potentially critical information. This work describes a framework
for effective knowledge discovery in such environments via the following tasks:
refinement and generalization of the Dempster-Shafer belief theoretic framework;
development of the data mining methods of association rule mining and
classification; and development of methods enabling the use of timing
information in the fusion process to improve threat detection/assessment tasks.
The proposed notions will be validated via the development of an experimental
platform consisting of a small-scale fusion and decision-making network located
at each of the participating institutions. It will possess various sensing
capabilities and will mimic the security zones plus gateways structure that
characterizes a typical threat detection/assessment environment.&lt;br/&gt; The
work being proposed significantly advances the state-of-the-art in distributed
information fusion environments that forms the basis for numerous other
application scenarios. The research results and experimental platforms developed
will be integrated into courses that already exist and those to be newly
developed; various other outreach activities will also be undertaken.
&lt;br/&gt;