* 0325867
* ITR:      An Electronic Field Guide:     Plant Exploration and Discovery in the 21st Century
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2010
* W. John Kress, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,224,000.00

This project is developing the first generation of electronic field guides:
computing devices that allow a taxonomist in the field access to critical
comparative information on plant species. Currently, when botanists in the field
collect specimens and want to verify the existence of a new species, they must
borrow physical samples from museums and herbaria, such as the Smithsonian type
specimen collection. This process is extremely time-consuming and inefficient.
The electronic field guide will speed and automate this process. At the core of
the system will be a type specimen digital collection. This will include digital
images of 95,000 botanical type specimens, the definitive reference specimens
used to identify new species. This core data will be linked to photos both of
additional specimens and of live plants. The investigators will also develop
algorithms for visual plant recognition. These will be central to searching
images in the digital collection, in conjunction with conventional text search.
Finally, this project will work toward the creation of a set of mobile and
wearable prototypes with novel user interfaces so that botanists in the field
can photograph plants and access the system with these photos and text. A
completed system will allow field botanists to have at their fingertips
information that is currently housed only in special collections far from where
the specimens are discovered. It will also provide content-based retrieval that
goes well beyond current methods for navigating this knowledge. These new
technologies will greatly accelerate the discovery and identification of the
remaining undescribed plants of the world.