* 0325378
* ITR:  Agent-Based Systems for Monitoring, Analysis, Diagnosis, and Control
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2010
* Ali Cinar, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,950,000.00

Research: Driven by the growing worldwide competition for quality, productivity,
and safety enhancement, attrition of experienced personnel, and increasing
complexity of manufacturing processes, this research project addresses the need
for software that can automate and integrate process supervision tasks such as
data reconciliation, process and product quality monitoring, fault diagnosis,
and control. Research on distributed artificial intelligence (DAI) and multi-
layered, intelligent, and adaptive multiagent systems (MAS) will be carried out
to develop a new framework for real-time supervision of distributed system
operations. The stability, scalability, performance, and robustness of this
framework will be explored, and test cases will be used to investigate the
synergy between microreactor and computer networks to discover ways of enhancing
their stability and productivity. Manufacturing process and computer network
operations will be the application domains of this monitoring, analysis,
diagnosis, and control with agent-based system (MADCABS) that automates
knowledge extraction from data, analysis, and decision-making. The research will
also focus on investigating emergence of behavior patterns in both the physical
systems and MADCABS, introducing evolutionary dynamics in analysis, diagnosis
and control by rewarding successful strategies over time, and enhancing the
stability and robustness of MADCABS by designing it with adaptation
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;Multiple layers of agents will be used, where lower-
level agents are performing local well-defined tasks such as data validation and
higher-level agents performing more global tasks over wider regions of the
supervised system. Agents are capable of acting, communicating with other
agents, perceiving their environment, and determining behavior to satisfy their
objectives. However, agents have only partial information about their
environments and may initiate actions that could conflict with actions of other
agents, leading to emergence of undesirable behavior of the supervised system.
In this sense, the supervised system is viewed as a self-organized complex
system comprised of the operating units of the process and layers of MADCABS
agents acting upon them. Complex adaptive systems (CAS) studied often by using
artificial life (AL) paradigms. CAS are known to exhibit emergence phenomena in
which the global system displays properties and features not inherent to any of
its components. Analysis and examination of the long-term behavior of the
MADCABS supervised systems will be used to assess the compatibility levels of
sets of agent characteristics and their optimal task orientation. &lt;br/&gt;The
project is led by an interdisciplinary team of researchers with expertise in
DAI, MAS, CAS, supervision of computer network and manufacturing process
operations, and real-time KBS development. Argonne National Laboratory (ANL) is
combining new modeling theories and software for studying CAS. Collaboration
between IIT and ANL will provide a strong partnership with powerful resources to
carry out the proposed research, education, and outreach activities. Research
results will contribute to advancement of knowledge in CAS, MAS, DAI, and AL.
The outcome of the research will provide a new approach for commercial software
for supervision of process and computer network operations. Research on behavior
and controllability of distributed microreactor networks will result in new
approaches to analyze the viability of such systems and ability to manufacture
high-value-added specialty chemicals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The
research results will be used to promote education and training activities in
DAI, AL, and complex adaptive system operation and supervision. The methods and
tools developed will have an impact on many CAS central to national concerns,
such as energy distribution systems, ecosystems, and epidemics. Consequently,
research results will be disseminated in the form of software, case studies, and
practical training to university and industry researchers, high school teachers,
students from underrepresented groups in science and engineering, and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;