* 0325464
* Collaborative Proposal:    ITR-SemDIS:     Discovering Complex Relationships in the Semantic Web
* CSE,IIS
* 10/15/2003,03/31/2007
* Budak Arpinar, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Frank Olken
* 03/31/2007
* USD 900,000.00

Research in search techniques was a critical component of the first generation
of the Web, and has gone from academe to mainstream. A second generation
"Semantic Web" is being built by adding semantic annotations that machines can
understand and from which humans can benefit. Modeling, discovering and
reasoning about complex relationships on the Semantic Web will enable this
vision and transform the hunt for documents into a more automated analysis
enabled by semantic technology. The beginnings of this shift from search to
analysis can be observed in research and industry as users look beyond finding
relevant documents based on keywords to finding actionable information leading
to decision making and insights. Large scale semantic annotation of data (both
domain-independent and domain-specific) is now possible because of an
accumulation of advances in entity identification, automatic classification,
taxonomy and ontology development, and metadata extraction. The next frontier,
which fundamentally changes the way we acquire and use knowledge, is to
automatically identify complex relationships between entities in this
semantically annotated data. Instead of a search engine that returns documents
containing terms of interest, there will be a system that returns actionable
information (with the associated sources and supporting evidence) to a user or
application. The user interacts with information universe through a hypothesis
driven approach that combines search and inferencing, enabling more complex
analysis and deeper insight. The research will focus on the design, prototyping
and evaluation of a system, called SemDIS (Semantic Discovery) that supports
indexing and querying of complex semantic relationships and is driven by notions
of information trust and provenance and models of hypotheses and arguments under
investigation. Such a capability greatly enhances the capacity of intelligence
analysts to obtain (in time) information leading to a more secure homeland and
world. Corresponding to the breadth and depth of the topics involved in the
challenge undertaken, this is a collaborative project involving researchers at
UGA's LSDIS lab and UMBC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SemDIS will have broader impacts
beyond the education and training of graduate students, and the publication of
research findings. Results from the research will be integrated with courses,
both existing and new. Institutional mechanisms in place will seek participation
of students from underrepresented groups. The work will also gain from several
academic-industry collaborations of the investigators. There will be an
opportunity to leverage commercial infrastructure and raw metadata provided by
Semagix. The researchers will collaborate with industry, and the students will
be encouraged to intern at collaborating industrial labs. Within a broader
social context, emerging knowledge-centric technologies raise legitimate privacy
and civil liberties concerns. Building upon past policy making experience, the
investigators will comment on potential implications of their scientific
progress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More information can be found at
http://http://lsdis.cs.uga.edu/SemDIS/ and at
http://www.cs.umbc.edu/SemDIS/&lt;br/&gt;