* 0325123
* ITR:  Gene Design for Vaccines and Therapeutic Phages
* CSE,IIS
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2008
* Eckard Wimmer, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2008
* USD 799,623.00

Gene Design for Vaccines and Therapeutic Phages&lt;br/&gt;PI: Steven
Skiena&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vaccines and antibiotics have proven to be
tremendously important agents against viral and bacterial infections,
respectively. However, current vaccines are ineffective against certain viruses
(e.g. rhinovirus) and potentially dangerous against others (e.g. smallpox).
Further, the evolution of antibiotic-resistant strains of bacteria has become a
critical problem in treating diseases such as
tuberculosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to exploit the redundancy inherent
in the genetic code to create both safer and more effective vaccines and an
improved class of anti-bacteriological agents. We apply design and synthesis
techniques to replace viral genes so they code for identical proteins as in the
wild type virus, but in different ways. For the first application, we seek to
weaken viral strains by introducing mutations that alter translational
efficiency and RNA secondary structure without affecting protein coding so as to
create better vaccine candidates. For the second application, we seek to
strengthen bacteriophages (viruses which attack bacteria) by eliminating
important restriction sites so as to improve their ability to combat pathogenic
infections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI (Skiena) is a computer scientist who has
worked extensively on theoretical sequence design problems which seek optimized
DNA sequences which code for a particular protein while simultaneously
accomplishing some other objective. The co-PI (Wimmer) is a microbiologist who
attracted worldwide attention in July 2002 by synthesizing poliovirus completely
from off-to-shelf components. But once you can synthesize an existing genome
from scratch, you can do the same for new and better designs as well. We will
collaborate on a series of computational and wet lab experiments using
poliovirus to test and develop this vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
of the proposed research include benefits to society through developing new
types of medical therapeutics, and its impact on interdisciplinary
bioinformatics education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;