* 0325046
* Collaborative Research: ITR: Global Multi-Scale Kinetic Simulations of the Earth's Magnetosphere Using Parallel Discrete Event Simulation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Homayoun Karimabadi, SciberNet, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 07/31/2005
* USD 699,968.00

This project focuses on the development of scalable, parallel, numerical models
for the simulation of space plasmas and the dynamics of the Earth's
magnetosphere, based on discrete event simulation (DES). Phenomena such as the
interaction of the solar wind with the magnetosphere are large-scale problems
that contain regions where smaller-scale dynamics dominates. The location and
scale of these sub-regions evolve in time and the sub-regions themselves are
characterized by dominant physical balances different to those controlling the
larger-scale dynamics. Examples of regimes present in the problem of describing
the interaction of the solar wind with the Earth's magnetosphere include ones
controlled by electron kinetics, by ion physics, and by magnetohydrodynamics.
Full particle simulation of such a problem is impractical because of the amount
of computing resources that would be required. The investigators will develop
DES methods with situation-dependent physics, suitable for space physics
problems, and then develop the algorithms required to execute these efficiently
on massively parallel computer systems. This will involve research into the
stability and accuracy of these methods, the extension of existing one-
dimensional prototypes to 3D, optimization for parallel environments, ways of
connecting regions in which different physical balances predominate, adaptive
algorithms, and the evaluation of different approaches to mesh design. Event-
based simulations are inherently dynamic in ways that make compile-time
optimization difficult; the reverse-execution approach proposed further
complicates the task of automatic optimization. The project will include
research on compiler technology to improve the automatic optimization of event-
based codes and the development of libraries of optimized reversible primitives.
This type of research may lead to improvements in the ability to model space
weather with the potential for significant impacts in the field of satellite
communications. The modeling techniques to be developed might be useful in other
areas of science and engineering where simulations of multi-scale, multi-physics
regimes are required. The project includes research training opportunities for a
number of graduate students.