* 0325875
* ITR:  Structural Health Monitoring Using Local Excitation and Large-Scale Networked Sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2010
* Sami Masri, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,600,000.00

Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) is a highly interdisciplinary area of
research focused on developing techniques to detect damage in structures such as
buildings, bridges, aircraft, ships and spacecraft. Most SHM research to date
has focused either on global damage assessment techniques using low-resolution
measurements of a structure's response to ambient excitation, or on limited
local independent damage detection mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal advocates a paradigm shift in SHM, using decentralized local excitation
and high-resolution measurements of response to these excitations, detected and
collaboratively analyzed through a spatially&lt;br/&gt;dense wireless network of
devices. This shift promises simpler and more accurate techniques to identify
and even localize damage within the structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the proposed research is the design of a networked computer system, with
distributed actuation and sensing, for SHM. The term "networked SHM" denotes the
class of monitoring systems that will&lt;br/&gt;be enabled by this research. By
combining local excitation with high-resolution sensing, networked SHM is quite
distinct from other sensor network applications being examined today. Networked
SHM promises a future where, for example, buildings are constructed using
concrete mixed with several tens of thousands of embedded sensor devices as well
as low-power local exciters. The network of sensors will be able to continuously
monitor the structure, trigger alarms that identify the onset of damage,
precisely pinpoint the location of damage and also provide a long-term history
of ambient stresses imposed on the building.&lt;br/&gt;