* 0325657
* ITR: On-Demand Information Extraction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2010
* Ralph Grishman, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,999,997.00

The goal of Information Extraction (IE) is to extract from free text the
essential relationships of a specific domain or scenario and record this
information in tabular format. For example, in the management succession
scenario, the essential information is the person, position, company name and
date of management changes. The extraction process requires substantial
scenario-dependent knowledge, and for most systems, this knowledge is currently
created by hand. This laborious task, which sometimes takes months, is a major
obstacle to the wider use of IE. The objective of this project is to fully
automate the creation of scenario dependent knowledge. In the system under
development, the user only specifies the scenario, and the system creates the
knowledge needed to extract the information. This is being accomplished through
the development of four components: 1) A broad-coverage name tagger, which
identifies and classifies a wide variety of names and numeric expressions. It
uses bootstrapping and active learning to overcome the sparseness problem. 2)
Unsupervised learning of IE patterns and the associated word classes. 3)
Automatic paraphrase discovery to find relationships between IE patterns. This
uses comparable corpora and automatic identification of comparable phrases based
on anchors such as names. 4) Discovery of rules for integrating information and
building the table.

This research will result in the creation of a new paradigm for IE. On-demand IE
will provide useful and concise access to the information in text collections in
a wide range of scenarios. We will make the knowledge and the systems available
to the public after it has been shown to be successful. High-performance,
rapidly portable extraction systems would have a major impact on the ways in
which we can exploit textual knowledge, both everyday news and the scientific
and technical literature. They would allow the creation of summaries, in table
form, for collections of documents on a topic. Such tables could in turn serve
as tools for highly-targeted document search or for mining the information for
scientific research.