* 0325940
* U.S.- Korea  Cooperative Research:  Directional Transformation of High-Temperature Alloys
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Rohit Trivedi, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 08/31/2006
* USD 16,508.00

0325940&lt;br/&gt;Trivedi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award facilitates
collaborative research on high temperature alloys between Professor Rohit
Trivedi of Iowa State University and Professor Jehyun Lee of Changwon National
University in Korea. They are examining processing variables that affect the
solid-state transformation and microstructure of alloys composed of various
combinations of Iron, Chromium and Aluminum. The two research groups have unique
and complimentary expertise and facilities. The Iowa State group will produce
the alloy ingots for processing in Korea and will be responsible for the
development of the theoretical model and for some of the materials
characterization. Most experimental work will be carried out in Korea using
state of the art directional solidification apparatus at Changwon University
that can heat the samples several hundred degrees Celsius higher than the
equipment at Iowa State University. The groups have complementary optical and
electron microscopy equipment to examine the resulting material structure in
various ways, and the two investigators will analyze the data jointly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training and research
experience of students is an important part of the project plan. An U.S.
graduate student will obtain international research experience and access to
equipment in the Korean Lab that is not available at Iowa State, and will then
contribute to constructing comparable equipment at Iowa State. The project also
includes plans for an undergraduate student to gain research experience with the
Korean investigator during his visit to Iowa State. The results obtained from
this study will be of significance to steel industries because they are relevant
to improved selection of alloys and processing approaches for the design and
processing of stainless steels. &lt;br/&gt;