* 0325353
* ITR: Secure CITI: A Secure Critical Information Technology Infrastructure for Disaster Management
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2010
* Louise Comfort, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2010
* USD 2,806,318.00

This is an interdisciplinary proposal for a Self-secure and robust Critical
Information Technology Infrastructure (Secure CITI, or S-CITI for short) that
takes advantage of pre-deployed data-sensing equipment and strategically deploys
new sensors in areas of concern. For example, cameras that are used to monitor
traffic and toll booths could be redirected to report on unexpected events
(e.g., pieces falling from a tunnel ceiling or a major crash) or re-oriented to
collect information about a potential landslide in a nearby hill. The PIs
propose to introduce a system to coordinate the use of existing resources and
distribute the data gathered among different organizational units in the form of
a Virtual Coordination Center to facilitate efficient and quickly coordinated
actions to natural and human-caused disasters. The system will contain a
learning module that will feed post-emergency data into the data processing
module of pre-emergency decision making. In order to carry out this project, the
PIs will specify scenarios and use the information generated from these
scenarios to use/redeploy sensors for collecting specific data, establish
communication between Emergency Managers (EMs) and disseminate appropriate
information. Protocols will respect the different organizational units and the
privacy of data through secure and authenticated data access. Protocols will
also be sensitive to the disaster level, the load on the system and the type of
information being shared.