* 0325410
* Collaborative Research:    ITR/NGS:    Fast Wireless Network Simulation Using Spatio-Temporal Dilations
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Srinidhi Varadarajan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 02/29/2008
* USD 304,634.00

The design and development of future wireless networks and services will require
sophisticated simulation and emulation tools that captures the scale,
complexity, and abstraction of both the protocols that constitute the multi-
layered network stack, as well as the heterogeneous nature of the wireless and
wired Internet - tools that currently do not exist. Future simulation strategies
must capture the heterogeneity of evolving protocols while simultaneously
supporting high-fidelity wireless modeling environment.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
will build a comprehensive Integrated Protocol Development Environment
(IPDE)&lt;br/&gt;to support design and development of wireless network
protocols. This work will enable researchers to design and&lt;br/&gt;develop
end-to-end network applications in a unified public-domain simulation and
emulation environment. &lt;br/&gt;Two key innovations in this proposal that will
empower real time test and emulation of future wireless
applications&lt;br/&gt;include (i) the notion of relativistic time, that
integrates the controllability of virtual-time with the natural
selfsynchronizing property of real-time, and (ii) spatial scaling, where various
components of the system will operate at different spatial scales - ranging from
continuous fluid flow models for the Internet backbone, to discrete packet data
flows in actual routers - with overall spatial coordination occuring in a
decentralized manner. Validation of such an IPDE framework will be in the form
of the design and deployment of multiparametric adaptive algorithms for wireless
network scheduling and control.&lt;br/&gt;By providing an integrated framework
for simulation, hardware emulation, and direct code execution of network
protocols, the IPDE will enable researchers to setup large scale virtual test-
beds, validate their modeling, and design middleware algorithms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;