* 0325014
* ITR: RESCUENET -- Embedded In-Building Sensor Network to Assist Disaster Rescue
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Franz Rad, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sajal Das
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,066,000.00

The vision articulated in this proposal calls for embedding sensors with UWB
(Ultra Wide-Band) radio and other sensing capability in walls of buildings. Upon
collapsing due to natural or manmade causes, the radios are deployed to form an
ad-hoc sensor network that determines the internal composition and structure of
the collapsed pile. This information is relayed to external rescuers in the form
of 3-D reconstruction of the interior structure (including key features such as
air cavities) that can speed up rescue efforts and save lives. Adding additional
sensing capability, such as heartbeat, voice, heat, and gas sensors will provide
information about the location of other survivors and any fires or gas leaks.
The role of such technology in mitigating the impact of natural disasters such
as earthquakes (e.g. the 1999 earthquake in Turkey killed as many as 18,000
people, many due to the slow process of excavating rubble blindly) as well as
manmade causes, will constitute the primary outcomes of this work. Overall, this
project represents a unique confluence of new science (ad-hoc networks)
contributing to the maturation of a new technology (UWB) in the service of some
of the most critical national imperatives (disaster
recovery).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component includes development of
material sensing algorithms exploiting the good propagation characteristics of
UWB signals. In addition, data regarding UWB propagation in rubble will be used
to develop rate/energy/range adaptive networking protocols to enable the buried
sensors to communicate with rescuers. Visualization software will use knowledge
of building collapse scenarios, structural mechanics, and on-site data of
interior composition obtained from UWB sensing, to create 3-D models of the
ruin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will rely on a combination of
measurement, analysis, and experimentation to realize the vision. Detailed UWB
propagation measurements in various types of rubble will be carried out as a
precursor to developing material sensing algorithms and networking protocols.
Sensing algorithms will be evaluated in new laboratory setups of rubble as will
the rate/energy adaptive networking protocols. Visualization software and
related algorithms will be developed to fuse data collected by buried sensors
into three dimensional maps. A formal characterization of error in sensing,
localization, and visualization will be concurrently developed.&lt;br/&gt;