* 0325603
* ITR:     Automatic On-The-Fly Detection, Characterization, Recovery and Correction of Software Bugs in Production Runs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Jiawei Han, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,000,727.00

Automatic On-the-fly Detection, Characterization, Recovery and Correction of
Software Bugs in Production
Runs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to develop a
comprehensive debugging system for automatic on-the-fly debugging of production
runs. Our system addresses all the aspects of debugging, including bug
detection, characterization, recovery and correction. The system tightly
integrates innovations in computer hardware, operating system, data mining, and
compiler support. More specifically, our proposed system hinges on the following
innovations: (1) low-overhead compiler-directed checking to detect bugs and pass
information to the data miner, operating system, and hardware to characterize
the bugs; (2) Low-overhead data mining algorithms that build and use models for
bug detection, characterization, and correction; (3) Novel hardware support to
roll back and deterministically re-execute buggy sections of code with very low
overhead and transparently to the user; and (4) operating system support to roll
back and re-execute code sections that cannot be supported by hardware. These
four layers are tightly integrated in a software
prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our work directly aims at improving what has
historically been the dark spot of the IT revolution: poor programmer
productivity. We can meet the software debugging challenge by focusing on
debugging production runs, thanks to providing very low-overhead bug
characterization support in hardware. The additional compiler, data miner, and
operating system layers can enhance the power of the hardware once the bug is
detected. We hope the work will have a broad impact, since expediting the
debugging process can lead to dramatic increases in the productivity of IT
professionals and students. In addition, the ideas developed can also be used
for other anomaly detection, such as intrusion detection and security attacks,
which is very important to our society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;