* 0325274
* Solve/Address the Issue of Trustworthiness in Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Ruzena Bajcsy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,010,081.00

This project investigates the design, modeling, (re)configuration, and
validation of trustworthy networked embedded systems (NES) applications that
support the privacy of their users, the confidentiality and integrity of the
data, the availability of the provided services, while implementing the required
functionality and quality of service by developing the fundamental new science
of secure network embedded systems and its implications for the emerging
infrastructure. NES applications must be protected against malicious attacks
that exploit specific vulnerabilities and characteristics of networked embedded
systems. Such critical support applications that must have trusted data include
equipment and process control (avionics, veitronics, communications, and
SCADA/DCS systems) and environmental monitoring (pollution and chem/bio agent
detection).

This project seeks the following three innovations: (1) A suite of mathematical
models to support the development and validation of trustworthy NES
applications, (2) high confidence middleware components to assure the
adaptability and survivability of NES applications, and (3) a large-scale test-
bed to validate the suitability of these models and methods in a realistic NES
application environment.

The work is a cooperative effort of three organizations. The University of
California Berkeley models distributed hybrid and embedded systems theory and
platforms and addresses issues of privacy in trusted NES. UCB is building a
large-scale testbed network of around 103 embedded network devices (Motes) to
explore issues of NES application trustworthiness in a realistic environment and
experimentally validate how the modeling and components developed by all groups
in the project can protect mission-critical NES applications from potential
abuses. Vanderbilt University brings their extensive experience in modeling
functional capabilities of NES applications, which yields new systems theory and
high confidence composable middleware frameworks with probabilistic elements to
them. SRI conducts research in modeling the trustworthy aspects of NES
applications and on developing methods and tools to support model-based co-
design that can enable the systematic and predictable interweaving of
trustworthiness with the functional applications and middleware.