* 0325550
* ITR: Subnanometer Structure Based Fold Determination of  Biological Complexes
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Chandrajit Bajaj, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2007
* USD 749,999.00

EIA-032550- University of Texas-Austin, Chandrajit L. Bajaj-COLLABORATIVES: ITR:
Subnanometer Structure Based Fold Determination of Biological Complexes.We
propose to form a team of three independent investigators with different
expertises to co-develop the necessary computation and visualization methodology
for biologists to quickly, easily and accurately deduce the folds of the domain
components of large macromolecular complexes. While structures of macromolecular
complexes are becoming more prevalent, and the size of some density maps would
increase up to 1GB, the visualization and analysis requirements to extract
important biological information are far beyond the currently available
software. Our research task will explore different algorithms to enhance the
signal through denoising of the 3-dimensional structure, visualize these large
and filtered maps effectively, extract the individual protein components and
their salient structural features such as a helices and b sheets accurately, and
ultimately construct pseudo atomic model with novel structure prediction methods
using protein sequence and structure considerations as constraints. We will set
up a test data set, comprised of both simulated and experimental structures, to
validate each of our development steps. The software developments in each of the
research sites will be glued together using a scripting language (Python) and
made easy to use through a graphical interface. Additionally, the software will
be extensively documented and distributed via an open source policy, encouraging
continued collaboration and development. &lt;br/&gt;