* 0325463
* ITR:     Collaborative Research:     New Directions in Predictive Learning:     Rigorous Learning Machines
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Robert Schapire, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,399,123.00

Constructing machines capable of learning from examples is a complex, cross-
disciplinary problem that spans a wide spectrum of scientific endeavor. The
central issue of learning is to understand the conditions under which a system
trained to perform a task from a finite set of examples can generalize its
behavior to previously unseen examples. This question is relevant to many areas
of research, including epistemology (how can theories be derived from
experimental data?), cognitive science, statistical analysis, machine
perception, data mining, bioinformatics, time series prediction, and many
other&lt;br/&gt;domains where laws and knowledge must be derived from empirical
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most common setting is the supervised pattern
recognition problem: find a function that can classify unknown objects into
categories from a training set of examples with known categories. The
development of Statistical Learning Theory over the last few decades has
provided necessary and sufficient conditions for ensuring
generalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning algorithms are often categorized
into linearly and non-linearly parameterized architectures. Two of the most
successful linear machines of the last few years, Support Vector Machines and
Boosting, possess good generalization bounds. They have become the state-of-the-
art for many applications, particularly those where the dimensionality is very
large. On the other hand, non-linear machines (such as multilayer nets, HMMs,
graphical models, and many others) are not as well characterized
theoretically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal of this project will be to
obtain better generalization bounds with the goal of producing better learning
algorithms (linear and non-linear) that follow the SLT framework more
rigorously. The second goal will be to understand the conditions under which
non-linear machines generalize. A third goal will be to define and study new
modes of inference such as on-line learning (in which examples are processed one
by one) and transductive inference (in which test examples are available during
training) that go beyond the usual inductive-deductive framework, and to find
new learning algorithms (linear and non-linear) that implement those new modes
of inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new algorithms and architectures will be
applied to some of the most challenging and useful application domains of
machine learning, possibly including bio-informatics, machine vision and
information retrieval.&lt;br/&gt;