* 0326109
* Collaborative Research: Ocean Pressure in the Arctic Derived From Satellite Gravity Observations and In Situ Pressure Measurements
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* James Morison, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Neil R. Swanberg
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,197,804.00

The research will estimate the large-scale seasonal and longer time variations
in the Arctic Ocean bottom pressure, sea level, and circulation using in-situ
observations of deep- sea pressure, hydrographic and atmospheric data, and
satellite gravity. Sea level in the central Arctic Ocean is a crucial
determinant of the ocean's circulation, and as such it strongly affects the sea-
ice distribution and the regional freshwater budget. Climate variability is
linked to changes in albedo associated with changes in sea-ice distribution and
to changes in the global thermohaline circulation associated with changes in the
export of Arctic Ocean freshwater and sea ice. Observing the pressure
distribution in the ocean is thus central to understanding the variability in
the ocean circulation. Current perspectives of the ice and freshwater
distribution and their variations are based on available hydrographic surveys
and measurements from a few automated instruments. The lack of routine,
spatially continuous measurements of the freshwater distribution makes it
difficult to construct a complete picture of frontal locations at any one time.
The scientific goal and merit of this work is to improve indices of ocean change
related to climate variability and to contribute to achieving the goal of
obtaining systematic measurements of large-scale ocean circulation and
freshwater distribution from space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bottom pressure
recorders (BPRs) will be deployed in a 100 km triangular array with vertices at
the Pole, the Lomonosov Ridge, and near the foot of the ridge. These in situ
measurements will be compared with GRACE (the Gravity Recovery and Climate
Experiment satellite mission) estimates of deep-sea bottom pressure in the
central Arctic Ocean to cross- validate these methods of pressure retrieval.
BPRs also provide measurements of tides and other short period (&lt; 60 days)
variability, and will be used to reduce aliasing problems in the satellite
measurements. GRACE time-dependent bottom pressure fields for the whole basin
will be compared with measured bottom pressure, coastal sea level records, and
hydrographic data to estimate ocean circulation changes and thereby evaluate the
accuracy of the combined remote sensing, in situ measurement approach. This work
will contribute to the long-term goal of comparing remote sensing measurements
of bottom pressure with satellite altimeter observations of sea surface height
to produce not only estimates of circulation changes but also estimates of the
total steric anomaly and inferred fresh water and sea ice content.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this work include in situ BPR records,
derived tidal constituents, drift corrections, the drift corrected pressure with
tides removed, and the spatial field of bottom pressure estimates from GRACE
after tide removal. These will be archived in the ARCSS and SEARCH data banks
and supplied directly to those collaborating on the system of Arctic Ocean sea-
level observations. For broader dissemination, pressure-derived sea-level
gradient and barotropic transport estimates will made available on the Web as
well as archived in the ARCSS and SEARCH data banks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will establish collaborations between three institutions: the
Universities of Washington and Colorado, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and
will require expertise in several disciplines: oceanography, geodesy, and solid
earth geophysics. The work, which will form the PhD thesis project of a
University of Washington graduate student and part of the PhD project of a
University of Colorado graduate student, will be a first step towards
integrating time-variable satellite gravity observations into physical
oceanography. These observations constitute a new and innovative data type for
oceanography, with considerable promise for improved and broader understanding
of the circulation of the polar and global oceans. &lt;br/&gt;