* 0326830
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Structure and Personality in Transitional Urban China
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Melvin Kohn, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 7,500.00

The proposed research will examine the relationship between social structure and
individual personality through the linkage of occupational self-direction in
urban China in transition. The interplay of market institution and institutional
legacy of the socialist planned economy indicates a transitional process
different from the path of radical social change in the former Soviet and East
European societies. The relationship between social structure and personality in
transitional China may be quite different from that in fully capitalist
societies, in socialist societies, and even in the transitional societies of the
former Soviet Union and East Europe. The research will be conducted in Shanghai,
the largest industrial city in China. It will employ a three-stage random
sampling strategy to collect primary survey data. A sample of 500 registered
residents of the city proper who are in the labor force at the time of survey
will be yielded. A pretest will be conducted before the actual survey to warrant
linguistically and culturally valid questions to be included in the interview
schedule. The actual survey will be conducted in the form of face-to-face
interviews. Using rigorous confirmatory factor analysis and structural-equation
modeling, the proposed research will be the first study of the relationship
between social structure and individual personality in China. The broader impact
of this research lies in its potential to bridge the gap in research on China
between the study of social structure by sociologists and the study of
personality by psychologists. It will provide important information for social
policy, helping to rectify a paucity of knowledge about the psychological
consequences of ongoing transition in urban China.