* 0326277
* ITR:     Simplifying Design and Analysis of Cryptographic Protocols
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Ronald Rivest, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William H Tranter
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,310,000.00

As Internet usage increasingly penetrates all aspects of
society,&lt;br/&gt;security concerns increasingly rise in importance. As one
moves from&lt;br/&gt;merely hosting web sites to supporting electronic commerce,
banking,&lt;br/&gt;auctions, health-care, and voting, the ability to prevent
malicious&lt;br/&gt;outsiders, or even malicious insiders, from gaining
confidential&lt;br/&gt;information or manipulating the system becomes
increasingly critical.&lt;br/&gt;Looking to the future, one can expect the
evolution of even more complex&lt;br/&gt;systems, such as digital rights
management systems and elaborate single&lt;br/&gt;sign-on web services, with
correspondingly complex
security&lt;br/&gt;requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cryptography is an
essential tool for implementing secure distributed&lt;br/&gt;systems over the
Internet: no other technology provides the required&lt;br/&gt;confidentiality,
authentication, or other security properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yet using
cryptography effectively is surprisingly difficult. While&lt;br/&gt;there are
good candidates for the underlying basic cryptographic&lt;br/&gt;operations
(encryption, digital signatures, etc.), such cryptographic&lt;br/&gt;primitives
by themselves are not sufficient: they need to be utilized&lt;br/&gt;within a
larger framework---a cryptographic protocol---specifying&lt;br/&gt;exactly how
they are to be used in a multi-party distributed system. The&lt;br/&gt;ability
to design and prove secure a cryptographic protocol for a
given&lt;br/&gt;purpose is essential to the secure evolution of our Internet-
based&lt;br/&gt;society; yet our tools for doing so are still surprisingly
awkward and&lt;br/&gt;limited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the highest level of
description, this proposal aims to remedy this&lt;br/&gt;situation by providing
tools and techniques that facilitate the easy&lt;br/&gt;design and analysis of
secure cryptographic protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, there are two major
approaches to protocol design. The first is&lt;br/&gt;a formal approach
pioneered by Dolev and Yao, based on theorem-proving&lt;br/&gt;and model-
checking. This approach offers surprisingly good design&lt;br/&gt;tools, but at
present this approach has a very limited domain of&lt;br/&gt;applicability, and
furthermore the limitations on what an adversary is&lt;br/&gt;allowed to do in
this approach make the analysis only suggestive, rather&lt;br/&gt;than
conclusive, in practice. (That is, a ``proof of security'' for
a&lt;br/&gt;protocol in this formal model doesn't necessarily imply that
the&lt;br/&gt;protocol will be secure in practice.) The second approach is based
on&lt;br/&gt;computational complexity; this approach offers solid conclusions,
since&lt;br/&gt;the adversary is not unreasonably restricted, but is very
difficult to&lt;br/&gt;use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of proposed
research: The most significant research&lt;br/&gt;direction proposed here is to
build strong effective relationships&lt;br/&gt;between these two approaches,
greatly expanding upon earlier seminal&lt;br/&gt;work by Abadi and Rogaway, and
more recently by Herzog, and then Herzog,&lt;br/&gt;Micali, and
Liskov.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to provide methods so that one may use
simplified formal&lt;br/&gt;methods to design and analyze cryptographic
protocols, with the&lt;br/&gt;confidence that the result will be secure in the
real world (that is,&lt;br/&gt;when realistic computational models and
assumptions apply). The formal&lt;br/&gt;methods will be enlarged to handle many
of the important ``details''&lt;br/&gt;ordinarily not considered by formal
methods, such as error handling and&lt;br/&gt;algebraic identities.
Cryptographic techniques will be used to&lt;br/&gt;``force'' a real-world
adversary to be no more powerful than his&lt;br/&gt;``formal'' counterpart. The
research will proceed by develping&lt;br/&gt;``compilation'' techniques that
enable any protocol proven secure within&lt;br/&gt;the formal model to be
implemented securely in the ``real world'' (that&lt;br/&gt;is, within the
computational model).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program is challenging;
it requires an interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;approach as it crosses boundaries
normally respected. Furthermore, &lt;br/&gt;developing ``generic'' techniques
that apply to any protocol is&lt;br/&gt;necessarily more challenging than the
usual procedure of working on&lt;br/&gt;protocols
individually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad impact: The results of this research
will not only advance the&lt;br/&gt;academic state of the art, but will also
provide practitioners with&lt;br/&gt;effective tools and technology for making
Internet-based society&lt;br/&gt;increasingly secure. The simplifications
resulting from the proposed&lt;br/&gt;research will also enable cryptographic
protocols to be taught in an&lt;br/&gt;effective and secure manner to a larger
circle of students and&lt;br/&gt;implementers.&lt;br/&gt;