* 0326757
* EID:  Ecological Drivers of Rodent-borne Disease Outbreaks: Trophic Cascades and Dispersal Waves.
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2009
* V. Kenkre, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2009
* USD 1,746,268.00

Climate variability is thought to affect a number of rodent-borne zoonotic
diseases such as plague, vector-borne zoonotic bartonellosis and hantaviral
diseases. This project team will evaluate the Trophic Cascade Hypothesis (TCH),
an hypothesis that was developed to explain changing levels of human risk for
zoonotic diseases associated with climate variability in the U.S. Southwest.
This study will (1) measure the responses of rodent food resources (plant cover
and net primary production, nut/berry/acorn production, and ground-dwelling
arthropod populations), rodent/vector reservoir abundance, and pathogen
infection prevalences in rodents, to meteorological events (summer monsoons and
El Nino - Southern Oscillation [ENSO] phenomena), (2) assess the usefulness of
meteorological data and various remotely-sensed (satellite) imagery in
accurately predicting these responses, and (3) develop spatially- and
temporally-explicit models that characterize both demographic and population
density changes with climate and ecosystem net primary production, as well as
dispersal patterns and rates for several rodent species responsible for
hantavirus, plague and Bartonella transmission.

These models will serve more broadly as prototypes for more generalizable
predictive models that may be applied to rodent-borne diseases in other
ecosystems throughout the world. As global climate change continues to alter
regional meteorological patterns, the models may prove useful in predicting
range expansions of vector-borne diseases, thereby allowing appropriate planning
and mitigation strategies to be implemented for public health enhancement.