* 0326734
* Collaborative Research:   Connectivity in Bivalve Populations: Assessing Sources of Larval Recruits
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Hal Caswell, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 09/30/2008
* USD 779,747.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The early life history of most marine benthic invertebrate
organisms involves a planktonic larval stage of development that acts as an
agent for increased dispersal and gene flow between sessile or sedentary adult
populations. There remains considerable debate as to the spatial scale and
strength of the connections between populations. This research project will
examine connectivity of bivalve populations (defined as the extent to which a
local population receives recruits from external sources), the role of physical
transport, and the metapopulation consequences. Because larval stages are
microscopic, it is all but impossible to follow individuals, or to track them
with conventional tags. Technological advances have facilitated the use of trace
element analysis to evaluate origins and trajectories of some planktonic larvae.
Spatial variability in environmental, trace elemental characteristics of
different coastal water masses is recorded in the geochemistry of biogenic
carbonates. Because shells are deposited throughout planktonic larval
development, they effectively record changes in environmental characteristics of
different habitats occupied by larvae through development. Analysis of larval
shell retained by newly settled bivalves will provide information about their
source locations. Trace element fingerprinting methods will be used to evaluate
the spatial scale and strength of connectivity among bivalve populations on the
Massachusetts and southern California coasts. Hypotheses will address (1) the
relative contribution of remote larval sources versus local ones (self seeding),
(2) the relationship between circulation?driven dispersal potential and realized
connectivity among bivalve populations and (3) the roles of species spawning
period, planktonic period, and spatial separation of sites in determining
probabilities of larval exchange. Our approach involves laser ablation
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA?ICPMS) to resolve spatial
changes in larval shell composition that reflect recruit origins and temporal
patterns of larval transport. We will work with the clam Mya arenaria and the
mussel Mytilus edulis in New England and the mussels Mytilus galloprovincialis
and M. californianus in southern California. Population connectivities will be
studied with two metapopulation approaches that estimate dispersal probabilities
from hydrodynamic models. One involves habitat area as a proxy for fecundity and
the other is a multiregional matrix model that uses a demographic framework to
describe the dynamics of the metapopulation. We will test realized population
connectivity determined from trace elemental analysis of recruit origins against
a priori predictions based on the circulation and metapopulation
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The resulting information about
source populations and connectivities will enhance understanding of
metapopulation dynamics in commercially valuable bivalve species. Connectivity
information applicable to the east and west coasts of the USA will facilitate
conservation of coastal resources through the improved design of marine
protected areas and fisheries regulations. Key educational elements include the
involvement of undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students, as well as
early career scientists, in interdisciplinary research that integrates coastal
ocean physics, larval ecology and metapopulation theory. There will be a
transfer of trace element fingerprinting technology (from fish) into the realm
of invertebrate dispersal and to collaborators in
Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;