* 0326142
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Politics and Meanings of Genetically Modified Foods in the United States, France and Japan
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Paul DiMaggio, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 7,500.00

The dissertation seeks to explain divergent policy developments regarding
genetically modified (GM) foods in the Unites States, France and Japan. Building
on an observation that definitions of GM foods (e.g., whether and how they are
defined as different from traditional foods) constitute crucial components of
policy orientations, the dissertation seeks to identify different understandings
of GM foods in the three countries, and to investigate the processes through
which these nationally distinct understandings emerged and interacted with
policy developments. It asks: 1) How are GM foods defined in each country's
policy framework today? 2) What are the important differences in the terms of
public debate surrounding GM foods among the three countries today? 3) How have
these different understandings of GM foods in both policy and public discourse
emerged? and 4) How have these different understandings shaped, and been shaped
by, policy developments? This comparative project uses a variety of data and
methods for each country: a review of journalistic and historical accounts, as
well as industry, NGO and government documents, to construct historical
narratives; content analysis of mass media coverage of the GM food issue,
relevant laws, policy statements and policy debates to examine how GM foods are
defined and framed, and how such definitions and frames emerged and changed over
time; and in-depth interviews with key actors to both supplement my historical
narratives and explore various actors' understandings of GM foods in a more
subtle way than is possible with content analysis. The project promises
theoretical contributions in cultural and political sociology by explicitly
exploring how culture and politics interact. It addresses the still unclear
processes through which certain meanings become dominant over others as
political actors struggle to advance their terms of debate. It also examines how
and to what extent discourse matters to politics and policy developments.
Furthermore, the project promises broader social contributions by facilitating
understandings of policy formation processes surrounding GM foods in three
leading industrialized nations. Given that the application of agricultural
biotechnology is a highly contested global issue that holds immense implications
for the future of the food supply system, such insights should prove valuable as
they help us assess the current policy frameworks and guide future
policymaking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;