* 0326490
* Collaborative Research: The Reluctance to Use Decision Aids
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Kevin Douglas, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2004
* USD 62,210.00

Four experiments will be run in order to investigate why professions are
reluctant to use decision aids. In the first study patients in a waiting room of
a clinic will read various versions of a scenario in which a doctor either does
or does not use an aid in making a diagnosis. We will assess the patients'
opinion concerning the competence of the physician in each scenario, the
hypothesis being that doctors who use a decision aid might be perceived as less
capable than physicians who eschew the use of an aid. We will also assess the
opinion of doctors concerning their colleagues who do or don't use decision aids
in making diagnoses.&lt;br/&gt;In the second study a videotape of a malpractice
trial will be shown to community members. In the trial the defendant, a
physician, either did or didn't use a decision aid in making a diagnosis that
led to an adverse outcome. The viewers of the videotape will decide whether the
physician is guilty of malpractice. Doctors will also watch the tape and will
render an opinion concerning the physician and will also predict the verdict of
the jurors. We are interested in whether using a decision aid either insulates a
physician from or exposes a physician to negative malpractice
verdicts.&lt;br/&gt;The third study is similar to the second. However in this
study a mental health professional described in a scenario will be make a
judgment about the dangerousness of an inpatient in order to determine whether
he should be released. In some versions of the scenario the professional uses a
decision aid; in some an aid is not used. An adverse outcome occurs in all
cases. Mental health professionals will decide whether the professional
described in the scenario acted responsibly.&lt;br/&gt;In the final study
emergency room physicians will read a case describing a disease and will render
a diagnosis. They will also express their confidence in their diagnosis, and
they will decide whether they wish to use a decision aid. We predict that the
more confident physicians will eschew the use of the aid.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
all studies is to discover reasons why professional decision makers refuse to
use aids which would heighten the accuracy of their
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal investigator:
Douglas, Kevin&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of South
Florida&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID : 0326490&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Collaborative
Research: The Reluctance to Use Decision Aids &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four
experiments will be run in order to investigate why professions are reluctant to
use decision aids. In the first study patients in a waiting room of a clinic
will read various versions of a scenario in which a doctor either does or does
not use an aid in making a diagnosis. We will assess the patients' opinion
concerning the competence of the physician in each scenario, the hypothesis
being that doctors who use a decision aid might be perceived as less capable
than physicians who eschew the use of an aid. We will also assess the opinion of
doctors concerning their colleagues who do or don't use decision aids in making
diagnoses.&lt;br/&gt;In the second study a videotape of a malpractice trial will
be shown to community members. In the trial the defendant, a physician, either
did or didn't use a decision aid in making a diagnosis that led to an adverse
outcome. The viewers of the videotape will decide whether the physician is
guilty of malpractice. Doctors will also watch the tape and will render an
opinion concerning the physician and will also predict the verdict of the
jurors. We are interested in whether using a decision aid either insulates a
physician from or exposes a physician to negative malpractice
verdicts.&lt;br/&gt;The third study is similar to the second. However in this
study a mental health professional described in a scenario will be make a
judgment about the dangerousness of an inpatient in order to determine whether
he should be released. In some versions of the scenario the professional uses a
decision aid; in some an aid is not used. An adverse outcome occurs in all
cases. Mental health professionals will decide whether the professional
described in the scenario acted responsibly.&lt;br/&gt;In the final study
emergency room physicians will read a case describing a disease and will render
a diagnosis. They will also express their confidence in their diagnosis, and
they will decide whether they wish to use a decision aid. We predict that the
more confident physicians will eschew the use of the aid.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
all studies is to discover reasons why professional decision makers refuse to
use aids which would heighten the accuracy of their decisions.&lt;br/&gt;