* 0326983
* Collaborative Research: Origins and Spread of the Aspergillus-Gorgonian Coral Epizootic: Role of Climate and Environmental Facilitators
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* John Bruno, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2008
* USD 259,540.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0326705 / OCE-0326983 /
OCE-0326269 / OCE-0326698&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent high rates of disease
outbreaks on coral reefs may be caused by climate-related stress, increased
inputs of new pathogens, or both. The inability to use traditional methods of
disease management in marine systems (culling, vaccination, quarantine) adds
urgency to understanding and controlling disease in the ocean. The most
practical remediation for coral disease is to control inputs and spread. Yet, we
do not know the origin of any coral pathogen nor do we understand mechanisms of
transmission. The aspergillus - sea fan coral epizootic is an excellent model
system for testing hypotheses about the origins of emergent marine disease, the
relative importance of transmission and resistance in outbreaks and particularly
the role of environmental facilitators. In this project, researchers at Cornell
University, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, University of South
Carolina, and the University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute will
investigate this system through a research program combining linked experimental
and theoretical approaches. The objectives are &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) to
determine the origins of the aspergillosis outbreak in sea fans, using
microsatellite markers;&lt;br/&gt;(2) to evaluate the role of host resistance
through development of immunological assays;&lt;br/&gt;(3) to evaluate
experimentally the role of environmental facilitators in the
outbreak;&lt;br/&gt;(4) to assess demographic and spatial determinants of
infection risk; and&lt;br/&gt;(5) to develop a predictive theory of disease
outbreak and spread through a spatial model for spread of disease in coral
populations, embedded in an agent- based framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is expected to have broad educational and international impacts because
will enrich undergraduate teaching programs in Akumal, Mexico, and train high
school students, undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows at
field sites and at the home research institutions. The primary intellectual
merit of this project is bringing current theory in wildlife disease to a
tropical marine study system that is easily manipulated. The project will be
enhanced by seeking applied outcomes for management of coral reefs and forging
new directions in the ecology of marine and particularly coral reef diseases
through interactions with NOAA and World Bank targeted research initiatives.
&lt;br/&gt;