* 0326630
* Mixing in the equatorial Pacific: the role of interleaving
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Julian McCreary, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2007
* USD 346,315.00

This project focuses on lateral mixing and the role of the observed interleaving
of water masses across the equator. Estimates suggest that the interleaving has
an effective lateral diffusion coefficient of the order of 1000 m2s-1. Imposing
an enhanced mixing coefficient of this magnitude close to the equator is found
in preliminary experiments with an ocean general circulation model (OGCM) to
both limit the strength of the Equatorial Under Current (EUC) and reduce the
cold bias in the eastern cold tongue, thus resolving two problems which plague
ocean models used in climate studies. The ultimate goal is to provide a
parameterization scheme for interleaving suitable for ocean models used in
climate studies, and thus improves the reliability and predictive skill of
climate models. An analysis of existing observations will be combined with
linear stability theory, numerical process studies and an OGCM to elucidate the
fundamental physics of the interleaving process. Associated fluxes of momentum
and tracers will be quantified and the relationship between these fluxes and the
broader scale characteristics of the ocean state will be determined. The main
focus will be on inertial instability (and other shear induced instabilities) as
the prime mechanism for the formation and subsequent evolution of the layering.
Particular attention will be paid to the three dimensional nature of the
interleaving process. Double diffusive vertical fluxes may also play a role and
their impact will be investigated and quantified. A parameterization scheme for
interleaving will be developed and tested, and its impact on the characteristics
of an OGCM configured for the Pacific Ocean will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The usefulness of any
climate forecast depends crucially on its skill and reliability; with
implications for the way planners and resource managers react and the potential
gains by human society. The reliability of a forecast is improved through an
increased understanding of the physical processes involved. The enhanced mixing
brought about by interleaving may well affect the development of ENSO events and
possibly its decadal variability. The proposed work is designed to have an
output that is directly useful to agencies charged with making ENSO forecasts,
as well as other researchers. The work is directly related to the aims of the
Climate variability and predictability Program (CLIVAR) and will be useful to
the forthcoming ocean biogeochemistry program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;