* 0326348
* ITR: COPLINK Center for Intelligence and Security Informatics Research---A Crime Data Mining Approach to Developing ôBorder Safeö Research
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Daniel Zeng, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Brandt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 999,365.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EIA-0326348&lt;br/&gt;Hsinchun,
Chen&lt;br/&gt;Title: ITR: COPLINK Center for Intelligence and Security
Informatics Research- A Crime Data Mining Approach to Developing "Border Safe"
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The main intended
intellectual contribution of our research is three-fold: (a) developing new data
mining, text mining, and knowledge discovery models and techniques that are
motivated by law enforcement applications but can also be applied in other
domains demonstrating similar characteristics, (b) developing new
representations, models, and computational methods for scalable networks from
other data mining applications, and (c) studying the acceptance and adoption of
the developed crime data mining technologies in real-world settings and
obtaining a comprehensive understanding of related policy implications including
information sharing and privacy issues.&lt;br/&gt; The broader impacts of this
research include: reducing cognitive and information overload in law enforcement
applications; improving intelligence and law enforcement agencies' abilities to
detect, prevent, and respond to crimes and terrorism events; fostering
information sharing and collaboration among law enforcement agencies; and
providing a large-scale research testbed for NSF KDD and "border safe"
researches.&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research effort will leverage our highly
successful past and ongoing work on the COPLINK system, our prior research
experience on data mining, text mining, web computing, and information retrieval
in other application domains, and our extensive ongoing partnerships with local,
state, and federal law enforcement agents.&lt;br/&gt;