* 0326670
* Collaborative Research: Transport Timescales, Pathways, and  Carbon Uptake in the North Atlantic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Darryn Waugh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2007
* USD 542,283.00

This project will apply a new framework to describe advective-diffusive
transport in geophysical reservoirs to Labrador Sea Water (LSW) transport in the
subpolar gyre. It will synthesize data from transient tracers, hydrography and
subsurface ?oats to estimate: (i) the time-averaged transport timescales and
pathways for LSW in the subpolar North Atlantic with a focus on the roles of
advection by the geostrophic flow, mixing, and recirculation, (ii) the processes
controlling propagation of LSW anomalies, and, (iii) the uptake of anthropogenic
carbon in the subpolar North Atlantic, and the importance of advection by the
geostrophic flow, mixing, and recirculation in controlling carbon sequestration.
A range of numerical models that simulate 1950-2000 North Atlantic circulation
at non-eddy-resolving and eddy-resolving resolutions will be used to test the
methods and estimate confidence levels for the data analyses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts will be better understanding of ocean
circulation and carbon uptake, a critical part of Earth's climate system with
great societal importance. The results will be disseminated to a wide audience
and feature the project in all levels of the PI's teaching. Two graduate
students and a post doc will assist the project and receive advanced training in
physical oceanography and climate dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;