* 0326221
* Silicon Based Nanoscale Quantum Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* William Holton, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 07/31/2007
* USD 240,000.00

This proposal describes the progress made in our present NSF grant 1 and
proposes to continue our research to further investigate the properties of
single electrons trapped within a vertical quantum dot. A technique has been
developed to fabricate metal electrodes on the oxide insulated surface of
silicon at dimensions ~ 60 nanometers so that with an appropriate applied
voltage at low temperature, a single electron is trapped at either the silicon
to silicon-oxide interface or at a silicon to silicon-carbide heterostructure
interface of a suitably grown heteroepitaxial structure. Preliminary theoretical
calculations, similar to those used in the design of a if pillar quantum
computer lo 2 have been employed to predict the stable regions where a single
and a few electrons can be trapped in these vertical quantum dot structures, and
to estimate the magnitude of the exchange coupling between neighboring quantum
dots as a function of the separation distance. A linear array of these quantum
dots in a device design that allows independent addressing of the trapped
electron spin states when the structure is in an external magnetic field, as
described in the Project Description, define a quantum computer application for
these devices. Herein we propose to fabricate additional devices and conduct low
temperature electrical and magnetic-resonance measurements to verify the
trapping dynamics of these quantum dots. To accomplish this, special low
temperature solid-state amplifiers will be designed with the sensitivity
required to make the measurements and perform the impedence transformation
necessary to drive the signal lines for room temperature acquisition of the
information. Initial measurements will examine many dots connected in parallel.
These will be followed by examination of quantum dot pairs where the separation
produces exchange coupling to study the nearest neighbor interactions. We will
use similar quantum dot device structures with a suitably interconnected quantum
dot arrays to make low temperature electron spin resonance measurements to
determine the spin resonance properties. The g-factor, spin-lattice relaxation
time (T1), the coherence time (T2), and nearest neighbor effects will be
determined.

Graduate students within our group at NCSU will conduct the research in
collaboration with our colleagues and students at the University of North
Carolina who have millikelvin temperature electrical measurement capability.
With successful conclusion of this research initiative, the societal impact
could be extremely beneficial by providing a scalable quantum computer. Our
nation will benefit from having available this most advanced computational
capability for military and commercial use. The need for this advance is
evidenced by the intense interest of the National Science Foundation, the
National Security Agency, and the Department of Defense in this area.