* 0326001
* ITR: Designing a Programming Environment for Network Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Harrick Vin, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2008
* USD 2,000,000.00

Network systems-designed to process packets efficiently-must meet two
requirements: (1) support a large number of high-bandwidth links, and hence
large system throughputs; and (2) offer a wide range of services (such as VPN,
intrusion detection, virus scanning, differentiated services, and overlay
network processing). To meet these requirements simultaneously, a new breed of
processors, referred to as network processors (NPUs), has emerged. Network
processors, when combined with general-purpose processors, function-specific
coprocessors and other reconfigurable logic elements, create a powerful platform
for designing network systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, the
methodologies and tools needed for programming these embedded, highly-parallel
network systems are in their infancy. Today, to develop high-performance packet
processing applications on such systems, programmers are required to be
intimately familiar with the hardware. Programmers are required to partition
their application at design time among the different processor types and develop
hand-tuned code for managing network system resources. This approach is tedious,
slow, and yields code that is difficult to port from one NPU-based platform to
another. With the next-generation of network systems and NPUs supporting a
larger number of processors, more diverse memory hierarchies, and more complex
processor interconnects, the difficulty in programming network systems will only
increase over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed research
is to create a programming environment that will make future generations of
network systems as easily programmable as today's workstations and servers.
Realizing this vision requires an inter-disciplinary research program that spans
the fields of networking, programming languages, compilers, run-time systems,
and software engineering. The proposed multi-disciplinary activity will yield a
programming environment that includes: (1) a domain-specific programming
language for specifying packet processing applications; (2) a set of tools for
profiling run-time characteristics of applications; (3) a set of compile-time
tools and techniques for mapping packet processing applications onto complex
network system architectures; and (4) a run-time system that adapts resource
allocations dynamically to create network systems that are robust against
attacks. Together, this set of tools and methodologies will create an
environment that will facilitate rapid development of portable, high-performance
packet processing applications on programmable network systems-the building
blocks of future generations of multi-service information networks.&lt;br/&gt;