* 0326870
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Locating Rural Black Women in the Racial Geography of Peru
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Judith Blau, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 7,500.00

Skin color plays an insignificant role in determining the racial status of
indigenous Peruvians. For this reason, researchers have argued that race in Peru
is a fluid and cultural construct. However, these arguments are based solely on
the experiences of indigenous Peruvians. This study will examine whether or not
race works differently for black Peruvians. Scholars have found that, when
Indians migrate to the capital city of Lima, they become more modern, and thus
'whiter,' through mestizaje (racial and cultural mixing). The questions posed in
this research are: Do black Peruvians also become 'whiter' when they migrate to
Lima? Is racial identity a fluid construct for black Peruvians? To answer these
questions, the researcher will conduct an ethnographic study, using participant
observation and interviews, in a black Peruvian village and of black Peruvians
in Lima. Neither the literature on race in Peru nor the literature on black
Latin Americans provide a depiction of contemporary black Peruvian communities.
The omission of the experiences of black Peruvians is more than a mere
oversight, for an investigation of the black Peruvian experience may reveal
inconsistencies in the cultural definition of race in Peru as well in the
prevailing discourse on mestizaje as it relates to Afro-Latin Americans. The
researcher will develop a theoretical framework of racial identity in Peru that
accounts for the experiences of black Peruvians. This will contribute to a
broader sociological understanding of the social construction of racial and
ethnic identity, and of its variation across space. The broader impact of this
research is that a better understanding of mestizaje as it relates to black
Peruvians will serve to illuminate racial issues throughout Latin America as
well as here in the United States. This is because the rhetoric of mestizaje and
whiteness is present in all Latin American countries. US scholars are also
currently arguing that race relations in the US are becoming more Latin America-
like, and adopting a nationalist mestizo ideology - We are all Americans. This
US version of color-blind ideology is quite similar to Latin American color-
blind nationalism, expressed through the rhetoric of mestizaje. Additionally,
the researcher intends to turn this dissertation into a book, which will be the
first ethnographic account of black Peruvians published in the English language,
and the first published in any language since 1980.