* 0326006
* Collaborative Research:  ITR:  Secure and Robust IT Architectures to Improve Survivability of the Power Grid
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Anjan Bose, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2006
* USD 268,879.00

Proposal Number: 0325892/0326006 Title: Secure and Robust IT Architectures to
Improve Survivability of the Power Grid

Abstract:

The communications architecture for today's electric power grid is designed to
support a centralized control model developed for the vertically integrated,
regulated power monopolies, each with complete control of a geographic area.
However, in recent years deregulation has introduced many more participants on
the grid. Together with a push for some measure of decentralized control, this
and a proliferation of intelligent digital devices on the grid have made the
management of the grid increasingly dependent on internet technology and
networked computers, exposing the grid to a new threat: cyber-attacks. At the
same time, deregulation has resulted in economic pressures to operate the grid
with less safety margin, increasing the potential damage caused by disturbances
and the need for better control, and more rigorous analysis behind that control,
more crucial. The grid's already overtaxed information technology (IT)
infrastructure does not have the ability to deliver information with the
required quality of service and flexibility to meet the ever-changing security
requirements of the evolving grid. The IT infrastructure needs to be made highly
adaptive to ensure its survivability. Power researchers and engineers have
detailed models of power dynamics on various geographic scales. However, none
also incorporates other facets such as market factors, regulatory changes, and
cyber-attacks that can affect the grid in different ways, and on different time
scales. Because cyber-attacks target IT systems at their core, cyber-protection
has to be an integral part of design. One fundamental contribution of this
project comes from incorporating cybersecurity features in the modeling and
decision making tools for relating the complex interactions among the physical,
information, economic, and regulatory signals within the evolving electric power
grid. The research is organized around three thrusts of activity which are being
pursued interactively: I. Hybrid models of grid information technology, power
dynamics, cyber-attacks, policy and markets. II. Distributed agent systems for
flexible and adaptive control of the grid and its survivability. III. Robust and
secure status dissemination middleware for new grid information technology
architectures The electric power delivery system, the most critical of our
critical infrastructures, is undergoing revolutionary changes. Successful
completion of this research will contribute methodology, artifacts and knowledge
to improve the security and efficiency of the power grid as it takes its new
shape in coming years. This project sets the foundations of an ambitious
collaborative research program between CMU and WSU, to address the complex
issues associated with the modernization of the grid and its increasing reliance
on an intelligent (i.e computerized) infrastructure.This collaborative research
is structured as a long term interdisciplinary effort in which PhD students will
acquire the kind of expertise this new phase of electricity generation and
distribution calls for. In the short term, research tools are developed which
can be used to compare different architectures for command and control of the
grid and their survivability.