* 0326227
* ITR:  Software Design Rules
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Dawson Engler, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,299,972.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0326227&lt;br/&gt;Monica Lam&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
U&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software reliability is one of the most important
problems in computer science. A single operating system&lt;br/&gt;error can
crash a machine. A single security hole can compromise the integrity of an
entire system or, as&lt;br/&gt;software and its errors is replicated, the
integrity of entire networks. This proposal focuses on
practical&lt;br/&gt;techniques to prevent such software errors. Its approach is
based on the insight that software is governed&lt;br/&gt;by many design rules,
from general ones that programs should not overrun their buffers, to application
specific rules such as a begin-transaction must be invoked before a commit-
transaction in a database,&lt;br/&gt;and low-level rules, such as the input
strings to strncpy should not overlap. Unlike specifications such
as&lt;br/&gt;loop invariants, pre-conditions and post-conditions that pertain to
particular lines of code, design rules are&lt;br/&gt;more powerful, succinct,
and are applicable to large amounts of code in the program. While design rules
are&lt;br/&gt;pervasive, in practice they are neither well documented nor
automatically enforced, yet programmers need&lt;br/&gt;to understand and obey
them to write correct programs.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The goal of this
work is to make design rules first-class objects. They should
be&lt;br/&gt;explicitly part of program design, form a core part of the
intellectual framework of system implementors, and be effectively supported by
techniques that have teeth. This proposal provides a comprehensive approach to
reach these goals. It is expected to make the following major
contributions:&lt;br/&gt;1. General theory of design rules in software
development. It will provide a deeper understanding of how&lt;br/&gt;software is
governed by design rules, what these rules are, and how they can be used in
practice. The&lt;br/&gt;intent is to teach this concept to all computer science
students.&lt;br/&gt;2. Automatic design rule inference. Real systems have
thousands of design rules, buried in millions of&lt;br/&gt;lines of code.
Expecting programmers to reliably specify all rules is unrealistic. Depending on
them to&lt;br/&gt;do so is dangerous since an omitted rule will not be checked.
This research will develop techniques to&lt;br/&gt;automatically extract design
rules from code. It uses the fact that the same rule is obeyed many
times&lt;br/&gt;in a program, allowing it to be inferred by observing
regularities in the program's static and dynamic&lt;br/&gt;behavior. The
challenge in the approach is inferring subtle patterns from noisy behavior. This
research&lt;br/&gt;will develop a general theory of design rule
extraction.&lt;br/&gt;3. Programming tools for design rules. This research will
develop practical tools that automatically extract&lt;br/&gt;design rules, check
programs for design-rule violations, and also enforce design rules in
programs.&lt;br/&gt;While the work will support general-purpose software, it
will also pay particular attention to tools for&lt;br/&gt;detecting both
security and non-deterministic errors (such as race conditions).&lt;br/&gt;4.
Fundamental static program analysis. Design-rule conformance testing requires
sophisticated program&lt;br/&gt;analysis. This research is expected to advance
the state of the art in program analyses of contextsensitive&lt;br/&gt;pointer
aliases and object invariants.&lt;br/&gt;5. Software model checking of design
rules. Some rules require deeper analysis than static analysis
can&lt;br/&gt;provide. This research will support such rules by developing a
software model checker that checks&lt;br/&gt;actual implementation code (rather
than an abstracted specification of it) against programmer-
supplied&lt;br/&gt;invariants or other implementations.&lt;br/&gt;6. Testing
based on design rules. This research intends to improve testing by leveraging
expressed and&lt;br/&gt;extracted design rules to guide test coverage, test
selection and test generation.