* 0326616
* Collaborative Research:  Hawaii Ocean Time-series Program:  Biogeochemistry and Ecology Component
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2003,07/31/2010
* David Karl, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2010
* USD 5,332,083.00

Since Oct 1988, a comprehensive suite of environmental measurements have been
obtained at the oligotrophic Sta. ALOHA (22'45N, 158'00'W) in the North Pacific
Subtropical Gyre. This time-series activity - Hawai'i Ocean Time-Series (HOT) -
was initiated within the 15-year U.S. Joint Global Ocean Flux Program; the
results of the HOT program have been one of the stellar centerpieces of the U.S.
JGOFS accomplishments. The core HOT measurements were selected to provide data
to validate existing carbon-nitrogen-phosphorus biogeochemical models and, to
improve them. Foremost in importance among the various ecosystem processes under
investigation are: the flux of carbon at the air?sea interface, the rates and
control mechanisms of primary production and particle export, and the pathways
and intensities of nutrient (N and P) fluxes. Also important are the observed
time?dependent changes in microbial biomass and biodiversity, and the
relationships of these observed ecosystem changes to the broader extra-tropical
climate forcing from the El Nino?Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and other large
scale ocean?atmosphere interactions. The emergent data from the HOT core
measurement program are unique and robust and illuminate previously undocumented
phenomena. The scientific results of the ongoing ocean time?series program have
provided an unprecedented view of biogeochemical cycles and ecological processes
in an under-sampled region of the world ocean. A very large number of
HOT?related publications and reports have already appeared based on the research
results obtained by program?associated and independent, ancillary
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the important
continuation of this ocean time?series core measurement program for an
additional five?year period ? August 2003 to July 2008. During this period, Dr.
Karl and collaborators will move the measurement program from a primarily
ship?based effort with an approximately monthly frequency of observations, to a
comprehensive ship / mooring / autonomous vehicle /cabled observatory /
satellite based measurement program that covers a broader spectrum of temporal
and spatial scales. In addition to maintaining a suite of core measurements and
distributing the analytical results to the scientific community at large in a
timely and accessible manner, they will also continue providing the logistical
infrastructure and the shared shiptime required to support related research
programs funded independently by NSF, ONR, NOAA, DOE and other
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As in the past, the HOT program investigators
will be actively engaged in education at all levels from K?12 through
post?doctoral. Research conducted as part of the HOT program has contributed
significantly to formal classroom instruction in oceanography as well as at?sea
training. In this next phase of HOT, investigators will initiate two new
education and outreach activities, Scientist?Educator Associations (SEA) and
Bluewater Marine Laboratory (BML), both targeted at middle school to high school
students in Hawaii and the Pacific Island region, including several
under?represented ethnic groups. The HOT program infrastructure, both at?sea and
laboratory components, provides unique facilities for science training. The
Internet?accessible time?series data base has already proven to be an invaluable
education tool for students and teachers worldwide. The broader societal
benefits of the research are an increased understanding of the Earth's carbon
and nutrient cycles, and a greater knowledge of climate and ecosystem
variability, including anthropogenic impacts. By maintaining these long?term
ocean sentinels we can help to track the health of the ocean and help to develop
the basic scientific understanding that will be necessary for predicting future
ocean ecosystem states.&lt;br/&gt;