* 0327147
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Identification of Glacial Refugia by Phylogeographic Analyses of the Forest Understory Plant Species, Trillium Cuneatum
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* James Hamrick, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

The description and interpretation of geographic patterns of genetic variation
have occupied a central position in plant evolutionary biology. Historical,
paleoecological, and biogeographical perspectives often have not been included
in these interpretations, however. With the availability of arrays of molecular
genetic markers combined with advanced analytical procedures, it is now possible
to couple biogeographical and paleoecological perspectives with population
genetic and phylogenetic analyses. This approach is embodied in the discipline
of phylogeography (a subdiscipline of biogeography). The goal of this doctoral
dissertation research project is to combine analyses of maternally transmitted
chloroplast DNA and bi-parentally inherited allozyme markers to investigate the
phylogeography and glacial refugial history of the forest understory species,
Trillium cuneatum (Melanthiaceae). This study will demonstrate how populations
are related across the species' geographic range, allowing inference of past
refugia and post-glacial colonization patterns. Objectives of this project are:
(1) to identify the number and locations of glacial refugia; (2) to infer
patterns of post-glacial colonization routes; and (3) to describe the degree of
overlap and intra-population polymorphism of refugial
lineages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determination of past range contractions and
refugial expansions has important implications for understanding the
biogeographical and evolutionary processes that have shaped the contemporary
distribution of biodiversity. By simultaneously examining the spatial and
temporal distribution of genetic diversity, this project will testify to
refugial locations during the last glacial maximum and will identify ancient
migration patterns following this period. The research therefore will provide a
historical biogeographical context for the interpretation of contemporary
genetic divergence. This project also complements studies of Southern
Appalachian biodiversity (conducted by the National Park Service) by providing
insights into the vegetation history and biodiversity of the southeastern U.S.
For example, the question of whether widespread species spread into the Southern
Appalachians after the last glacial maximum or whether these species originated
from small in situ refugia has important implications for the effective
management of the rich southeastern flora. Furthermore, by developing insights
into the processes that have shaped contemporary genetic variation, this study
should prove useful in predicting biotic responses to future global climatic
changes. Regional and global patterns of climatic change inferred from the
Quaternary and early Holocene fossil records coupled with detailed genetic
analyses will identify similarities and differences between species in their
response to climate change. The accumulation of such information may yield
analogues for future climatic change, and, thus assist the evaluation of the
anticipated changes. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;