* 0327959
* (TSE03-C)Alkane production from renewable biomass by aqueous-phase catalytic reforming: A combined experimental and theoretical approach
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2006
* James Dumesic, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 10/31/2006
* USD 340,046.00

This project will address the catalytic production of alkanes from biomass-
derived oxygenated hydrocarbons utilizing a newly discovered low-temperature
aqueous-phase reforming process. This new process provides a route for
generation of alkanes from renewable biomass resources. The core of the
innovation is the production of hydrocarbon-rich fuel-gas by reactions of
oxygenated hydrocarbons with liquid water at low temperatures (near 200 C). The
main advantages include: (1) generation of alkanes without the need to
volatilize water, which represents a major energy saving, and (2) operation at
temperatures where the water-gas shift reaction is favorable, making it possible
to generate high-quality fuel-gas with low amounts of CO in a single chemical
reactor. The process provides a strategy for delivering a biorenewable fuel for
modern, highly efficient internal combustion engines (ICEs). The combination of
renewable alkanes with efficient ICEs provides a promising method for
sustainable generation of mechanical and electrical energy that is green house
gas neutral, since the CO2 emitted from the reforming process is consumed by the
next year's growth of biomass. The potential technological impact of this new
process for the production of alkanes is substantial, leading to a considerable
decrease in the dependence of the US economy on imported fossil fuels.

The best catalysts identified at present for the generation of alkanes by the
aqueous-phase reforming process are based on platinum, which is an expensive
metal. Further research will be conducted to develop a new generation of
catalysts to provide cost-effective methods to generate alkanes using the
aqueous-phase reforming process to convert reactants extracted from biomass
streams. Additives will be investigated to improve the performance, cost, and
efficiency of Pt-based catalysts. The reaction conditions (such as temperature,
pressure, feed concentrations, solution pH) will also be varied to control the
product distribution, and catalytic performance with respect to long times on-
steam will be determined. The investigations will rely on: (1) high throughput
screening of catalyst candidates, (2) detailed catalytic reaction kinetics
studies of the most promising catalyst candidates, (3) spectroscopic and
characterization studies of the most promising catalytic materials, and (4)
systematic first-principles studies for C-C, C-O, C-H, and O-H bond activation
on transition metals.