* 0327118
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Precipitation Pulses and Geomorphic Response During Periods of Late Quaternary Climate Change, Western United States
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Joseph Mason, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2005
* USD 11,978.00

Geomorphologists have long believed that periods of rapid climate change have
significant impacts on colluvial and fluvial systems. New evidence suggests that
precipitation pulses -- episodes of higher precipitation rates or more intense
storms -- are associated with rapid climatic changes. In many settings,
precipitation pulses would produce pulses of hillslope erosion, high sediment
yield, and increased flood magnitude. Studies conducted in the desert Southwest
and Midwestern U.S. suggest that large precipitation events, producing large
floods, were especially frequent during rapid climate changes of the late
Holocene. In the Great Basin, episodes of increased precipitation associated
with rapid late Pleistocene climatic change are inferred from records of pluvial
lake levels. Preliminary data suggest that late Pleistocene and Holocene
episodes of rapid hillslope erosion in the Midwest and Great Plains may have
been synchronous with each other and with precipitation pulses identified in the
Great Basin. This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate the
spatial extent of precipitation pulses and hillslope response across the
Midwest, Great Plains, Great Basin, and Southwest over the past 20,000 years.
The focus will be on colluvial aprons, which are slope wash deposits found along
fluvial and lacustrine terraces. These aprons are found in each of the study
regions. They typically record multiple episodes of slope erosion, they are
sensitive to changes in precipitation regime, and they are amenable to optical
(OSL) dating. At field sites in each region, episodes of erosion recorded by
slopewash deposits in colluvial aprons will be dated using both optical and
radiocarbon methods. These records will then be compared between
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project may help explain
episodic changes in hillslope erosion rates, sediment yield, and flood
magnitudes, recognized in previous work on Quaternary geomorphic systems. For
predicting response to future climate changes, it is particularly important to
understand the spatial scale and mechanisms of past precipitation pulses. This
project will contribute toward that goal by helping to constrain the actual
geographic extent of pulses of increased precipitation and sediment yield
presently identified in scattered localities. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;