* 0327198
* Changing Concentrations of Methyl Halides, Nonmethane Hydrocarbons, Organic Sulfur Species, and Alkyl Nitrates in Response to Iron Fertilization during SOFeX
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Donald Blake, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2006
* USD 170,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0327198&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine production
and consumption of volatile organic carbon (VOC) species, including methyl
halides, nonmethane hydrocarbons (NMHCs), alkyl nitrates, and dimethyl sulfide
(DMS), by phytoplankton and other microorganisms have an impact on stratospheric
ozone and global climate. Several VOCs were sampled from surface ocean water and
the lower atmosphere for the first time during an iron (Fe) enrichment
experiment. The Southern Ocean Iron Experiment (SOFeX) was conducted between
January-February 2002, and involved the research vessels Revelle, Melville, and
Polar Star. An extensive suite of chemical, physical, and biological
measurements were made in order to observe the effects of iron fertilization on
marine organisms and the extent of carbon sequestration in two high nutrient,
low chlorophyll (HNLC) regions in the Southern Ocean. Previous iron enrichment
experiments indicate that primary productivity is limited by trace amounts of
iron in certain HNLC regions. During SOFeX, two areas were fertilized, one north
of the Antarctic Polar Front and the other south of the front. Roughly one
quarter of the ocean.s surface waters are HNLC and may be iron limited. Much of
this area is in the Southern Ocean, making this region promising for reducing
global warming by sequestering additional oceanic carbon by iron
fertilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, researchers at the New Mexico
Institute of Mining and Technology have completed VOC analyses of 420 seawater
samples from SOFeX. With support from this project, they will complete the
remaining 98% of the analysis, so that each peak representing each compound on
2700 individual chromatograms can be visually checked, normalized to the
standards, and corrected for disequilibria in the equilibrator.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. and other governments are seeking solutions to
mitigate global warming. Some proposals involve climate engineering such as iron
fertilization. Prudence dictates that before any large-scale oceanic iron
fertilization takes place, its impact on the marine production of climatically
relevant compounds such as VOCs must be assessed. VOC results from the SOFeX
field study will better inform policy makers and society on the coupling between
the marine biosphere and the atmosphere. This knowledge is imperative in order
to more fully understand the climatic ramifications of proposed large-scale iron
fertilization/carbon sequestration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;