* 0327509
* CAREER: GeoWorks: A Multidisciplinary Design Studio Fostering Innovation and Invention in Geo-Construction through Research, Development and Education
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2003,12/31/2006
* Michael Mooney, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Richard J. Fragaszy
* 12/31/2006
* USD 271,271.00

9984378

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) research and education project
involves the formation and operation of GeoWorks, an organizational framework
within which research and teaching in geotechnical engineering formally brings
together students from civil engineering with other disciplines (mechanical
engineering, electrical engineering, materials science, and engineering physics)
to pursue innovation and invention in geotechnology, particularly geo-
construction. The mission of GeoWorks is to develop intelligence-based processes
and products in geo-construction by fusing state-of-the-art advances from other
disciplines with a soils knowledge base that is itself being advanced to
accommodate intelligence-based methods.

One initial focus of GeoWorks is the pursuit of intelligent vibratory soil
compaction, where the adoption of state-of-the-art feedback control,
microsensors, and microprocessors, coupled with a developed knowledge base of
the soil compaction process, provides a means whereby soil can be compacted in
an autonomous and optimal fashion. The research focuses on detailed
characterization of the vibratory soil compaction process, application of
microsensors to monitor compaction, and development of feedback architecture to
control soil compaction.

The GeoWorks studio, with its focus on the pursuit of innovation in geo-
construction, is intended to be offered as a regular part of the College of
Engineering curriculum. Participants of the GeoWorks studio include:
undergraduate and beginning graduate students from civil, mechanical, and
electrical engineering, as well as materials science and engineering physics;
Ph.D. student mentors from civil, mechanical, electrical, and materials science;
and graduate students from geotechnical engineering. Through teamwork, inquiry-
based discovery, and mentoring, multidisciplinary student groups develop problem
statements and propose innovative solutions. Student groups advance the proposed
innovation to the prototype stage, communicating progress and final reports, as
well as writing proposals for continued development and commercialization.

The GeoWorks framework builds synergy in research and teaching through true
integration; students develop innovative technologies and advance the
geotechnical knowledge base while immersed in active, inquiry-based discovery
and design. To promote diversity, GeoWorks seeks participation by minorities and
women, with the goal of increasing the percentage of minorities and women in
engineering.

