* 0327904
* GDSE/RES  Study of the Role of Gender in the Training and Career Paths of Women and Men in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Cecilia Marzabadi, Seton Hall University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 08/31/2008
* USD 387,814.00

Seton Hall University will determine factors influencing the differential
training and career patterns of women graduating in physics, engineering, and
mathematics. The study will permit a comparison of the academic development,
particularly at the graduate level, of women and men and will identify reasons
for their different career choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The path from a
bachelor's degree to a faculty position in STEM loses women every step of the
way. Women are less likely to be awarded a doctorate degree in chemistry,
physics, engineering, and mathematics than men. No research has examined
explicitly the reasons for this under-representation of women among doctoral
recipients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A questionnaire will be sent to doctoral
recipients who graduated during the years 1988-1992 from the top 10 ranked
universities (as identified by the National Research Council) in physics,
engineering, and mathematics. (A similar study of chemistry graduates is already
underway.) These elite universities were chosen because their graduates have the
greatest probability of being future leaders in science and technology in
America. Participants will be asked to evaluate in detail their graduate
training, identify the criteria used in making various choices, and state the
reasons for their career decisions. In addition, quantitative data will be
obtained for the first time regarding the number of employment positions sought
and secured by graduates. In all analyses, the study will identify any
statistically significant differences between the responses of women and men, as
well as the magnitude of any differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings will be
communicated widely and especially to the administrators at the elite academic
institutions in the sample. The findings will potentially form the basis for
thoughtful and critical discussion of the status of women, and will lead to
institutional self evaluation and reform at the elite schools and others
producing STEM graduates. The desired outcome is to decrease the under-
utilization of women in academe and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;