* 0327981
* GOALI:     Multiscale Simulations of the Surfactant Mediated Assembly of Magnetic Nanodots
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2006
* Sanat Kumar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Sanat K. Kumar Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Azar Alizadeh General Electric Company "GOALI: Multiscale Simulations of the
Surfactant Mediated Assembly of Magnetic Nano-dots"

The principal investigator will develop highly integrated multiscale simulation
tools to model the surfactant-mediated synthesis of magnetic nano-dots and their
macroscopic assemblies. These nano-materials (nano-particles) are of particular
interest to the industrial collaborators, General Electric, since they have
potential use in several applications, e.g., computer memory, drug delivery,
sensors and molecular imaging. The development of the multiscale simulation
approach is essential for two reasons. First, these synthesis methods involve
reactions and self-assembly which span a variety of length (and hence time)
scales, from the molecular (A and fs) to the macroscopic (m and s). Second,
since current synthesis routes were developed by empirical methods, predictive
strategies for creating materials with desired structures are missing. This is,
perhaps, the biggest bottleneck to the broad-based use of these novel materials.
The research will aim to integrate a variety of simulation tools, going from
quantum mechanics, to Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics to the mescoscopic in
order to go from details of molecular architecture to the structure and
prosperities of individual nanodots and then to their macroscopic assemblies. If
successful, this research will directly aid in the development of new, generally
applicable paradigms for synthesizing nanostructured materials which are
relevant to a variety of interdisciplinary contexts that cross the boundaries of
physics, chemistry, biology, and materials science.

The project involves collaboration with General Electric who will focus on novel
methodologies for the synthesis of monodispersed nano-particles. The particles
consist of inorganic maghemite cores ad surfactant or carbon based coatings.

The work could broadly impact the evolving area of nanomaterials since it
constitutes the first systematic effort to delineate the underlying molecular
facts which govern the nanoscale synthesis and assembly of these materials.
Further, it is proposed to develop multiscale simulation tools to understand the
macroscopic consequences of these nanoscale processes. The PI will interface
with experiments, which will provide data against which the simulations will be
initially validated. The simulations will ultimately provide a predictive means
of understanding these complicated issues. Based on these ideas the PI will
develop an interdisciplinary course at RPI on "Nanomaterials" (scheduled to be
taught in Spring '04) and couple with the Junior Science Museum in Troy, NY to
develop movies on nanomaterial for K-12 children.