* 0327455
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant - The Yalahau Regional Settlement Pattern Survey
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2005
* Scott Fedick, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2005
* USD 11,989.00

The Yalahau Regional Settlement Pattern Project, conducted by Jeffrey B. Glover
under the supervision of Dr. Scott L. Fedick, is investigating the socio-
political organization of the ancient Maya in the northeastern corner of
Mexico's Yucatan peninsula. The Yalahau region represents a unique water-rich
environment with extensive freshwater wetlands that is strikingly different from
the dry landscape that dominates the rest of the northern Yucatan peninsula.
This project will test four possible models of the spatial organization of
administrative centers within the region from the Late Preclassic period (100
B.C. - A.D. 350) to the Late Postclassic period (A.D. 1250 - 1521).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the synchronic and diachronic analysis of the
administrative system(s) operating within the Yalahau region, an understanding
of the processes associated with the emergence and eventual decline of socio-
political complexity at a regional scale will enrich the growing corpus of
research addressing socio-political complexity not only in the Maya area but
across the globe. By comparing hierarchical and heterarchical models of socio-
political organization in the analysis of the data, the researcher will clearly
highlight the strengths and weaknesses of both, and in the process, potentially
develop a model with cross-cultural applicability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To cover
the 5,000 km. of the region, the researcher will utilize two economical survey
methods, an informant-based survey and a survey of cleared fields adjacent to
rural roads. These survey techniques will provide a distribution of all of the
major sites within the region, the majority of the moderate sized sites, and a
sample of the small settlements. At these sites, surface collections of ceramic
material will be conducted, and at a sample of the large sites, off-structure
test excavation units will be placed. With these locational and chronological
data, the major architectural groups will be mapped at each site when present.
From these data two types of analyses will occur. First, a comparative database
will be constructed based on a volumetric assessment of a sample of the major
architecture as a means to measure the relative administrative power of each
site. Secondly, the spatial patterning of the major architecture will be used to
investigate intersite relations. All of these data are being contained in a
Geographic Information System (GIS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Yalahau region is
threatened today by a rapidly growing population that is a direct result of
Cancun's success as a vacation destination. In light of this threat, the
completion of the project will catalog the sites within the region and provide
INAH (National Institute of Anthropology and History) with important data for
the protection of this area's rich cultural patrimony. Aside from managing data,
the GIS will be used to generate a predictive model of as yet unidentified sites
within the region. The predictive model can be used by subsequent Mexican and
American scholars interested in the area, as well as aid INAH with further site
preservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stemming from the informant-based survey
technique, Mr. Glover is working closely with a number of indigenous Maya
communities. At the termination of the dissertation, visually accessible maps
and brief narratives about the archaeological resources found on their land will
be presented to each community so that they can better assess and manage their
cultural patrimony. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By funding this research, NSF will be
contributing to the preservation of non-renewable cultural patrimony as well as
helping provide a legacy of valuable educational tools in the form of a
predictive model, a comparative ceramic collection, and fieldwork training in
basic archaeological skills (survey and excavation) for future Mexican and
American scholars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;