* 0327776
* Discrimination of Hydrate and Diagenetic Methane Inputs to the Ocean with Measurements of Natural 14CH4
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Stanley Tyler, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2008
* USD 368,978.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0327776&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methane clathrate
hydrates are a major unknown in the present global methane budget. Independent
estimates of the global methane hydrate reservoir size indicate that it contains
1019 g of methane, equivalent to 2000-times the Earth's atmospheric methane
reservoir, or about 30% of the ocean DIC reservoir. Methane concentration,
oxidation rate, and stable isotope distributions in the Black Sea water column
indicate that methane turnover in the Black Sea is rapid (~20 y) and that
hydrates, which are known to be present in Black Sea sediments, are an important
water column methane source. Restricted circulation in the Black Sea allows
using it as a biogeochemical bucket to integrate methane inputs and to obtain an
estimate of the basal hydrate dissociation rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, researchers at the University of California - Irvine will attempt
measurements of natural 14CH4 to discriminate between hydrate (radiocarbon-dead)
methane and diagenetically-produced (modern or finite age) methane, increasing
our understanding of the dissociation of hydrates and the importance of basal
hydrate decomposition to the global methane budget. They will use the Cariaco
Basin as a hydrate-free comparison environment to provide a means of
understanding the multiple methane sources in the Black Sea and will undertake
parallel measurements of d13C-CH4, d2H-CH4, and 14CH4 there. Vent inputs will be
characterized with stable isotope and 14CH4 measurements on individual Black Sea
vents as well as vents from the western coast of North America and the Gulf of
Mexico. Finally, they will measure 14CH4 in waters in the Eastern Tropical North
Pacific to test the suggestion that the deeper zone of the methane maximum
present in this region may result from shelf seep and vent inputs. The low-
blank, low-background method already developed by the investigators will permit
measurement of 14CH4 in as little as 100 liters of seawater with a methane
concentration as low as 2nM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Methane
hydrates are under serious consideration as a possible future energy source. It
is important to have a specific, well-understood tracer like 14CH4 to assess
changes in natural hydrate fluxes as well as to assess potential losses
associated with commercial development. This project will involve one graduate
student and an undergraduate. &lt;br/&gt;