* 0327513
* A Time-Series Study of Ocean Climate Processes in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2010
* Roger Lukas, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 09/30/2010
* USD 2,829,554.00

This project focuses on observing and understanding ocean-climate related
processes in the North Pacific Ocean subtropical gyre. The funding will support
five years of continued shipboard observations of water properties and currents
in the vicinity of the Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT) deep-water Station ALOHA
to extend the time-series to 20 years, and to continue the high-quality support
of the biogeochemistry research component of HOT. Temperature, salinity and
velocity instruments will be placed on a NOAA-funded surface mooring to be
deployed at ALOHA to improve our temporal resolution of upper ocean processes. A
better spatial context for the time-series using the HOT observations in
conjunction with models and basin-scale data analysis products will be
developed. The scientific analyses focus on improving the description and
understanding of ocean climate variability, and on discerning the associated
impacts on ocean biogeochemistry and ecosystems. A particular goal is a better
understanding of the subduction and entrainment processes in relation to water
mass variability observed at ALOHA, including surface layer variations in
relation to air-sea interaction. The studies also include investigation of the
contributions of high frequency processes such as eddies and tidal mixing to the
slower evolution of the water masses within the North Pacific subtropical gyre.
The moored upper ocean measurements are essential to all of these objectives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The measurements and analyses from this project contribute
to the objectives of the ongoing US Global Change Research Program and the new
Climate Change Science Program, through the Climate Variability and
Predictability (CLIVAR) program and the Carbon Cycle Science program. These
programs aim to improve models of ocean variability as part of the coupled
climate system. Such improved models will be used for testing ideas about
coupled climate variability, for ocean and climate predictability studies, for
ocean and climate state assessments, for ocean observing system studies and,
ultimately, for forecasts of climate variations. This project will contribute to
the development of the ALOHA Observatory, which in turn will be a contribution
to the planned US Integrated Ocean Observing System, and helping to develop new
technology for sustained ocean observations. The project will contribute to the
education of a graduate student and provide training for several undergraduate
students working with the project. In addition, the investigator will work with
University of Hawaii and Rutgers University colleagues to support K-12 marine
science educational efforts. &lt;br/&gt;