* 0327497
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Charmonium Cross Sections in Heavy Ion Collisions
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Ted Barnes, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Robb M. Winter
* 09/30/2006
* USD 20,000.00

0327497&lt;br/&gt;Barnes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports international
research collaboration in nuclear physics by Professor Ted Barnes of the
University of Tennessee, Dr. Cheuk-Yin Wong of Oak Ridge National Laboratory and
a US graduate student. They are working with a Profesors Su Houng Lee and
Yongseok Oh of Yonsei University in Seoul, South Korea. They are focusing on
getting first principles understanding of the production cross sections of heavy
quark bound states("Quark-Gluon Plasmas") in heavy ion collisions. This will
enable them to test ideas about confinement in the high energy density matter
produced in heavy ion collisions. There is very little known about the
production of heavy quark bound states. They occur in both high-energy nuclear
physics and particle physics. The collaborators are addressing this theoretical
problem using several different theoretical models. The strongly collaborative
effort depends on complementary expertise in the US and Korean groups in nuclear
theory and hadronic models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the advent of the
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) at BNL, the nuclear physics community has
begun the exploration of a new frontier of high densities and temperatures in
the physics of strongly- interacting matter. One especially exciting prediction
is that a new state of matter, the "quark-gluon plasma" (QGP), should be formed
in central heavy-ion collisions, provided that sufficiently high energy
densities and temperatures are reached and maintained. A crucial problem that
has arisen in this field is the identification of "QGP signatures", that is,
observations that will confirm that a QGP was indeed produced. This
collaborative research addresses some of the additional "signatures" produced by
heavy ion collisions that would confound the identification of true QGP
signatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research addresses a very important issue in the study of the Quark-Gluon Plasma
phenomenon in nuclear physics. It strengthens the links between two very strong
research groups in the US and Korea that have complementary expertise. It also
enhances the training of young theorists in a frontier area of fundamental
physics, which is important to keep the field strong.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;