* 0327276
* Two-Section Gain- and Loss-Coupled DFB Lasers and Their Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Patrick LiKamWa, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 08/31/2008
* USD 240,000.00

0327276&lt;br/&gt;Li&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is aimed at
advancing the design and fabrication of self-pulsing multi-section gain- and
loss-coupled distributed feedback (DFB) lasers and demonstrating new
applications of these lasers. Specifically, the objectives of the proposed
research are:&lt;br/&gt;1)To develop the enabling technology for the optical
generation of millimeter-wave (MMW) signals (up to ) using self pulsing in
multi-section gain- and loss-coupled DFB lasers. &lt;br/&gt;2)To demonstrate
high-bit-rate (up to ) all-optical clock recovery.&lt;br/&gt;3)To realize all-
optical regeneration/format conversion of both amplitude and phase of optical
signals for future high-bit-rate long-distance optical transport.&lt;br/&gt;4)To
design, build and optimize MMW fiber-optic links for both uplinks and down
links, which can be used to simplify the architecture of base stations for
future broadband wireless networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of the proposal manifests in that the proposed activity will advance the
knowledge base and the technology base for optical communications in several
fronts. It will lead to a 160 Gb/s clock recovery technology for future 50Tb/s
per fiber transmission systems. Using optical injection locking in combination
with self pulsation to realize MMW fiber-optic uplinks for antenna remoting can
potentially circumvent limitations that prevented insertion of optical
technology for transmission of MMW signals. For the first time, we introduce the
concept of simultaneous amplitude and phase regeneration of carrier-suppressed
return-to-zero (CSRZ) signals. As optical transport technologies explore new
modulation formats that manipulate both amplitude and phase, such optical
regeneration techniques not only are intellectually stimulating and challenging
but also have practical applications. Fundamentally, this is an important first
step as this naturally leads to the question of whether optical technologies can
be used to regenerate both amplitude and phase for other modulation formats.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity has broader impacts on the optical
communications community and the society. When successfully carried out, the
proposed research will result in a technology option for building fiber-optic
backbones for future 60 GHz broadband wireless networks. This technology will
further enable advance in next generation optical transport and networking at 40
Gb/s and above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;