* 0327447
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Movements and Global Transformations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* John Burdick, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 08/31/2005
* USD 7,500.00

How do social movement organizations adapt to openings and constraints in their
environment? Do these adaptations increase chances for success? Much research
looks at conditions that allow movements to flourish; but far less attention has
focused on how their own work can enhance impact. This research will investigate
factors movement actors consider in planning, and the connection between
participant actions and results. The researcher will examine social movement
influence in a changing global environment through comparative case study of
three US anti-nuclear groups that make credible claims to having had measurable
impacts on legislation. These groups, the Shundahai Network in Nevada, the
Piedmont Peace Project in North Carolina, and the New Jersey Coalition for Peace
Action, have been selected for diverse ethnic and socio-economic composition, in
order to reflect the concerns of people with varied degrees of access to
decision-making and resources. This qualitative study uses interviews to
illuminate individuals' understanding of their issue and how they think through
their strategies; participant observation to reveal how they act on these ideas,
and give evidence of adaptations they do not verbalize; and focus groups to
uncover controversies and shared history. Analysis of current and past internal
documents, archival material and media coverage will clarify the groups'
messages, actions, and outcomes, and provide a check on the memories of the
participants. This project links theory of social movement outcomes with that of
political opportunity, while developing methodology to investigate cause and
effect relationships in complex social situations. It will have broad impact in
exploring social movements as voices of underrepresented peoples and as
institutions of popular education important to the functioning of a democracy.
Observations provided by this project will benefit society by providing
knowledge for organizational self-evaluation; for educating the American public
about resolving conflict and influencing government policy; and for working
towards a more equitable society. Results will have implications for a wide
range of social movement and community organizations beyond those studied.