* 0327189
* Is the Southern Ocean a Major Sink for Anthropogenic Carbon?
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Jorge Sarmiento, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2007
* USD 461,959.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0327189&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerical models
predict that the Southern Ocean is disproportionately important in the oceanic
uptake of anthropogenic carbon dioxide. For this reason, scientists from
Princeton University propose to evaluate the role of Southern Ocean in the
uptake of anthropogenic carbon. The investigators believe that the primary
mechanisms responsible for the large uptake of carbon in this region without
leaving a large in-situ inventory is lateral transport towards the north
associated with the formation of Sub-Antarctic Mode Water (SAMW) and Antarctic
Intermediate Water (AAIW). To attain this goal, this team of investigators plans
to determine how much anthropogenic carbon dioxide is found in the SAMW and
AAIW, identify the pathways by which anthropogenic carbon dioxide enters the
ocean and assess how the models simulate these pathways. The scientists
hypothesize that advection of waters along isopycnal surfaces that outcrop in
the Subantartic and Antarctic Zone is the most important pathway and suggests
that differences between the models arise largely from differences in the
forcing of this advection by the wind stress field in the Southern Ocean. To
test the hypothesis, the following tasks will be carried out: (1) evaluate and
reduce biases in the estimation of anthropogenic carbon dioxide and apply a new
water mass analysis technique to assign this to specific water masses; (2)
examine the mechanisms that determine the water mass distribution and
anthropogenic carbon dioxide burden by performing a set of model sensitivity
studies in which winds are varied in the Southern Ocean in both a level-
coordinate and new isopycnal circulation model; (3) quantitatively evaluate
model-data consistency by performing inverse calculations based on observed
inventories and model circulation fields; and (4) determine what types of field
measurements would be most appropriate for monitory future uptake and improving
our understanding of basic processes. Results from this study will improve our
understanding of the processes that determine the uptake of anthropogenic carbon
in the Southern Ocean&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;