* 0327877
* Adaptive Neural Network Architectures For Emission Control of Engines (TSE-03G)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* James Drallmeier, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 08/31/2008
* USD 516,361.00

The goal of this project is to provide the next generation emission controller
for engines with adaptation, optimization, and learning so as to achieve low NOx
and improved fuel economy. The controller will guarantee performance in the
presence of unknown nonlinearities, feedback delays, and is supported by a
rigorous design and mathematical framework. Specific objectives to support that
goal are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Develop a robust adaptive NN control scheme
for SI engines that would minimize the effect cyclic dispersion at very lean
operation (equivalence ratio =0.7) by selecting appropriate feedback
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Study and model the complex dynamics in
cyclic output for SI engines under the influence of high-levels of EGR.
Investigate potential for reducing NOx over 50% below current EGR
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Develop a robust adaptive critic NN EGR control
scheme that would minimize the effect of cyclic dispersion and would allow
satisfactory performance in low NOx regimes via appropriate feedback. Provide
methodology to integrate combustion stability with high levels of EGR in SI
engines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Simulate and verify the EGR and lean stability
controller performance on an experimentally validated model. Demonstrate the
controller schemes on a single cylinder engine in the
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. Investigate the complex dynamics in output
for diesel engines under the influence of high levels of EGR with an objective
of reducing the NOx over 50% with minimal particulate matter. Provide
recommendations about the applicability of the proposed EGR controllers for
diesel engines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These projects will be pursued in
collaboration with organizations such as Caterpillar, Inc. and Oak Ridge
National Laboratory. These areas of research could lead to significant advances
in the development of advanced control schemes for non-strict feedback nonlinear
systems such as next generation spark ignition, diesel as well as nontraditional
engines such as homogeneous charge compression ignition, direct injection spark
ignition and hybrid engines (electric power and gasoline).&lt;br/&gt;