* 0327019
* Collaborative Research: A new Account of Souther Ocean Waters: Characteristics, Variability, Production
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Thomas Whitworth, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 08/31/2006
* USD 293,000.00

A recently quality-controlled database of hydrographic stations collected by the
World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) will be used to create a high-
resolution climatology for the region south of 25 S. A fine-scale volumetric
census of Southern Ocean waters will be created based on the climatology and
objectively mapped property fields. Regions of high variance in the climatology
and volumetric census will be inspected using profile data as possible sites of
temporal and mesoscale variability. Estimates of water mass transformations and
mixing rates associated with the production of new deep and bottom Antarctic
waters over the shelf/slope regime will result from the quantitative analysis of
classic tracer distributions, volumetric census data, and mean cross-slope
velocity fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:&lt;br/&gt;A collection
of maps and vertical sections will be produced as static figures that can be
browsed by visitors to our web site to illustrate the water mass structure and
circulation of the Southern Ocean. An interactive tool will allow users to
choose particular datasets or subsets, different grids and correlation lengths,
and several plotting options to generate custom figures. These features may be
useful as classroom aids in the teaching of descriptive oceanography and mapping
techniques. The gridded climatology and census data will be made available on
the web site for use by other researchers. A high quality version of the figures
will also be produced for inclusion in a printed version of the WOCE
atlases.&lt;br/&gt;