* 0327106
* Collaborative Research:     Establishing Marine Varve Thickness as a Proxy for Annual Climate Variability and PDO Oscillations, Hubbard Glacier Field Study
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Ellen Cowan, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 07/31/2006
* USD 43,887.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Cowan&lt;br/&gt;OPP-0327106&lt;br/&gt;Powell
&lt;br/&gt;OPP-0327107 &lt;br/&gt;Jaeger&lt;br/&gt;OPP-: 0326926
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a collaborative proposal by Principal
Investigators at the Appalachian State University, Northern Illinois University
(NIU), and the University of Florida (UF). A major goal of Arctic science is to
quantify the impact of recent climate change on threatened ecosystems and native
cultures. In Alaska, this climate forcing by North Pacific (Pacific Decadal
Oscillation (PDO); Aleutian Low Pressure (ALPI), and Arctic Oscillation (AO)
climate systems is most strongly manifested in decadal-long shifts in Arctic
(60degrees-90degreesN) air temperature and precipitation. This has led to
pronounced changes in regional oceanography and noticeably in the accelerated
melting of Alaskan glaciers, which has been shown to have a global impact on
sea-level rise and perhaps on regional freshwater input to the Bering Sea from
the Gulf of Alaska. However, the timing and forcing of glacial melting cannot be
established, because there are few annual records of meltwater discharge
directly from large cliff-calving glaciers to test how glacier melt varies in
response to high-frequency climate change over the last two
decades.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This research will generate annually-
resolved climate records in an area where forcing by the PDO and ALPI is
strongest and the impact is likely to affect threatened Arctic ecosystems by
establishing a correlation between marine varve thickness and local
meteorological forcing. Analysis of the proxy climate record at Hubbard Glacier,
the largest tidewater glacier in North America, will allow evaluation of what
climate variables or indices most closely correlate with annual release of
sediment and meltwater. The Hubbard is an ideal glacier for a field study
because it is relatively stable, is located in a climatically sensitive region,
and there is a long (50+ year) monthly record of local climatology in Yakutat,
AK. Annual varves form in proglacial basins adjacent to large tidewater glacier
systems along the Gulf of Alaska coast and consist of summer deposition of
meltwater-produced laminated mud following winter deposition of a diamicton
produced by iceberg rafting. The hypothesis to be tested is that the thickness
of the laminated unit is a proxy for summer meltwater discharge from Hubbard
Glacier. Preliminary analysis of varve thickness shows a correlation between
PDO, ALPI, and sedimentation rate, such that the negative (cold-phase) PDO index
correlates with higher winter snowfall leading to increased meltwater discharge
later in the summer melt season. After a 1989 regime shift, the varve record
also correlates with higher summer precipitation, a characteristic of the
post-1989 ALP index. By using these relationships, a 20-year long hypothetical
varve record has been produced for testing by collecting ~30 piston cores from
Disenchantment Bay. Sedimentological and radiochemical techniques will establish
varve thickness and chronology. High resolution seismic reflection profiles will
be collected to increase spatial coverage and correlation, which will address
how varve thickness varies as a function of distance from the sediment source.
&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impacts will include improved understanding of the role
of glacial melting in influencing the freshwater discharge to the Gulf of
Alaska, which plays a critical role in the health of fisheries within the Gulf
of Alaska and Bering Sea. This proposal also emphasizes collaboration among
researchers at various stages of their careers, including five undergraduate
students, and several graduate students at UF and NIU, to train students in the
earth sciences. This project will also contribute to citizen outreach by
establishing a partnership with a regional science center in Western North
Carolina to produce a photographic display and a lecture series to communicate
Arctic climate change as well as methods used to study tidewater glaciers to an
adult audience.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Two of the reviewers are not convinced
that the results of this project will be of large scale significance. They
realize that understanding the recent record of meltwater discharge as a
function of specific environmental variables is important, as described on page
C-10 for example, but this just does not seem important enough. They think that
a longer term perspective should have been a stronger and more prominent element
of this proposal - with perhaps a smaller effort on the short record and a
greater effort on longer records. While the short record is critical for
developing the tools to interpret older records, they recommend that this be
taken into consideration should this project be funded for only a single field
season. Perhaps this should have been written as a three year project, with two
field seasons, and more discussion of why and how a longer term data set would
help us put modern day glacial retreat into perspective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;