* 0327188
* Collaborative Research: The Influence of Surface Gradients on Gas Exchange during the SOLAS--ANZ Experiment
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Peter Minnett, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2006
* USD 274,997.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0326814 / OCE-0327188&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
SOLAS initiative has as its goal to quantify biogeochemical-physical atmosphere-
ocean interactions and determine how this coupled system affects climate and
environmental change. One of the key objectives is accurate quantification of
air-sea gas transfer rates. The lack of field observations leaves large gaps in
our understanding of gas fluxes, and the most urgent region requiring
observations is the Southern Oceans. Models have shown that this region has a
large potential effect on the ocean carbon sink over the next 60 years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project researchers at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution and the Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric
Sciences (University of Miami) will participate in the SOLAS-ANZ (Surface Ocean
Lower Atmosphere Study - Australia/ New Zealand) gas transfer experiment in the
Southern Ocean in November, 2003. The SOLAS- ANZ cruise will be a bio-
perturbation experiment involving the addition of iron to stimulate a
phytoplankton bloom. The corresponding modification to the gas transfer will be
quantified with the dual tracer technique, as well as micrometeorological
methods. The Woods Hole and RSMAS team involvement in the expedition will be
through the deployment of the SkinDeEP profiler and the M-AERI
spectroradiometer. SkinDeEP is equipped with high-resolution temperature and
conductivity sensors to investigate microstructure from a depth of 10 m to the
surface. The team will extend the measurement capability of SkinDeEP with the
addition of oxygen and PAR sensors. The M-AERI spectroradiometer provides highly
accurate ocean skin temperature measurements. Participation in this bio-
perturbation experiment will allow them to obtain estimates of the influence of
temperature on gas fluxes. The high-resolution oxygen profiles will allow
quantification of biological production and consumption in the surface layer.
The PAR measurements will also provide an indicator of biological activity
through the absorption of light. These measurements will be conducted both
inside and outside the fertilized patch. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The international
collaboration established through this project will allow the transfer of
knowledge between researchers from the US and New Zealand. The research team
expects to make daily updates of the cruise available on a web site, in a
similar fashion to the recently NSF-funded SOFeX experiment, thereby allowing
the public insight into the daily activities of an oceanographic field
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;