* 0327502
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  A Multiscale Analysis of Natural and Human Influences on the Variability of Subalpine Forest Fire History in Rocky Mountain National Park
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2003,04/30/2005
* Thomas Veblen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2005
* USD 11,957.00

Fire is a major ecological agent in the forests of the western United States,
and as a result, it important for forest ecosystem preservation and management.
Knowledge of forest fire characteristics of frequency, size, and severity,
collectively referred to as the fire regime, is essential to understand and
manage western forest landscapes. Researchers conduct fire history research by
reconstructring past fires in order to identify fire regime specifics for a
particular forest type or zone. Whereas detailed knowledge of the fire regime
exists for some forest types and zones of the western United States, in the
subalpine (higher elevation) forests of the Southern Rocky Mountains ranging
from southern Wyoming to northern New Mexico, relatively little is know about
the fire regime and the impact of human activities on the fire regime. The
objectives of this doctoral dissertation research project are to address the
following questions for subalpine forests: (1) What is the natural frequency,
size and severity of fire events? (2) What are the influences on the fire regime
at different scales, and what are the resulting spatial variations in the fire
regime? (3) How and where have human fire suppression practices altered the
natural fire regime? To address these questions, the student will combine
dendroecological (tree-ring) and geographic information system-based methods to
reconstruct the last approximately 400 years of fire history for six subalpine
forest drainage basins in Rocky Mountain National Park. Spatial and temporal
variations in this fire history record will be examined to determine variations
at different scales as a result of influences from local topography, regional
climate, and human land-use practices. These multi-scale analyses will help
define the natural range of variability of fire in subalpine forests, the
relative importance of influences at different scales, and human impacts on this
forest ecosytem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will advance
knowledge about subalpine forest ecosystem dynamics, which is central to forest
ecosystem management. Concern over excessive forest fuel accumulation as a
result of fire suppression activities combined with the extensive, severe
burning of the 2002 fire season and a recent dramatic increase in human
population in the forested areas of the region has resulted in demand for forest
management action to achieve goals of forest restoration and fire hazard
mitigation. To accurately identify forest areas in need of various management
actions and in order to focus limited forest management resources, detailed fire
history information is needed. In the context of planning forest fire
restoration and mitigation projects, this project will provide important
information for decision making for both Rocky Mountain National Park and the
surrounding Arapaho-Roosevelt National Forest. This project will provide an
opportunity for the scientific development of two undergraduate students who
will work on the project as research assistants. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;