* 0328221
* ACS Symposium on the Chemistry of Global Climate Change
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Jeffrey Steinfeld, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard D. Foust
* 12/31/2004
* USD 13,650.00

PI: Steinfield Institution: Massachusetts Institute of Technology

With this award, the Special Projects Office of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting Dr. Jeffrey Steinfield of the Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, who will organize and conduct a symposium entitled "The
Chemistry of Global Change". Dr. Joseph Francisco of Purdue University will be
co-organizer of the symposium. The symposium will be a Presidential Event at the
226th American Chemical Society (ACS) Meeting, Sept. 8, 2003, in New York City.
The goal of the symposium is to discuss the current state of climate science;
modeling and greenhouse gas measurements; coupling between climate change and
atmospheric chemical cycles involving ozone, aerosols and oxidizing radicals;
technology options for energy production in a "greenhouse constrained" world;
and the viewpoint from developing countries. The symposium will also discuss
communication and perception of this complex set of issues among professional
chemists, the public, students, and policymakers. The speakers, panelists and
invited guests include minorities, women, and representatives of developing
countries from universities, industry, and government laboratories having
expertise in environmental science, atmospheric science, climate modeling,
energy economics and communications. The symposium organizers plan to make the
presentations available to students, teachers and the press.