* 0328364
* PEET: Systematic Monography of the Gnomoniaceae (Ascomycetes)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2010
* James White, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 12/31/2010
* USD 732,968.00

The ascomycete order Diaporthales includes saprobic and plant
pathogenic&lt;br/&gt;fungi of which the most notorious is the chestnut blight
fungus that altered the landscape of eastern North America. Forest and landscape
diseases caused by members of the included family Gnomoniaceae include oak
dieback, cherry leaf scorch, sycamore canker, ash anthracnose, dogwood
anthracnose, butternut canker, and many others. These microfungi include many
serious emerging and invasive plant pathogens, thus knowledge of their taxonomic
affinities is crucial for rapid detection, control of the diseases they cause,
determinination of their origin and close phylogenetic relatives, and prevention
of future introductions. Although of considerable economic importance, fungi in
the Diaporthales have not received modern monographic treatment nor have their
related asexual fungi been included in their limited literature. A monographic
account of this understudied group is needed to provide the taxonomic framework
for understanding the evolution of invasive asexual fungi such as the causes of
dogwood anthracnose and butternut canker. &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
Partnership for Enhancing Expertise in Taxonomy (PEET) project is to monograph
the ten major genera and related fungi of the ascomycete family Gnomoniaceae,
order Diaporthales, including their derived asexual species using a combination
of morphological and molecular approaches. The three groups of genera of the
Gnomoniaceae will be studied as separate but interrelated projects. Several
hundred living cultures and reference specimens are available for each group
with additional material to be acquired through collecting and collaborating
with scientists throughout the world. The research approach involves examination
of macroscopic and microscopic characters using high quality light and scanning
electron microscopy. A digital image analysis system will be used for measuring,
recording, and analyzing microscopic characters as well as for capturing
diagnostic images of spore-related structures. Morphological data and molecular
DNA sequence data (nuclear ribosomal DNA regions and other genomic markers) will
be used to develop hypotheses about lineages within the&lt;br/&gt;Gnomoniaceae.
These hypotheses will be tested using DNA sequence analyses of additional genes,
specifically RNA polymerase B subunits 1 and 2, translation elongation factor 1
alpha, mitochondrial ATP6 and mitochondrial ribosomal DNA genes individually and
in combination. Monographic accounts of these fungi will be published in
mycological journals and placed on the Internet along with interactive
identification keys supported by descriptions and
illustrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;