* 0328473
* Collaborative Research: Seafloor Sounding in Polar and Remote Regions
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Larry Mayer, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 08/31/2005
* USD 26,835.00

P.I. Rognstad (UH) Proposal #: 0328252&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title:
Collaborative Research: Seafloor Sounding in Polar and Remote Regions&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to develop a Seafloor Sounding in Polar and Remote
Regions (SSPARR) System that will enable seafloor depth soundings to be
collected in regions rarely or never visited by ships. As proposed, the system
will consist of a large number of expendable, battery-powered, surface drifting
buoys, each containing a simple single beam depth sounder, a GPS navigation
receiver, and a bi-directional satellite link. The system developed will also
include the shore infrastructure to monitor the buoys, control their function
and receive sounding data, perform quality checks, and archive the sounding
data. The PIs will develop a system whereby the buoys could be deployed over the
side of a ship or by air. They also propose that the SPARR buoy, enabled by the
shore site, could be an aid to navigation for underwater vehicles, in which case
the buoy will transmit its own GPS derived location via acoustic telemetry and
these positions could be recorded by the underwater vehicle to aid in track
reconstruction or for use in real-time navigation. This function is expected to
be of particular use in remote areas where unmanned underwater vehicles may be
employed for seafloor surveys. Buoys will be strategically deployed where
prevailing currents will carry them into areas where depth soundings are
required, and where ships seldom travel. The lifetime of a SSPARR buoy will be
dependent upon repetition rate of acoustic and electromagnetic transmissions,
but it is estimated that a typical buoy will have a lifetime of up to four years
in echo-sounding mode and possibly only one year as a navigation aid. The PIs
envision the development of SSPARR in three phases: A technology assessment and
demonstration phase; full scale engineering development with parallel shore site
implementation; and pilot buoy production. Test and evaluation efforts are
inherent in all three phases. This proposal is the first of the three phases,
technology assessment and demonstration. This effort will entail development of
prototype hardware for testing in laboratory and at sea; and optimization of
sonar parameters and communication protocols. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;