* 0328361
* Request to Support a Strategic Planning Workshop for the Organization of Biological Field Stations to be held in October 2003, Bodega Marine Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2003,12/31/2005
* Susan Lohr, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 12/31/2005
* USD 42,768.00

The Organization of Biological Field Stations (OBFS) has received support for a
workshop for to develop a strategic plan for the organization. The current
national scientific, political and financial climate requires that an
organization such as the OBFS be proactive, comprehensive and efficient with
regard to meeting the needs of its member institutions. Necessary tasks for
completing the strategic plan include: 1) define the mission and vision of the
OBFS, 2) identify goals and objectives that could be accomplished
organizationally, 3) prioritize the goals, 4) set the prioritized goals in a
10-year timeline, 5) attach cost figures to the timeline, and 6) suggest
strategies for accomplishing the goals within the time frame and budget. The
strategic planning workshop will be held in fall 2003 with 18-20 participants. A
web-based survey will solicit input from all institutional and individual
members regarding appropriate and reasonable mission, vision, goals and
objectives for the OBFS prior to this workshop. At the 2003 Annual Meeting in
September a facilitated discussion will prioritize the information gathered from
the survey effort. The survey report and prioritization will be provided to
workshop participants before the fall meeting. The product of the workshop will
be an "OBFS Strategic Plan", available via the Internet and also as hard copy.
The strategic plan would be used by the organization to identify efforts that
should be undertaken to best serve member institutions. The OBFS seeks to assist
member stations to the maximum extent feasible in order to offer the best
possible field research and educational opportunities and to sustain the role of
field study facilities at a level of recognition congruent with the importance
these facilities play in the national scientific agenda.