* 0328378
* Collaborative Research: Theory and Simulation Study for Communicating Autonomous Underwater Vehicles
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Tzyh-Jong Tarn, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Yu Oh
* 08/31/2008
* USD 285,000.00

Robotics and Computer Vision Program

ABSTRACT

Proposal #: 0328378PI: Tarn, Tzyh-JongWashington University Proposal #:
0328387PI: An, EdgarFlorida Atlantic Univ

It is recognized that successful operation of a network of AUVs rests upon
efficient communication in the network. This proposal proposes a procedure for
constructing controllers that limit and route information flow in a network of
AUVs. Particular attention is paid to the objectives of maximizing throughput
and bandwidth efficiency while minimizing power consumption. The proposed
research intends to (i) Create a mathematical model for facilitating analytical
study of communication problems for a network of AUVs, (ii) Adopt a receding
horizon control approach to obtain a piecewise continuous optimal controller for
the communication network, and (iii) Testing and evaluating of the obtained
results.

The major merits of this proposed research effort include (i) Addressing a
fundamental challenge in distributed and co-operative control for a group of
underwater vehicles, (ii) Creating a rigorous mathematical model for
facilitating analytical study of communication problems for a network of AUVs
rather than simply performing experimental study. The results of this research
effort will broadly impact not only the successful operation of a network of
AUVs, but also different areas of science and society. The outcome of the
proposed research will be genetic. It can be applied to other engineering
systems that can be modeled by differential and difference equations. Therefore,
the proposed research will significantly enhance our general understanding about
dynamics and control of a distributed complex system, and will have a specific
impact to the U.S. Navy in terms of their Future Naval Capabilities in research
and development.