* 0328881
* Location-based Information Access in Pervasive Computing Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Wang-Chien Lee, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Griffin
* 08/31/2008
* USD 265,000.00

Location-based Information Access in Pervasive Computing
Environments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Location-based spatial queries (LBSQs) refer
to a set of spatial queries that retrieve information based on the current
locations of the users. Due to the unrestricted mobility of users in the
pervasive computing environments, the LBSQs is distinct from the traditional
spatial queries. For example, a traveller may issue a query "find me the three
nearest restaurants". The answer to this query is dependent on the location
where the traveller receives the query results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this research project is to investigate new ways of indexing and caching
spatial data to support processing of LBSQs in pervasive computing and to
validate the methods obtained from this project via analysis, implementation,
and simulations. The emphasis of the project is on methods that are particularly
suitable for wireless data broadcast. A list of LBSQs, including point query,
window query, nearest neighbor (NN) search, k nearest neighbor (KNN) search,
continuous nearest neighbor (CNN) search, spatial join, and complex queries is
studied in this project. Fundamental issues faced by all the spatial indexes and
caching schemes (such as large index search space, large index size, linear
streaming property of wireless data broadcast, continuous movement and requests
of mobile users, and cache replacement/invalidation) are tackled. This research
result will have significant impacts on advancing the fields of spatial
databases and pervasive computing. The proposed research activities will be
closely integrated with the PI's educational goals and activities at both of the
undergraduate and graduate levels. The developed techniques and experimental
data will be made available in a timely manner by means of a website and
publication in multi- and interdisciplinary conferences, workshops, and
journals. In addition, scientific and engineering presentations will be given to
the broader community, including the public or industry, where possible.
Finally, the results and experiences obtained in this research have many
possible applications in location-based services, e.g., those based on the
recently announced SPOT technology and directband network. Publication,
technical reports, software and experimental data can be accessed at the project
web site http://www.cse.psu.edu/pda/LBSQ