* 0328019
* CO2-Enhanced Aqueous Extraction for Benign Separation of Reaction Products
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Charles Eckert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2005
* USD 250,465.00

Eckert, Charles A., et al. GA Tech Res Corp - GIT

"CO2 Enhanced Aqueous Extraction for Benign Separation of Reaction Products"

Separation and product purification are crucial for environmentally benign and
economically attractive chemical processes. In this project, it will be shown
that the thermodynamic properties of CO2 can modify phase boundaries and
distribution coefficients to provide benign and efficient separation of reaction
products and recycle of homogeneous catalysts. These processes will prevent
pollution both by making fewer undesirable side products as well as by reducing
water and energy needed for catalyst recycle.

CO2 is miscible with most organics but virtually immiscible with water; also it
is a powerful antisolvent in the organics. It has often been used in this manner
for particle production or for fractional crystallization, but these
applications require a saturated solution. The PIs propose to use it in
conjunction with aqueous extraction to enhance recovery from more dilute organic
solutions. The system proposed here can operate effectively even in dilute
solutions.

The PIs will show that systems containing water plus an organic where the
addition of CO2 will result in significant absorption of CO2 into the organic
only. This can achieve phase separation of a miscible organic/water mixture, or
change drastically distribution coefficients in a two-phase organic/water
system. As such this makes possible reactions between hydrophobic and
hydrophilic moieties, with facile separation and purification after reaction. In
addition it provide for benign recycle of catalysts which may be expensive
and/or toxic.

This research will show the advantages of novel solvent systems and will develop
the thermodynamic data and phase equilibrium correlations needed to implement
these systems.

Broader Impact: The group proposing this work is a diverse joint Chemical
Engineering - Chemistry team with extensive industrial partners. This format is
especially advantageous for both multidisciplinary education and for technology
transfer. The results will be both the education of superior
chemical/environmental scientists and engineers, as well as amelioration of
substantial pollution by current and future solvent-based processes.

