* 0328347
* Doctoral Dissertation:  Ceramic Vessel Circulation in Iron Age Moab (Jordan): A Regional Archaeometric Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2005
* Bruce Routledge, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2005
* USD 11,996.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Bruce Routledge, Benjamin W. Porter will
investigate the circulation of ceramic vessels in Iron Age (1250 -500 BC) Moab
(central Jordan) using archaeometric techniques (petrography and Instrumental
Neutron Activation Analysis (INAA)). Currently, a scholarly consensus assumes
that Moab did not evidence levels of social complexity befitting evolutionary
definitions of archaic states. Before any such characterization should be made,
however, an investigation exploring Moab's political economy is required. At
present, scholars argue that Moab's elites remained too weak to orient local
economic practices towards Dhiban, the polity's administrative capital. Instead,
production, distribution, and consumption practices are presumed to have been
dispersed and locally organized on a small-scale. However, archaeological
evidence for intensive agricultural production, specialized ceramic vessel
production, and marked social differentiation, especially in the later half of
the Iron II period, suggests that 'Moabite" economic practices are not well
explained by assumptions linking decentralization and relative underdevelopment.
Therefore, by investigating shifting production, exchange, and consumption
practices this project will make an important contribution to our understanding
of both Iron Age Moab and economic and political diversity in complex societies
of the distant past.

This research proposal investigates these issues during two volatile periods of
social change (the Iron Age IIB and the IIC periods), using a model of material
culture circulation that considers both production sources and consumption
contexts in order to determine shifts in economic practices over time. NSF
funding will permit a four-week field season at ancient Dhiban, Moab's capital,
where the city's elite residency will be excavated. Forthcoming data will be
subjected to petrographic, INAA, and Radiocarbon analysis in order to
reconstruct the origin and production methods of pottery vessels, and to secure
absolute dates for their deposition at Dhiban. This in turn will allow the
reconstruction of local trading and consumption practices and their change over
time.

Conclusions will be presented in published articles, a monograph, and scholarly
presentations, encouraging the further use of archaeometric procedures in
archaeological research. A regional petrographic and INAA dataset will be
generated from this research and broadly distributed to scholars for their own
research. Several public lectures and newspaper articles in Jordan will
circulate knowledge of Moab and ancient economic practices to Arabic-speaking
communities, encouraging local involvement in site interpretation and
presentation.

Broadly considered, this research addresses the relationship between the economy
and society at a time when this relationship is changing rapidly on a global
scale. Archaeology's long-term perspective is, therefore, absolutely vital; not
only to illustrate how humanity has arrived at its present hyper-connected
condition; but also to remember the many different ways that humans have made,
used, and acquired objects as a product of their situated historical and
cultural context. It is in this final point that the investigation of the
historically remote Middle Eastern polity of Moab finds its greatest
significance.