* 0328930
* Visualization/MASSIVE: Multiresolution, Adaptive, Subdivision Surfaces for Interactive Visualization and Exploration
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Hong Qin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 08/31/2006
* USD 350,002.00

One fundamental research challenge of advanced computational science is to aid
scientists, researchers, engineers, and general users to gain a better
understanding of large-scale datasets acquired from either computer simulations
or real-world experiments. Therefore, it demands better modeling, analysis, and
visualization tools that can reveal the insight from raw datasets and facilitate
the interpretation of high-level knowledge. Towards this goal, the technical
approach in this multi-disciplinary project is to develop novel algorithmic and
computational techniques founded upon the principle of the deformable modeling
paradigm for manipulating, simulating, visualizing, and processing any large-
scale, complex dataset, hence leading to a better understanding of the higher-
level, more meaningful information hidden&lt;br/&gt;within raw data subject to
uncertainty and noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research initiative aims to
develop new theoretic, algorithmic, computational, and software techniques
within the mathematically rich and broadly applicable deformable models
paradigm, with an ambitious&lt;br/&gt;goal to further revolutionize deformable
models and promote them as a valuable visualization and exploration tool. The
intellectual merit of the proposed research is the unique technical approach of
developing a&lt;br/&gt;suite of novel deformable models and presenting an
integrated methodology for modeling and visualizing both complicated geometric
information and arbitrarily, unknown topological structure in&lt;br/&gt;large-
scale, complex datasets. The essence of our novel deformable models is
multiresolution, level-of-detail (LOD), and subdivision geometry whose topology
is also dynamically adaptive subject to variational principles (VPs) and partial
differential equations (PDEs). Through an array of research and education
activities, this investigation aims to demonstrate that the novel deformable
models are not only a powerful modeling, rendering, and simulation tool for
visual information processing, but that they can potentially serve as a general
computational technology to aid in new scientific exploration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meanwhile, we will incorporate the newly-developed theory
and algorithms into our graduate curricula in computer science, applied
mathematics, and statistics of SUNY at Stony Brook. These curricula will expose
graduate students to a novel perspective on visual computing based on deformable
models, which will significantly improve their problem-solving skills in an
interdisciplinary context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;