* 0328594
* Function-valued Traits in Natural Populations: Variation, Selection, and Evolution
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Richard Gomulkiewicz, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 09/30/2009
* USD 2,129,468.00

An award has been made to Washington State University under the direction of
Richard Gomulkiewicz and Patrick Carter to develop ways to analyze complex
traits. Other personnel involved in the project are: Jay Beder (University of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee), George Gilchrist (College of William and Mary),Nancy
Heckman (University of British Columbia),Joel Kingsolver and Steve
Marron(University of North Carolina),Mark Kirkpatrick (University of Texas),
Scott Pletcher (Baylor College of Medicine),Johanna Schmitt (Brown University).
Biologists have a rich array of quantitative tools for analyzing the genetics
and evolution of traits, provided the traits can be described by one or a few
measurements. However, many complex traits of central importance in basic and
applied biology are defined quantitatively by mathematical functions, and few
methods exist for their analysis. These function-valued traits include gene
expression profiles, life history patterns, two- and three-dimensional
morphological shapes, and phenotypic responses to continuous environmental
gradients. Empiricists are becoming increasingly interested in function-valued
traits, but their studies have generated an expanding range of unresolved
practical and theoretical questions. To address these issues, this award will
integrate approaches from several disciplines, including statistics,
mathematical modeling, and biology. Specifically, the work will lead to a
comprehensive framework of statistical tools and mathematical models for
analyzing function-valued traits. The framework will be used to address major
questions in seven model empirical systems that span a broad spectrum of
natural, field, and laboratory systems. These investigations will produce an
extensive set of empirical results for new and existing data, statistical
methods, and mathematical theory. An easy to use software package will also be
developed for biologists whose research involves questions about variation,
selection, and evolution of function-valued traits.&lt;br/&gt;Expected broader
impacts: Methodologies developed in this proposal can be applied to any area of
biology concerned with variation of complex traits. Besides evolutionary
biology, this includes applied fields such as medical genetics, agriculture,
wildlife management, global change, and conservation genetics. The scope of this
project would include molecular, quantitative, and ecological genetics in plant
and animal systems, statistical analysis, and mathematical modeling. As such,
the proposed crosscutting research and training strategy will provide an
outstanding opportunity to train undergraduates, graduate students, post-docs,
and established researchers who span a wide range of scientific fields and
approaches in virtually all the skills of contemporary evolutionary
biology.&lt;br/&gt;