* 0328797
* Design Guidelines for Learner-Centered Scaffolding on Handheld Computers
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2009
* Christopher Quintana, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2009
* USD 447,602.00

Many of today's educational standards, such as those for science education, call
for student use of computational tools for doing substantive inquiry-based
activities to develop a better understanding of science practices. Combating the
reality of poor student-to-computer ratio in schools and occasional access to
technology, handheld computers (sometimes referred to as PDAs) offer an
intriguing, more pervasive solution to the computer access problem given their
increasing functionality and decreasing costs. However, technology aimed at
learning must also be supportive of learner needs and be designed from a
learner-centered perspective to develop scaffolds for those tools, with software
features (e.g., prompts, process maps) that physically realize literature-based
conceptual scaffolding strategies (e.g., "visualize complex tasks") aimed at
supporting learners to mindfully do and learn complex new activities and
content. This project explores the design and assessment of effective scaffolds
for handheld-based software tools in the context of science education. While a
significant research community has explored desktop-based scaffolds, we lack
similar design information for handheld-based scaffolds. User interface design
decisions for desktop computers do not necessarily "scale down" to handheld
computers due to differences in screen size, input methods, processor speed,
etc., so new design guidelines are needed to develop handheld-based scaffolds.
In this study the PIs will engage in an established learner-centered design
methodology to design scaffolds for four handheld-based science tools. They will
classroom test those tools in Detroit middle schools, and assess the impact of
those scaffolds on student science work. Design guidelines will be coupled with
assessment about the "effects with" the scaffolds (i.e., how do students work
with the individual scaffolds to do their work?) and the "effects of" the
scaffolds (i.e., what did students learn after using the scaffolded tools?). The
main outcome will be to develop and articulate design guidelines about scaffolds
for handheld computers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader
impacts of the proposed work are: to impact HCI research by shedding light on
effective and ineffective user interface decisions for the "non-desktop"
computational devices that are becoming more prevalent, and also by distilling a
set of design guidelines that articulate different scaffolding approaches for
handheld tools and assessment information (from classroom testing) describing
the impact those scaffolds had on learners; to advance discovery while promoting
teaching, training and learning by integrating research activities into science
education and teaching at the K-12 level: to broaden participation of under-
represented groups by bringing innovative technologies to under-represented
classrooms in the Detroit Public Schools; and to enhance scientific and
technological understanding by disseminating the resulting software, curricula,
and assessment information to teachers, school board members, and other
educational policy makers.&lt;br/&gt;