* 0328468
* Simulation Studies of Macromolecular Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Daniel Kroll, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2005
* USD 106,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational research on complex fluids. Complex
fluids such as amphiphilic mixtures, colloidal suspensions, and polymer
solutions, mixtures, and melts, are characterized by structure on mesoscopic
length-scales - ranging from nano-to micrometers- and energy scales comparable
to the thermal energy. The mesoscale structures of these systems endow them with
many interesting and unique features, and they are widely used in the
processing, chemical and energy industries. It is therefore important to explore
ways in which their properties can be modeled numerically to predict behavior,
test physical theories, and provide feedback for the design and analysis of
experiments and industrial applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These systems
present a challenge for conventional methods of simulation due to the presence
of disparate time-scales in their dynamics. The unique problems associated with
the modeling and analysis of their behavior has created the need for new
simulation techniques that overcome some of the difficulties associated with the
use of atomistic molecular dynamics simulations and macroscopic approaches based
on the numerical solution of continuum equations. The modeling of these systems
requires the use of "coarse-grained" or mesoscopic approaches that mimic the
behavior of atomistic systems on length scales of interest. The goal is to
incorporate the essential features of the microscopic and macroscopic physics in
models that are computationally efficient and are easily implemented in complex
geometries and on parallel computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research entails
the development and application of a range of mesoscale simulation techniques.
In particular, previous research involving Monte Carlo simulations of
dynamically triangulated random surfaces will be extended to study the structure
and thermodynamics of microemulsions with a finite spontaneous curvature. Work
on a recently developed particle-based mesoscopic simulation technique for fluid
flow will continue, and it will be extended to model the dynamics and rheology
of complex mixtures, including embedded vesicles modeled as a randomly
triangulated network. This work will be a first step towards integrating
simulation techniques for network models of membranes with mesoscopic solvent
simulation techniques and developing the capability to model blood flows in
narrow capillaries and the trafficking of blood born cells into tissue, which is
crucial for the proper function of the immune system. Much of this work will be
preformed in close collaboration with experiment, and previous collaborations
involving the use of simulations to model and interpret fluid membrane flicker
spectroscopy data - and determine the bending rigidity and spontaneous curvature
of individual lipid bilayer vesicles - will continue and be
extended.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mesoscale simulation techniques have matured over
the last several years to the extent that they can now be used to model specific
amphiphilic mixtures and determine their phase behavior and rheology. Since
simulations provide an essentially approximation-free method for studying these
coarse-grained models, when performed in concert with experiment, they provide
an ideal vehicle for model refinement and can be used to help engineer materials
with desired properties. One of the goals of this research is to develop
algorithms and disseminate software that can be used for the design and
understanding of industrial and biological processes. Students will be
introduced to these techniques in an interdisciplinary
course.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational research on
complex fluids. Complex fluids such as amphiphilic mixtures, colloidal
suspensions, and polymer solutions, mixtures, and melts, are characterized by
structure on mesoscopic length-scales - ranging from nano-to micrometers- and
energy scales comparable to the thermal energy. The mesoscale structures of
these systems endow them with many interesting and unique features, and they are
widely used in the processing, chemical and energy industries. It is therefore
important to explore ways in which their properties can be modeled numerically
to predict behavior, test physical theories, and provide feedback for the design
and analysis of experiments and industrial applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mesoscale simulation techniques have matured over the last
several years to the extent that they can now be used to model specific
amphiphilic mixtures and determine their phase behavior and rheology. Since
simulations provide an essentially approximation-free method for studying these
coarse-grained models, when performed in concert with experiment, they provide
an ideal vehicle for model refinement and can be used to help engineer materials
with desired properties. One of the goals of this research is to develop
algorithms and disseminate software that can be used for the design and
understanding of industrial and biological processes. Students will be
introduced to these techniques in an interdisciplinary course.&lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;