* 0328198
* Life Course Patterns of Urban Youth Through the Third Decade
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Karl Alexander, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/2007
* USD 325,200.00

This project has three aims: 1) to track and interview at age 28 the Beginning
School Study's (BSS) long-term panel of urban youth; 2) to sketch a detailed
portrait of the group's mature adult standing in three key life domains
(education since high school, workplace experience, and mental health status);
3) to use the enhanced BSS longitudinal data to pose questions about life
outcomes in adulthood in relation to formative experiences over middle childhood
and adolescence. Baltimore based, the BSS has been monitoring the educational
progress and personal development of a representative, random sample
approximately 800 local public school children, starting when they began first
grade in fall 1982. Typical urban youth are not often the focus of long-term
developmental studies, but African Americans make up the majority of the BSS
panel (55%) and 75 percent of the panel was living in low-income households when
the project commenced. Coverage of the panel's experience at present extends
though the years immediately after high school, to ages 22-23. These data have
supported research on high school completion, college entry, and early work
experience, but we know that the transition to adulthood has stretched out in
the modern era, and typically much remains unsettled in the early 20.s. The
Mature Adult Survey at ages 27-28 will afford a more definitive accounting of
the group's adult life circumstances and trajectories, supporting studies of
postsecondary program completion (including vocational training), career
success, criminal persistence and desistance, family relationships, and health
status toward the end of the third decade of life. Data will be archived and
deposited with the social science data library at Harvard's Murray Research
Center, making this valuable data resource available to the wider scientific
community. The main scientific objective is to identify sources of resilience in
the lives of disadvantaged urban youth that enable many of them to overcome
poverty and other handicapping conditions to finish school or training programs,
find their way to steady work with good prospects, enter into satisfying and
stable relationships, avoid debilitating substance abuse, stay out of trouble
with the law, and attain a sense of personal satisfaction as their lives have
unfolded. The project has significant broader impacts in that it involves
underrepresented minority and low-income youth as study participants, has an
interdisciplinary leadership team, will make project data available for use by
the broader scientific community, and could potentially provide insights for
improving the life prospects of disadvantaged youth. Previous BSS research on
summer learning, grade retention, and educational tracking, were widely
disseminated to the social science research community as well as through popular
media, and helped to inform several areas of education policy. Similar impacts
are expected from the results of this study