* 0328823
* Technology for Cross-Cultural Communication in a Children's International Book Community
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Philip Resnik, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2007
* USD 529,972.00

Every day news media report misunderstandings, intolerance or outright
aggression between people from different cultures. Age-old disputes over land,
water, religious and cultural practices fuel intolerance. Children absorb the
ambiance, culture and attitudes of their community. Consequently, cycles of
intolerance pass from generation to generation. But there is some hope for
change: research has shown that sharing personal experiences can change
attitudes. When it comes to developing tolerance, early intervention is best.
The multicultural education literature highlights the effectiveness of children
interacting with children from other cultural groups, as well as reading
children's literature from other cultures. The aim of this project is to develop
technology and social structures needed for children who speak different
languages to learn with and from each other in a digital community setting
centered on children's books. The PIs will address two closely linked technical
challenges. The first is the design of child-friendly user interfaces to support
online interaction and communication between children; this will be addressed
via cooperative inquiry, in which design teams (including researchers and child
participants) gather field data, initiate ideas, and test and develop new
prototypes. The second is the problem of translation; this will be addressed by
involving the communicating children themselves as collaborative participants in
an innovative approach to developing language technology resources that support
cross-language communication without full-scale machine translation. A
combination of methods will be used to evaluate the proposed research. Data to
be gathered in classrooms will include understanding changes in how children
from different cultures use new technologies to communicate, interpret stories,
develop collaborative narratives, and see other cultures. This research will
leverage the ongoing NSF ITR-funded International Children's Digital Library
(ICDL), with which the PIs are involved, in order to provide access to books
that create common ground for children's "ICDL communities." This project will
add value to ICDL by contributing technologies that give children who speak
different languages an opportunity to interact. The intellectual merit of this
research includes: new interfaces that enable children who speak different
languages to communicate safely with each other in ways that are comfortable for
them; advances in translation technology; and evaluation of the impact of
children's experiences in ICDL communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The broad impacts deriving from this research include two significant
contributions: a model online community using technology to advance the cause of
tolerance and understanding; and a technology test-bed that will be made
available to the scientific community in order to lower the barriers to entry
for further development of cross-cultural online communities for children and
adults.