* 0328074
* Collaborative Research:      (TSE03-L)  Assessment and Redesign of Processes for Sustainable Construction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* H. Scott Matthews, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 08/31/2007
* USD 248,053.00

Research Award Title: Assessment and Redesign of Processes for Sustainable
Construction &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will create 'hybrid' life cycle models of the environmental implications
of construction process activities. Input-output models function by considering
a change in economic activity in a primary sector, and estimating the
implications in that sector and all other sectors in the supply chain. Further,
these models then link with other data (e.g. emissions, energy use) on a sector
basis to link primary production with all secondary impacts in the supply chain.
However these models are highly aggregate (e.g. there are a small number of
construction sectors). Thus the estimates from input-output models may not
accurately reflect the specific activities within a particular process. In this
project, we will integrate an existing input-output model with process-specific
data from existing inventories (e.g. BEES). The data from these various process-
based inventory sources will act as substitutes for the estimates that come from
the very average and aggregated input-output based models. This should make the
overall estimates much better.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several broader
impacts expected from the research. The construction industry has a significant
impact on resource use, environmental emissions, and energy use in the United
States. The products of construction activity (e.g. buildings, roads) further
contribute to impacts in these areas. By using the model and framework described
above, more detailed information about the impacts of various construction
process activities will be created. The result of this project will be freely
accessible on the Internet to aid in public and private decision making issues
related to the implications of construction. For example, someone trying to
construct a 'green building' can see estimate of the overall environmental
effects of various processes (e.g. transportation of materials to the site) and
be more informed about which of these processes has the smallest environmental
burden. In the longer term, such results could better inform and define the ways
in which green building/construction projects are rated via a better
understanding of the relative impacts of various processes. Finally, the model
will be widely disseminated through public availability on the web, similar to
the fashion in which the EIO-LCA model is
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;