* 0328002
* Functional Polymers From Renewable Resources -- Itaconic and Lactic Acids (TSE03-B)
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Robert Weiss, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2007
* USD 360,000.00

The objective of this research is to synthesize and characterize new functional
polymers from renewable and sustainable resources. Specifically, ionomers based
on itaconic anhydride (ITA), which is derived from citric acid, will be
prepared. Three types of systems will be synthesized: random ionomers based on
highly branched poly(L-latic acid) and two types of telechelic ionomers with
polycaprolactone and poly(ethylene glycol) backbones. The functional groups will
be introduced by copolymerization or end-capping reactions involving ITA, and
the ionomers will be formed by the hydrolysis and neutralization of the ITA
repeat units. The microstructure and the physical and viscoelastic properties of
the polymers will be characterized as a function of ionic concentration and the
choice of the counterion. Probing experiments to assess the application of the
ionomers in a variety of applications (hydrogels, compatibilizers, coatings and
adhesives) will also be carried out. &lt;br/&gt; Renewable plant- and wood-based
raw materials are attractive alternative starting materials for polymers as the
monomers are less costly than petroleum-based monomers and the polymers can be
designed to be biodegradable after use, thus eliminating much of the
environmental and disposal problems associated with petroleum-based plastics.
This research explores a new direction for bio-derived polymers, namely the
synthesis of functional polymers to replace petroleum-based polymers in
applications such as hydrogels, coatings, adhesives and compatibilizers in
polymer blends. The research addressess the basic chemistry and physics of
bioderived polymers. The research will also train undergraduate and graduate
students in polymer chemistry and engineering and in provide them experience in
the emerging field of "Green Chemistry".&lt;br/&gt;