* 0328288
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Arab Immigrants in Detroit-Dearborn: Entrepreneurship and Racial/Ethnic Identity
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Sherman James, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2004
* USD 7,500.00

Because of the paradoxical position Arab Americans hold in relation to
race/ethnic paradigms in the U.S., the group constitutes a strategic research
site to the study of contemporary immigration and the social construction of
race/ethnicity. While Arab Americans are classified as white in the US census
and other official forms, very little is known about how members of the group
relate to whiteness as both an identity and a social position. The purpose of
this study is to explore racial/ethnic identity among a group of Arab immigrants
who occupy a specific economic position as small business entrepreneurs in
Detroit and Dearborn, Michigan. The study will explore the immigration and
employment experiences of members of the group and describe the factors that are
associated with entrepreneurship as a career trajectory. It seeks to describe
the ways in which Arab immigrant entrepreneurs define their race/ethnic identity
in relation to the US system of racial categorization and a white/black dyad. It
will also attempt to delineate whether and how business location - Detroit's
inner city versus Dearborn's ethnic enclave - and gender shape racial/ethnic
identity. We will employ a qualitative research design relying on participant
observation and in-depth interviews with male and female business owners.
Dearborn and Detroit provide an ideal site to carry out a study of this nature
given that Arab immigrants are structurally incorporated into the two locations
in two distinct forms: as middleman minorities in the predominantly African
American city of Detroit and as owners of ethnic businesses in a viable ethnic
enclave in Dearborn. The broader impact of this study lies in its potential to
contribute to the expansion of theoretical frameworks on immigrant
entrepreneurship and ethnic economies, to contribute to the literature on
immigration and race/ethnic identity construction and to the literature on
whiteness, and to offer an alternative narrative about the experiences of Arab
immigrants in the US, a group that is currently the subject of much
attention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;