* 0328233
* Behavior of the Ricci Flow and Related Curature Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 12/10/2002,06/30/2005
* Dan Knopf, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 65,264.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0202796. PI: Dan Knopf&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;My research centers
on geometric evolution&lt;br/&gt;equations, notably the Ricci flow and related
curvature flows. I plan&lt;br/&gt;to study seven areas in which I have obtained
prior results, and where&lt;br/&gt;continued work is likely to yield new and
useful mathematics. [1] When &lt;br/&gt;a flow converges, it is valuable to
study the stability of its limit, in&lt;br/&gt;order to improve our global
understanding of the dynamics of flows. [2] If&lt;br/&gt;a flow fails to
converge but behaves in a nonsingular way, one can still&lt;br/&gt;study the
dynamics of this collapse by classifying the asymptotic behavior&lt;br/&gt;of
nearby solutions. [3] In most cases, a flow does become singular; so
it&lt;br/&gt;is of paramount importance (particularly in regard to Hamilton's
program&lt;br/&gt;to resolve Thurston's Geometrization Conjecture) to develop a
better&lt;br/&gt;classification of singularities. [4] The basic method of
studying&lt;br/&gt;singularities is the construction of a sequence of parabolic
dilations&lt;br/&gt;(blow-ups). To take limits of these solutions, one must
obtain (partial)&lt;br/&gt;injectivity radius estimates by various means. [5]
The most powerful (but&lt;br/&gt;perhaps most difficult) way to obtain such
injectivity radius estimates&lt;br/&gt;would be to study and extend existing
Harnack estimates of the type&lt;br/&gt;pioneered by Li and Yau and further
developed by Hamilton. [6] It is &lt;br/&gt;also useful to study the asymptotic
behavior and stability of parabolic&lt;br/&gt;dilations at certain model
singularities (a method which has been very&lt;br/&gt;fruitful in studying the
mean curvature flow). [7] Further information&lt;br/&gt;about singularities can
be obtained by constructing and studying solitons:&lt;br/&gt;self-similar
solutions that often arise as limits of blow-ups. Moreover,&lt;br/&gt;Kaehler
Ricci solitons have interesting connections with complex geometry&lt;br/&gt;and
algebraic geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric evolution studies
the way an&lt;br/&gt;object's shape changes. In some cases, such as the mean
curvature flow and&lt;br/&gt;porous media flow, the motivation is to model
certain physical phenomena&lt;br/&gt;such as the motion of an interface in
forming metallic alloys, the shape&lt;br/&gt;of a thin film of highly viscous
oil, or the flow of oil in shale. In&lt;br/&gt;other cases, the goal is to
improve the shape of an object, either to find&lt;br/&gt;optimal (most
efficient) shapes, or else to help mathematicians recognize&lt;br/&gt;and
classify geometric objects. My own research is part of a large
program&lt;br/&gt;to resolve one of the most compelling open questions in
mathematics: the&lt;br/&gt;desire to understand and classify all possible
3-dimensional shapes. But&lt;br/&gt;regardless of whether their motivation comes
from material science or pure&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, all geometric evolution
problems have much in common; so that&lt;br/&gt;the field benefits from rich
cross-fertilization. In particular, ideas and&lt;br/&gt;techniques that are
developed for any of these highly nonlinear problems&lt;br/&gt;are usually
quickly adaptable to related applications.&lt;br/&gt;