* 0328849
* Deriving General World Knowledge from Texts by Abstraction of Logical Forms
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Henry Kyburg, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Douglas H. Fisher
* 08/31/2007
* USD 491,491.00

The goal of this project is to break through the knowledge acquisition
bottleneck in the effort to endow artificial intelligence (AI) systems with
common sense. The novel idea is to abstract general propositions about what is
possible in the world from the specific assertions made in miscellaneous texts
(including fiction). This will be accomplished by compositional interpretation
of parse trees, with heuristics to decide on verb argument structure and with
concomitant simplification and abstraction of logical
forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will employ state-of-the-art parsers to
derive general knowledge from unannotated texts. Semantic classifications of
words will strengthen and disambiguate the knowledge derived from text. There
will be an emphasis on the extraction of causal knowledge, since this is so
central to commonsense understanding of the world. This will be made possible by
the use of event variables in logical forms and fuller interpretation of
adverbial modification. Research will also investigate the representation of
general (and often uncertain or even inconsistent) knowledge and methods of
using such knowledge for inference. One result will be a demonstration system
that is able to answer simple questions eliciting general
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this work includes
enhanced learning and active research participation by doctoral candidates as
well as undergraduates. By helping to break through the knowledge acquisition
bottleneck, this research will pave the way for building more user-friendly AI
systems for a broad range of potential applications, such as personal agents
that mediate between a user and more specialized software, medical advice
systems, tutoring systems, and computer games. It could also serve to bootstrap
natural language understanding systems towards more human-like understanding.