* 0329061
* Distributed Energy-Efficient Mobile Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Charlie Hu, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2008
* USD 429,199.00

Mobile robots (mobots) have a wide range of applications in humanitarian
operations, including search and rescue operations. To successfully accomplish
these missions, mobots must maintain high mobility by carrying their own energy
sources, and they must make efficient use of their limited energy resources in
order to be capable of operating for extended periods of time. In this project,
the PI and his team will investigate a new methodology of constructing
distributed energy-efficient mobots. They will design, implement, and evaluate a
team of mobots controlled by using biologically inspired engineering principles,
and where inter-mobot communication is conducted through wireless ad hoc
networks with peer-to-peer overlay protocols. Speci?cally, the team will
study:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Biologically inspired algorithms for sensing,
planning, coordination, and control. This is motivated by the observation that
many creatures, through natural selection, use energy efficiently. Soft
computing and multi-agent systems will be adopted to manage the team
coordination as well as the activities of individual mobots. Neuro-fuzzy logic
will be used to control multiple robots with energy
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Energy-efficient, scalable, and robust
wireless networks for inter-mobot communication. Peer-to-peer overlay networks
will be constructed on mobile ad hoc networks to support the high mobility and
to handle the possibility of losing or adding mobots during missions. Packets
will be transmitted through energy-efficient routes; these routes will be
dynamically determined based on the current locations and the remaining energy
of the mobots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Energy models for each component in a
mobot, the interactions among the components inside each mobot, and the
interactions among mobots. These models will be used to evaluate the energy
efficiency of the control algorithms developed in (1) and the communication
mechanism presented in (2). In addition, a comprehensive simulator will be
constructed to study a large number of mobots: the team movement, con?guration,
coordination, and the communication among them. The simulator will also validate
whether biological systems indeed use energy
efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this research will consist of:
(i) biologically inspired neuro-fuzzy control algorithms to improve energy
efficiency; (ii) efficient inter-mobot communication mechanisms; (iii) three
mobot prototypes for experiments and instrumentation; and (iv) a detailed
simulator to study various scenarios with a large team of
mobots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project has broader impacts
on society, education, and outreach. Mobots will be able to operate for
signi?cantly longer times in humanitarian missions and outer space exploration.
Research results will be incorporated into graduate and undergraduate courses at
Purdue, and the lab will host an open session to local K-12 students every year
to demonstrate the mobot prototypes and to encourage participation by students
in engineering and science activities.