* 0329910
* SENSORS: Network Sensing, Decision, and Actuation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Michael Branicky, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

Networked Sensing, Decision, and Actuation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
interconnection of sensors, actuators, and controllers &lt;br/&gt;enables local
and remote supervision of physical environments.&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental
difference between the traditional and the networked control &lt;br/&gt;problem
is that the network introduces unreliable and time-dependent levels&lt;br/&gt;of
service (delays, jitter, losses).&lt;br/&gt;In turn, network vagaries can
jeopardize the stability, safety, and &lt;br/&gt;performance of the controlled
units.&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this research is to devise
integrated&lt;br/&gt;control and communication algorithms to compensate for
the&lt;br/&gt;vagaries of network service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such control and
communication strategies are targeted toward the&lt;br/&gt;application-layer and
their objective is to deal with&lt;br/&gt;packet losses, delays, jitter, and
network unreliability.&lt;br/&gt;This objective necessitates an integrated
approach that combines networking &lt;br/&gt;(e.g., network measurement,
modeling, and simulation; reliability) with &lt;br/&gt;decisions based on sensor
data (e.g., feedback control).&lt;br/&gt;Although strategies have to be adapted
to the specific application areas,&lt;br/&gt;the research addresses a general
methodology by drawing from the foundations&lt;br/&gt;of Systems Theory and of
Networking.&lt;br/&gt;Control algorithms and communication protocols are
evaluated according to a &lt;br/&gt;methodology that combines analytical
characterization, co-simulation, and &lt;br/&gt;prototype construction and
validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research includes
teaching, course &lt;br/&gt;and curriculum development, graduate advising, and
undergraduate research &lt;br/&gt;experiences. &lt;br/&gt;An objective of this
work is to expand the presence of groups that are &lt;br/&gt;under-represented
in Engineering and Computer Science.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators have on-going
relationships with industry.&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research are
published and freely disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;