* 0329559
* Keys Marine Laboratory Small Boat Support
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2006
* John Ogden, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2006
* USD 52,356.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Florida Institute of
Oceanography (FIO), University of South Florida, under the direction of Dr. John
C. Ogden, to improve the small boat fleet at the Keys Marine Laboratory (KML).
The KML commenced academic research and education programs in the 1980's through
a public/private partnership between the Florida Institute of Oceanography
(FIO)/State University System (SUS) and Sea World of Florida, Inc. Based on the
success of that partnership and recognizing the need for these programs and
facilities the State of Florida purchased the KML in 1990. The KML is presently
managed by the FIO in cooperation with the Florida Fish and Wildlife
Conservation Commission, a state resource management agency. With the closure of
other residential laboratory facilities in the region and the unprecedented
scientific and political attention focused on the mosaic of South Florida
environments, the KML has now assumed an even more critical support role. In the
last five years usage by research and education groups has increased steadily
and is now exceeding some of the capabilities of the current facilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particularly urgent is the need for a new boat with a
larger capacity suitable for research and education groups of 12-15 persons. The
current fleet consists of 5 small boats, ranging in size from 10-24 feet. The
three largest boats together have a capacity of 18 students/scientists. As the
average educational groups at the KML range in size from 10 - 15 persons
including 1 instructor this means that much of the time all three boats must be
dedicated to a single educational group leaving no vessel support services for
the researchers on site at the same time. The residential capacity of the KML is
34 persons, therefore, one to three groups of 4-6 researchers are frequently on
site with education groups. While the interaction with the researchers enhances
the educational experience for undergraduates, its value is diminished by the
inability to provide adequate research support services.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This grant will partially fund the purchase of a 26' outboard vessel
for support of the education programs. The vessel will carry 15 students and
faculty. This will greatly alleviate the conflicts in boat usage when research
and education groups are at the KML at the same time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;