* 0329317
* Configurational Biomimetic Imprinting Methods for Advanced Drug Delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2006
* Nicholas Peppas, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/2006
* USD 190,000.00

Nikolaos A. Peppas&lt;br/&gt;University of Texas - Austin&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;"Configurational Biomimetic Imprinting Methods for Advanced Drug
Delivery"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering nano-biomaterials by controlling
recognition and specificity is the first step in &lt;br/&gt;coordinating and
duplicating complex biological and physiological processes. Configurational
biomimetic imprinting (CBIP) and nanoimprinting techniques, which create stereo-
specific three-dimensional binding cavities based on a biological compound of
interest, produce biomimetic materials for intelligent drug delivery and drug
targeting applications. Of particular interest are intelligent analyte-modulated
drug delivery and recognition of biologically significant molecules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Macromolecular networks will be developed with precise
chemical architecture that possess enhanced mechanical, thermal, and recognition
properties compared to their biological counterparts. The synthesis and
characterization of novel biomimetic molecularly imprinted gels &lt;br/&gt;and
molecularly imprinted release systems is a significant focus of this proposal.
Of particular &lt;br/&gt;importance in polymer design is the network morphology,
which spatially varies in &lt;br/&gt;crosslinking density (microporous and
macroporous regions). Emphasis is also placed on &lt;br/&gt;fundamental studies
regarding the monomer chain flexibility and size, the number and chemical
&lt;br/&gt;nature of monomer functional groups, and the chemical reactivity of
the functional groups on the &lt;br/&gt;specific recognition event needed to
produce a spatially defined recognition site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific
rationale is based on the hypothesis that effectively designed imprinted
&lt;br/&gt;polymer networks will have superior binding properties and directed
recognition in aqueous environments by properly tuning non-covalent interactions
between the gel functionality and template such as increasing or decreasing
macromolecular chain hydrophobicity, including strong hydrogen bond donors and
acceptors, or including strong ionic directed recognition sites. Preliminary
experimental success imprinting D-glucose for aqueous recognition has provided
encouraging results within the laboratory. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Spectroscopic
and fluorescent and confocal microscopy analysis will lead to efficient
optimization of polymer design. By tailoring the polymer gel structure
composition, effective recognition sites for can be created in polymer gels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed research will advance our
knowledge in the field of nanodevices that can recognize undesirable chemicals.
This work is of major importance in the development and understanding of the
function of molecularly imprinted polymer networks, which can be used in a
variety of high technology applications. From a fundamental point of view, this
work will provide significant new understanding of how diffusional mechanisms
and reactions in the presence of biological and chemical entities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Developments of particular interest to the
field are expected to be wide and far reaching, such as intelligent analyte-
modulated drug delivery, recognition of undesirable biologicals, nano-scale
patterning and recognition of proteins, site-specific interaction with tissues,
etc. The students will be trained and educated in all aspects of the field of
molecular recognition. In addition, the P.I. has established an undergraduate
research program in the same field which attracts 5-6 juniors or seniors per
year who do research on these projects. &lt;br/&gt;