* 0329913
* SENSORS: Detecting Microbial Pathogens with Novel Surface Acoustic Wave Devices in Liquid Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Paul Millard, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 08/31/2009
* USD 541,874.00

This SENSORS proposal integrates research and education to exploit the
sensitivity of a new&lt;br/&gt;family of LGX crystal devices operated in novel
Shear Horizontal Surface Acoustic Wave (SH-SAW)&lt;br/&gt;propagation directions
by combining them with highly selective molecular padlock probes to
detect&lt;br/&gt;specific nucleic acid sequences associated with bacteria such
as Escherichia coli O157:H7, Salmonella&lt;br/&gt;typhi, and Vibrio cholerae in
aqueous solutions. The anticipated fundamental advances in sensor
science&lt;br/&gt;and engineering will be relevant to numerous applications,
including rapid response to bioterrorism,&lt;br/&gt;healthcare, epidemiology,
agriculture, food safety, and pollution avoidance and mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;This
SENSORS program builds upon the initial proof-of-concept results provided by an
NSF&lt;br/&gt;SGER project funded by the divisions of Electrical and
Communication Systems, and Bioengineering and&lt;br/&gt;Environmental Systems.
The intellectual merit of this proposal rests in the creative, integrated
research&lt;br/&gt;and education activities related to combining the recently
identified LGX SH-SAW devices with&lt;br/&gt;molecular padlock probe technology
to permit the design, fabrication, testing, and optimization
of&lt;br/&gt;prototype biosensors. The specific research objectives of this
SENSORS program are to: (i) Identify the&lt;br/&gt;surface density chemistry for
increased sensitivity; (ii) Investigate and identify the optimal LGX SH-
SAW&lt;br/&gt;orientation and device design for operation with the padlock
technology; (iii) Study and develop the&lt;br/&gt;molecular padlock probe system
to operate effectively in conjunction with the LGX SH-SAW device;
(iv)&lt;br/&gt;Fabricate and test the prototype SH-SAW liquid biosensors; (v)
Identify and optimize a procedure for&lt;br/&gt;sensor regeneration; and (vi)
Characterize and optimize the sensor's dynamic range and cross-effects
due&lt;br/&gt;to temperature and other physical and chemical
factors.&lt;br/&gt;The educational objective of this SENSORS program is to
provide a multidisciplinary learning&lt;br/&gt;experience to students ranging
from high school to graduate student level in the area of sensors in
general,&lt;br/&gt;and biosensors in particular. Broader impacts will be
achieved through the following programs and&lt;br/&gt;activities to: (i) Train
and interact with high school audiences through two major ongoing programs
at&lt;br/&gt;University of Maine (UMaine), NSF Research Experiences for Teachers
(RET) and the GK-12 Sensors;&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Involve undergraduates from Maine
and other institutions directly into the research project under
the&lt;br/&gt;umbrella of the ongoing NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) program at the UMaine;&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Expand existing undergraduate
Sensor Technology and Instrumentation and Biochemical
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;Engineering courses at the UMaine by adding modules
relating to biosensors devices and systems; (iv)&lt;br/&gt;Identify appropriate
Capstone projects for undergraduates involving cross-disciplinary research and
design&lt;br/&gt;projects; (v) Enhance existing graduate level courses
Microscale Bioengineering and Design and&lt;br/&gt;Fabrication of Acoustic Wave
Devices by incorporating research results into the course; (vi) Contribute
to&lt;br/&gt;the new interdisciplinary multi-institutional NSF Integrative
Graduate Education and Research&lt;br/&gt;Traineeship (IGERT) program in
functional genomics, which involves UMaine, the Jackson
Laboratory,&lt;br/&gt;and the Maine Medical Center Research Institute; (vi)
Provide a experimental and/or theoretical thesis&lt;br/&gt;topics for Masters
and Ph.D. students; (vii) Disseminate the research and educational material on a
project&lt;br/&gt;website, and through conferences and printed
literature.&lt;br/&gt;The SENSORS project proposed here is designed to result in
tangible research and educational&lt;br/&gt;benefits. It will provide a
knowledge base critical to creation of the next generation of biosensors
for&lt;br/&gt;single unit production and future integration into arrays. It also
seeks to establish a model program&lt;br/&gt;whereby cross-disciplinary
education is integrated with a state-of-the-art research program, providing
a&lt;br/&gt;rich learning experience for students ranging from high school to
graduate student level. Finally, the&lt;br/&gt;project will help to strengthen
US research and educational capabilities in an area of high technology
that&lt;br/&gt;currently is in need of highly trained industry and academic
professionals.