* 0329662
* SENSORS:  Sensor Arrays for Micro-Control of Electrically Conducted Flows in Magnetic Fields
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* Miroslav Krstic, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Suhada Jayasuriya
* 07/31/2007
* USD 270,000.00

Control of plasmas and liquid metals (in applications including hypersonic
aerodynamics, fusion, and lasers) is an emerging research area of great promise.
A small amount of control can qualitatively change the intensity of
magnetohydrodynamic turbulence, and in this way influence the heat transfer
characteristics of a system or the external power needed to sustain its
operation stably. This project intends to identify the sensing mechanisms that
can be effective for feedback control. At present, two candidate approaches
exist: (1) arrays of electrodes for measuring the current density at the wall of
the flow domain, and (2) arrays of solenoids for measuring the induced magnetic
field at the wall. The objective of this theoretical/numerical research project
is to determine which of the two sensing approaches is right for controlling
plasmas and liquid metals, before the community ventures into the expensive
technological effort of developing both types of sensor
arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on prototypical
magetohydrodynamic and magnetogasdynamic flows (channels, pipes, bluff bodies,
cavities, jets, in the presence of magnetic field, pressure, and thermal
driving), going from incompressible to compressible flows, and from lower to
higher Reynolds numbers. The project will determinine not only whether
electrical or magnetic sensing is more promising but also the specifications
needed from the sensors: the magnitude of of the fluctuation variables (current,
magnetic induction) that need to be sensed, the power and bandwidth rating, the
density of sensors on an array, and the optimal location of
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Lay the foundations for the
field of control of magnetohydrodynamic flows. Impact Statement. Answering key
sensor technology questions in fusion, lasers, and hypersonics. Educating new
interdisciplinary experts in plasmas, sensors, and
controls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;