* 0329276
* Collaborative Proposal: Multiple Task Performance in Collaboration
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Sherry Thatcher, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2007
* USD 294,276.00

As productivity in knowledge organizations has risen, the quantity of
responsibilities and the relationships of professional workers have likewise
increased. People work on multiple projects with multiple colleagues. Because of
the complex interdependencies among workers and projects, overload and
interruption on any one task can have a cascading negative effect across the
entire organization. This multidisciplinary project by researchers from Carnegie
Mellon University and University of Arizona addresses the processes of managing
interdependencies in complex collaborations. The project combines field studies
in a police department and a professional service organization, laboratory
studies of how people allocate resources and organize their work, and
development of computer models of real-time multiple task collaborative
performance. The work will contribute to organizational theory by providing new
insights about collaboration in complex professional organizations. It will
contribute to computer-supported cooperative work by increasing our
understanding of how alternative effort allocation strategies affect
coordination and performance and by creating tools for allocating effort across
multiple people and projects. This work is socially significant because multiple
task performance is essential to the contributions that professional
organizations are able to make. Even with high-performing teams, organizations
cannot function effectively if multiple task roles and responsibilities become
misaligned.