* 0329546
* Disaster Prevention and Mitigation: Protecting the Nation's Critical Infrastructure from Natural, Technological, and Deliberate Disasters
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Charles Perrow, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2004
* USD 79,404.00

In the U.S. the concentration of urban areas, of populations in areas vulnerable
to hurricanes and floods, of production and storage sites of toxic and explosive
substances, all make us vulnerable to natural, industrial, and deliberate
disasters. In addition, our response and recovery systems are unnecessarily
inflexible and poorly funded at the local, first responder, level. Natural,
industrial, and deliberate disasters have increased in the last 2 decades. This
research explores the possibilities of deconcentrating targets and
decentralizing response efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current theory argues
that deconcentration and decentralization of areas, organizations, and
facilities is likely to be inefficient and expensive. However, I will examine
four examples of highly decentralized systems that are very efficient, flexible,
adaptive, and reliable. They provide guidance for the redesign of vulnerable
areas and organizations. They are the national power grids, the Internet,
networks of small firms in several nations, and (alas), terrorist networks.
These systems manage to reduce two types of interdependencies that have negative
system effects - physical interdependency (e.g. a railroad engine needs coal)
and spatial interdependency (bundling unrelated systems together, so that if a
highway bridge collapses it also brings down the power lines that it carries).
These interdependencies are low because the four systems have multiple inputs
(suppliers), and outputs (products) available, reducing physical
interdependencies, and extensive redundancies that make spatial interdependency
less problematical. The four systems maximize, however, the two forms of
interdependency that facilitate safety: logical interdependency (compatible
infrastructures, dependable reputations, stable governance regimes), and cyber
(or communication) interdependency, where information rather than material is
the commodity that is transmitted. Both of these promote resiliency and safety,
and are inexpensive for the four systems. Based on these cases, recommendations
will be made for reducing the vulnerability of systems with catastrophic
potential, and for improving homeland security and disaster response agencies.