* 0329794
* Collaborative Research:  SENSORS:  Energy Efficient Communication in Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Lixin Gao, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2008
* USD 250,000.00

ABSTRACT 0329794 Lixin Gao Jie Wu U of Massachusetts Amherst

Spurred by the fast increasing capabilities and declining costs of computing and
communication devices, it becomes increasingly viable to embed sensors in
physical devices and link these sensors through wireless networks. These sensor
networks can be deployed for a wide range of applications that can improve
quality of life, and even save lives. These applications include healthcare
(e.g., health monitoring and coordination among doctors and nurses), aircraft
flight control, weather forecasting, home appliance control, and protection
against bioterrorism. One of the key challenges in the deployment of sensor
networks is how to prolong the lifetime of the networks. Sensor networks will
stress power sources because of the their need for long operating lifetimes and
high energy density. Therefore, energy efficiency is critical for the wide
deployment of sensor networks.

The investigators study energy management techniques for sensor networks. The
key idea is to take advantage of the physical layer design that facilitates the
combining of partial information. A node can receive several partial signals and
combine these signals to retrieve the complete signal. This is referred to as
hitchhiking. Hitchhiking can potentially conserve energy for transmitting data
in sensor networks. By the effective use of partial signals, a packet can be
delivered with less nodes and/or less transmission power at each node. The
investigators will systematically study the energy management techniques for
sensor networks as follows. First, the investigators will study the physical
layer design of hitchhiking. Second, the investigators will study power control
for broadcast networks and unicast networks. Third, the investigators will study
power saving protocols to reduce the energy consumption for idle modes.