* 0329374
* Geochemical controls on bioavailability and toxicity of nitroaromatics during phytoremediation (TSE03-N)
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2005,10/31/2007
* Stephen Boyd, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 10/31/2007
* USD 99,550.00

0329374 Boyd&lt;br/&gt;Nitroaromatic compounds are prominent priority pollutants
in the United States because of their widespread use as explosives. More than
1200 sites across the country are contaminated with such compounds, and an
efficient and low-cost means of remediating these sites currently is lacking.
This project will develop a novel hybrid technology that uses macronutrient
fertilization to control the bioavailability of nitroaromatic compounds to the
plants used in phytoremediation. The project will test the hypothesis that
application of potassium (K+) to contaminated soils before establishing
phytoremediative plants will sequester most nitroaromatic contaminants in clay
mineral interlayers, where the compounds are neither toxic to the immature
plants nor mobile enough to move offsite. The project also will test that
hypothesis that once the plants have established robust root systems and
vigorous growth, application of calcium ions (Ca2+) to the soil will release the
nitroaromatic compounds from the clays in a controllable fashion, allowing root
interception and plant uptake or degradation in the rhizosphere. This
exploratory feasibility study will demonstrate the essentials of a management
scheme whereby nanoscale environments within clay mineral interlayers are
tailored to both sorb and release the pollutant compounds at optimal times. The
new management tool will enhance engineering controls on mobilization of
nitroaromatic compounds at polluted sites and will promote effective
phytoremediation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;