* 0329808
* SENSORS: Low cost wireless state sensors for civil infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Dean Neikirk, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 420,000.00

This project aims at developing a completely new class of sensors for civil
infrastructures. The research team plans to develop a series of novel state
sensors that are economical and greatly enhance the information available during
a routine inspection of a structural system. Two classes of sensors are planned:
threshold sensors and analog sensors. Both will be designed to be economical,
rely on wireless transmission of data, and will require no on-board power
supply. For both classes, wireless interrogation allows the sensors to be
hermetically sealed to reduce the likelihood of sensor deterioration due to
environmental exposure. The objective is to provide the owner of the structure
the flexibility to select the measurand and match the capabilities of the state
sensor with the expected performance of the structural system. The sensors may
also be used to characterize the behavior of complex structural
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The uses envisioned for the state sensors in the
proposed research include measuring acceleration, corrosion, strain,
temperature, and crack propagation. The state sensors must be durable, low-cost,
reliable, and must not rely on exhaustible power supplies in order to provide
useful information about the condition of civil
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The decisions to rely on a wireless
communications channel to transmit information from the state sensors and not to
use a battery to power the state sensors influence the amount and type of data
that can be collected from the sensors. To meet the criteria discussed above,
the research team has already studied prototype sensors designed to provide
binary information about the presence of damage at the location of the sensor
using an unpowered, wirelessly sensed device. Providing a wider range of sensed
variables while increasing the amount of information transmitted by the sensors
are the primary goals of the research proposed here.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
is a NSF 03-512 award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;