* 0329416
* BE: MUSES:  Sustainable Concrete Infrastructure Materials and Systems: Developing an Integrated Life Cycle Design Framework
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2009
* Victor Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,685,000.00

This Biocomplexity in the Environment - Materials Use: Science, Engineering and
Society (MUSES) project brings together researchers from three countries and
seven disciplines to create models and evaluate new materials aimed at reducing
the environmental impact of concrete used in large civil infrastructures. Global
production of concrete drives huge flows of material between natural and human
systems. The shear magnitude of this material flow, which exceeds 12 billion
tons each year, causes significant societal impacts. For example, concrete-based
infrastructure projects require major investments of public capital, trigger
enormous greenhouse gas emissions from cement production, and lead to
construction-related traffic congestion resulting in pollution and lost
productivity. Developments of new materials to supplement or replace concrete to
improve the performance characteristics typically do not address the broad
economic, environmental, and social consequences. This project will address this
shortcoming by developing a novel framework for sustainable design that
integrates microstructure tailoring with life cycle analysis. The project
explores engineered cementitious composites (ECC) both from a technical design
standpoint and from the health, economics, and policy perspectives. &lt;br/&gt;
The project includes micro-scale research on the development of ECC, macro-scale
application of ECC to bridge decks, roadways, and pipes, incorporation of
recycled materials, measurement of life-cycle impacts, and investigation at
different geographic scopes. This work encompasses multi-disciplinary
perspectives including civil and materials engineering, geology, environmental
health sciences, industrial ecology, environmental economics, and public policy.
Among the issues to be explored are the impacts of sourcing alternatives
(superquarries vs. smaller mines) and location of infrastructure projects (urban
vs. rural, and U.S. vs. China). Given the inherent design complexity,
researchers will incorporate uncertainty and sensitivity analysis in their
quantitative models to ensure that results are sufficiently robust to support
effective decision-making in the adoption of new materials. The University of
Michigan team will collaborate with researchers at the Tohoku University in
Japan, who will investigate the use of CO2 hardening process on the ECC mixes;
researchers at Tsinghua University in China who will use the life cycle model to
assess sustainability performance of infrastructure systems in China, and
Stanford University. Educational outreach will be facilitated through a web-
based educational resource compendium, as well as through a series of workshops
involving the global partners. It is expected that this MUSES research will have
a significant impact on materials use in large, civil infrastructures and will
provide tools that will accelerate the adoption of new materials and material
substitutions that lower the environmental impact over their whole life
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;