* 0329163
* Arabic Dialect Modeling for Speech and Natural Language Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Owen Rambow, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2006
* USD 299,989.00

The Arabic language is actually a collection of dialects with important
phonological, morphological, lexical, and syntactic differences. However,
throughout the Arab world, the standard written language is the same, Modern
Standard Arabic (MSA), that is also used in some official spoken communication
(newscasts, parliamentary debates). MSA is based on Classical Arabic and is
itself not a native spoken language. This situation has important negative
consequences for Arabic automatic speech recognition (ASR) and natural language
processing (NLP): since the spoken dialects are not officially written, it is
costly to obtain adequate corpora to use for training the kind of ASR and NLP
tools commonly in use today, for example, language models for ASR. Experience
has shown that using MSA text for language models is ineffective in improving
dialect ASR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at devising a way to
hierarchically specify the morphology and syntax of a group of closely related
languages/dialects. The syntax of a seed language (MSA) is automatically
extracted from an existing treebank and is augmented by hand as needed, while
the syntax of related dialects is specified manually to the extent that it
differs from that of other dialects. A similar approach is pursued for
morphology and the lexicon. These formal specifications are then used to derive
transducers among the dialects. To test the utility of this approach, the
transducers are used to convert MSA corpora to (an approximation of) dialect
text. These "created" corpora in turn are used to train language models for the
dialect, with the expectation of improving dialect ASR over the baseline in
which only small dialect corpora or (large) MSA corpora are used for language
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the potential to improve the
quality of ASR for Arabic dialects and, more generally, to increase the
understanding of how closely related languages can be modeled formally. The
developed NLP tools for Arabic dialects will be made available to the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;