* 0329908
* SENSORS:     Cooperative Diversity for Wireless Sensor Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2007
* Anders Host-Madsen, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/2007
* USD 151,195.00

0329908&lt;br/&gt;Anders Host-Madsen&lt;br/&gt;University of
Hawaii&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project considers the communication
between sensors in a wireless sensor network. The capacity of such wireless
sensor networks is limited both by the interference between different
transmissions and by the impairments of the wireless channel, such as fading.
This project investigates using cooperative diversity to overcome the
limitations of the wireless communication. The gains promised by cooperative
diversity are substantial, and the impact on the design of wireless sensor
networks could be considerable. Simple forms of cooperative diversity can be
build into wireless sensor networks in the near term relatively easily, while
more advanced forms can be incorporated in future wireless networks as
technology develops. Cooperative diversity can also have a large impact on
military networks, both communications networks and sensor-actuator networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In cooperative diversity, several nodes form a kind of
coalition to assist each other with the transmission. The sources jointly act
like a multi-antenna transmit array, and the destinations act like a multi-
antenna receive array through interchange of messages. There are three
advantages from this: diversity, since different paths might fade independently,
a power gain through beamforming, and interference mitigation through
cooperation on messages transmission. The gain from cooperative diversity is
both an increase in rate, measured by ergodic capacity, and diversity, measured
by outage or outage capacity. Preliminary results already show very large gains
while still hinting at the further considerable gains that can be obtained by
optimum signaling. The work planned in this project is 1) Deriving upper and
lower bounds for the Shannon capacity of cooperative diversity in fading
channels. 2) Developing near-optimum signaling methods for cooperative
diversity. 3) Developing simple signaling methods that can be utilized by even
simple sensors.&lt;br/&gt;