* 0330829
* Theoretical Studies of Interplanetary Magnetic Fields: Turbulence and Cosmic Rays
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Jack Jokipii, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 03/31/2007
* USD 240,001.00

This Accomplishment Based Renewal proposal seeks three years of continued
support for a program of fundamental theoretical studies and associated computer
simulation and modeling, covering a range of basic solar-wind properties and
their interactions with energetic particles and cosmic rays, including energetic
solar and heliospheric energetic particles and galactic and anomalous cosmic
rays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant part of solar influences on Earth are
exerted through interplanetary plasma, magnetic fields, and energetic particles.
Observations of cosmic rays and energetic particles can be used to study the
structures and physical parameters in regions of space inaccessible to direct
measurement. Many plasma processes can best be tested in interplanetary space,
so we can learn much about both laboratory and astrophysical plasmas through
these studies. This work is central to understanding the science of solar-
terrestrial physics and space weather. In this continuing program, the
investigations undertaken would include studies of the structure of the
interplanetary magnetic field and plasma, with particular emphasis given to the
effect of the field's structure on cosmic ray and energetic particle
acceleration, propagation, and anisotropies. This understanding could then be
used to probe distant, unexplored regions of the solar atmosphere and solar wind
using energetic particle observations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's previous
work has led to significant new insights into the nature of the transport of
solar energetic particles and promises to clarify the relation between the
transport of solar particles and galactic particles, an area which has
previously not received sufficient attention. The PI would extend this work to
relate particle motions to the structure of the interplanetary magnetic field.
Mechanisms of particle acceleration in interplanetary space and the effects of
energetic particles on the dynamics of the solar wind would also be studied. The
PI would further develop an implementation of the "diffusive compression
mechanism" for charged-particle acceleration. This mechanism is important in a
number of space physics and astrophysical contexts. Efforts to understand the
full three-dimensional heliosphere and its effects on cosmic rays would be
strengthened. The PI would follow up on previous work on heliospheric asymmetry
in cosmic rays and magnetic fields by studying the whole problem of variations
in the magnetic field and their effect on cosmic rays. This work would have a
broad impact also through its support of student work, its relevance and
importance to the understanding of the Earth's environment in space, and through
its wider astrophysical implications.