* 0330664
* Critical Globus-enabled Implementation of the MPI-2 Standard
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Nicholas Karonis, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 442,000.00

This project improves on MPICH-G2, an implementation of the MPI v1.1 standard
delivering MPI application-level middleware functionality based on the popular
MPICH library. MPICH-G2 is the only MPI that is built on top of Globus Toolkit
services and is the only MPICH-based implementation that supports a vendor-
supplied MPI as a low-level transport method for intra-machine or intra-cluster
messaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MPICH-G2 relies on two software projects, the
Globus Toolkit and MPICH library, both of which have recently undergone
significant revisions. Globus developers are implementing their next-generation
software, the Globus Toolkit 3.0 (GT3), based on the integration of Grid
services from their current Globus Toolkit 2.0 (GT2) and Web services concepts
and technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will augment GT3 by adding
the multi-site startup functionality and bootstrap message passing libraries
found in GT2 but not yet brought forward to GT3. Support for dynamic process
creation and management introduced by the MPI-2 standard will also be
investigated. These activities will bring GT3 to a minimum level of utility as
required by MPICH-G2. The project will also collaborate with the MPICH group in
the design of ADI-3 by investigating the unique challenges associated with
supporting a vendor-supplied MPI as one of the low-level transport methods that
has not yet been addressed. The project will incorporate the additions to GT3
and the new ADI-3 design to render a high-quality and uniquely Globus-enabled
implementation of the MPI-2 standard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual
Merit of this project is embodied in the investigation of the unique challenges
presented by supporting vendor-supplied MPI, and by investigating issues
surrounding the support of the dynamic process creation and management
introduced by the MPI-2 Standard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact of
this work will be realized by MPI application developers because the proposed
activities will significantly increase the utility of MPICH-G2 as an effective
middleware tool.&lt;br/&gt;