* 0330178
* SENSORS: Robust and Efficient  Data Dissemination for Data-Centric Storage
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Scott Shenker, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Gia-Loi Le Gruenwald
* 08/31/2007
* USD 500,000.00

Sensornets will provide detailed measurements at fine spatial granularities over
large geographic areas. Providing access to the data is a formidable challenge
because the measured data are distributed across the entire sensornet and
communication between sensornet nodes requires substantial expenditures of
scarce energy. Data-centric abstractions are now seen as a fundamental aspect of
sensornet systems that provide efficient access to sensor measurements. In prior
work, we have suggested that sensornet applications would benefit from data-
centric storage. Such systems enable efficient querying and search in large-
scale sensornets. However, data-centric storage makes exacting demands on its
routing infrastructure. In particular, data-centric storage is predicated on a
robust and efficient routing primitive that allows storing data by name at a
node in the sensornet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to investigate
the design and development of geographic hash tables (GHTs), a routing primitive
for data-centric storage. GHTs bring together two technologies, distributed hash
tables (DHTs) and geographic ad-hoc routing, that were developed in two
completely unrelated contexts, peer-to-peer systems and ad hoc wireless
networks. Each technology has been extensively explored in its respective
domain, but the combination of these technologies in the new, and more
challenging, context of sensor networks raises many new design challenges.