* 0330127
* SENSORS: Detection of toxic chemical agents by molecular imprinting with nanoparticles and dendrimers in ultrathin films
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Rigoberto Advincula, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 07/31/2008
* USD 250,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0330127&lt;br/&gt;Rigoberto Advincula, University of
Houston&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecularly imprinted (MI) chemical
recognition elements of toxic organophosphorous chemical agents will be
investigated. MI techniques will be employed to detect toxic organophosphorous
chemical agents using semiconductor nanoparticles (CdS, CdSe, and ZnS),
dendrimers of polybenzylphenyl ethers, and electroactive monomers in a three
component cross-linking methodology. These materials will be imprinted as films
and monoliths and the sensing efficiency evaluated using electrochemical,
evanescent wave, acoustic, and fiber optic sensor formats. Quantum dots will
have optical, electrochemical, and luminescent properties sensitive to the
binding of chemical agents. The dendrimers will enhance the imprinting
methodology by forming high surface area and porous cavities as chemical
recognition elements. Electroactive polymers will allow controlled cross-
linking, selective hydrophobicity, and electrochemical transport control in
these materials. It will also influence the photochemical and electrochemical
properties of the quantum dots. Combinatorial methods will be used to control
composition and target increased specificity, sensitivity, detection limits, and
reliability for sensors. Quantitative specific and non-specific binding studies
will be made to determine kinetics, mass transport, pre-concentration effects,
and equilibration to properly address sensor figures of merit. In terms of the
broader impacts, societal benefits should result from protection from chemical
agent threats, improved security, and pollution monitoring. The training of
students and interaction with academic, military, and industrial collaborators
will also result.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;