* 0330815
* C-RUI:  An Undergraduate Research Training Program Focused on Plant Responses to Copper in the Environment
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Thomas Whelan, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 11/30/2007
* USD 767,916.00

The goal of this multidisciplinary collaborative project is to explore the
mechanisms involved in plant responses to copper, an important environmental
pollutant in both terrestrial and aquatic environments. While species-specific
tolerance and accumulation of zinc and nickel are relatively common, copper
tolerance in plants is rare. Biochemical, molecular genetic, and biophysical
tools will be used to characterize and localize tolerance mechanisms in plant
tissues. It is hoped that these studies will lead to strategies for the use of
plants to remediate copper pollution, the development of more copper-resistant
agricultural varieties, and the identification of sea grasses that can be used
as indicator species for copper pollution in marine and estuarine environments.
Technical expertise for the project will be provided by established researchers
in studies of plant metal tolerance from the School of Agriculture at Purdue
University and the Departments of Chemistry and Biology at University of Texas -
Pan American.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key component of the project is an effort
to provide guided research experiences for minority undergraduate students at
the University of Texas Pan-American. Students will engage in laboratory
research, regular research seminars and research presentations. Students from
the program will be selected for summer internships at Purdue University where
they will work directly with leading researchers and utilize the most advanced
instrumentation available. Students and faculty will present research posters at
annual meetings of professional societies. All of these efforts are intended to
encourage participating students to have "real world" scientific experiences and
pursue advanced degrees in the life sciences&lt;br/&gt;