* 0330450
* SENSORS: Self-Monitoring Structural Composite Materials with Integrated Sensing Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2010
* David Meyer, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/2010
* USD 1,660,750.00

The ultimate goal of the proposed research project is the development of a new
class of self-sensing materials, which have the ability to mange data flow from
the sizable number of embedded sensors by use of local processing techniques. To
be addressed first will be the fabrication issues to include the electronic,
sensing and connection elements within a fiber-reinforced composite. Initially
the work will be directed to demonstrating a proof-of-concept self-sensing
material, capable of monitoring temperature flow patterns with the composite.
Miniaturized MEMS based sensors capable of measuring such quantities such as
acceleration, rotation and acoustic emission will be developed Hierarchical
algorithms will be developed to manage the data expected from the sensor
network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 5-year research will be carried out by a
multidisciplinary team made of Principal Investigator who is a civil/materials
engineer and three Co-Principal Investigators who span mechanical, physics and
applied mathematics. On-going research by the PIs in the area of fabrication of
composites with tailored electromagnetic properties will provide a foundation
for the proposed research. The proposed research includes collaboration with
Lucent Technologies, which would provide substantial expertise and capability in
MEMS fabrication and facilitate the technical transfer of the research outcome.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes three specific outreach programs to
engage high school and undergraduate students, and a plan to establish a Summer
Research Program and summer internship for underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an NSF 03-512 project.&lt;br/&gt;________
___________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;