* 0330166
* Multidisciplinary Aspects of Plant-Insect Interactions: Symposium of Junior Faculty, Toronto, Ontario, February 15-18, 2004
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Lynn Adler, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 11/30/2004
* USD 5,850.00

Adler 0330166 Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funds to bring together
junior scientists actively involved in multi- disciplinary work in plant-insect
interactions. The central goals of this symposium would be to 1)exchange ideas
on how to expand theory and multidisciplinary experiments, 2) work in small
groups, with meaningful input of graduate students and postdocs, to address
specific research questions, and 3) brainstorm ideas on specific issues relating
to junior faculty development. The topic was chosen because of its long
historical importance in ecology and evolution and because recent technological
developments and integrative approaches are rapidly changing the face of the
discipline. The request is for funds to support airfare and subsistence for 6
junior participants (3 grad students/post-docs and 3 junior faculty) and 3
senior faculty. &lt;br/&gt;The Ecology Program supports a broad range of work in
the area of plant-herbivore interactions making the topic relevant. Moreover,
the University of Toronto is contributing much more to the workshop than NSF,
meaning there is an excellent leverage of NSF
funds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The focus on young
investigators and foreign collaborations translates into very strong broader
impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;