* 0330974
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Proyecto Arqueologico Isla Cedros / Isla Cedros Archaeological Project
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Philip Wilke, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Philip J. Wilke, Matthew R. Des Lauriers will
conduct archaeological excavations of prehistoric sites on Isla Cedros, Mexico.
This island is located on the outer coast of the Baja California peninsula, 426
air miles south of San Diego, California. Prior to European contact, it was home
to a thriving indigenous population, which is the focus for the current
dissertation research. Spanish galleons, pirates, otter hunters, whalers, and
fishermen followed these early occupants. The research being funded by NSF will
consist of excavations at five of the 41 sites located during the survey portion
of this project. Excavations will proceed with the intent of recovering
information regarding the subsistence economy, stone tool technology, and
exchange relationships of the original inhabitants of Isla Cedros. The
recognition of shifts in resource exploitation and technology, and evidence for
the production and/or consumption of trade items will be
sought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The archaeological research on Isla Cedros is
significant for several reasons: &lt;br/&gt;1) Archaeological research in Baja
California is in the pioneering stage, and the very real potential for
surprising and unexpected findings exists. 2) The cultural heritage of the two
Californias was not divided in the past, and modern political boundaries should
not shape our understanding and appreciation of the rich past of this remarkable
coastline. The research on Isla Cedros can bridge this gap, by highlighting an
indigenous culture that had much in common with its northern neighbors. 3) The
answers to the specific research questions addressed by this research will
provide insight into the nature of relationships between mainland and island
groups along the Pacific coast of North America. 4) Finally, the broader issues
of the development of human cultural systems, and how different ecological and
social factors either spur or constrain such developments will be addressed as
part of the analytical phase of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the
academic relevance of this project, a number of positive impacts will result. In
Mexico, until the initiation of this project, the people of Isla Cedros were
unaware of the indigenous history of their island, and this project has sparked
interest, among both adults and children, to learn more. Classes at the
elementary and high schools are planned following the completion of the first
field projects. Closely related is the development of ties with archaeologists
working for the Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia de Mexico (INAH).
Already underway is the development of a local site stewardship program,
currently being organized by Archaeologist Jorge Serrano of the Ensenada office
of INAH. As recent partnerships between INAH and such U.S. agencies such as the
Bureau of Land Management and California State Parks have shown, these
relationships can improve the quality and efficiency of cultural resource
management on both sides of the international border. This research project will
be the culmination of the professional training program for Matthew R. Des
Lauriers, will provide field experience for several undergraduate students, and
begin training local people participating in the site stewardship program.
&lt;br/&gt;