* 0330100
* SENSORS: A Novel Lateral Field Excited Acoustic Wave Sensor for Chemical and Biological Agents
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2003,06/30/2009
* John Vetelino, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 06/30/2009
* USD 381,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensors for the sensitive and selective
detection of chemical agents and a biological agent are being developed. The
sensor structure consists of a piezoelectric platform that is coated with a film
that selectively sorbs a chemical or biological agent of interest. The
sensitivity of the sensor is embodied in the sensor platform, which consists of
a quartz crystal that is excited by a lateral electric field. The exciting
electrodes are placed opposite to the sensing surface, and the sensing film is
attached directly to the sensor platform. This arrangement is in contrast to the
standard quartz microbalance (QCM), where the sensing surface is normally coated
with a gold film, and it offers increased sensitivity along with selectivity.
The high sensitivity exhibited by this novel lateral-field-excited (LFE) QCM is
attributed to the fact that the sensor can measure both electrical and
mechanical property changes in the sensing film caused by the sorbed chemical or
biological agent. The selectivity of the LFE-QCM sensor is obtained by
performing molecular filtering directly in the sensing film. In this specific
project the LFE-QCM sensor is being designed to detect two specific chemicals
and one biological agent. The target chemicals are dimethyl phosponate (DMMP),
which simulates VX and G nerve agents, and an organophosphate pesticide that is
chemically similar to many other chemical-warfare agents. The biological agent
is E. coli O157:H7, which could appear in food or water supplies. In order to
realize the desired chemical and biological sensors, the research team is
exploring several issues relating to the LFE-QCM platform and the sensing film.
These issues include the optimum electrode geometry in the LFE-QCM platform, the
development of novel polymer and silica films for the detection of
organophosphates in water, and the coupling of E. coli antibodies to the sensing
surface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Homeland security as well as environmental and
industrial health concerns dictate that improved chemical and biological sensors
must be developed and deployed. After various sorbate-selective films have been
attached to the LFE-QCM surface, they will be exposed to the chemical simulants
and the biological agent in order to determine the sensing properties. It is
anticipated that the proposed work on these organo-phosphorus chemicals and E.
coli can be extended to development of selective sensors for other significant
chemical and biological agents. In addition, by coupling with existing GK-12 and
REU programs, this project will contribute to the education of a number of
students and teachers who will participate in the research program.&lt;br/&gt;