* 0330201
* SENSORS: Data-Driven Sensor Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Rajmohan Rajaraman, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Gia-Loi Le Gruenwald
* 08/31/2006
* USD 512,000.00

The widespread distribution and availability of small-scale sensors, actuators,
and embedded processors is transforming the physical world into a computing
platform. Sensor networks that consist of a large number of sensor nodes
combining physical sensing capabilities such as temperature, light, or seismic
sensors with networking and computation capabilities will become ubiquitous.
Applications range from environmental control, warehouse inventory, health care
to scientific and military scenarios. Sensor networks are heavily resource-
constraint, and thus careful resource management is an important task.

This research will investigate cross-layer optimizations for the preservation of
resources in sensor networks using a data-centric approach of programming the
sensor network through queries. Due to the regularity of query processing
patterns, query-layer specific routing algorithms that are optimized for the
more regular types of communication patterns that are generated by a query
layer. Anticipated results include techniques for processing continuous queries
and ad-hoc queries over wireless sensor networks, techniques for in-network data
storage including approaches for deciding when, what, and for how long data
should be stored, algorithms for periodic sensor data archival, and novel
techniques for gossip-style query processing in highly volatile environments.
This research will also result in a prototype that integrates the research into
a working system for use in research and education.