* 0330602
* SGER:     Investigation of Wheat Gluten as an Industrial Material
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2003,01/31/2005
* Dara Woerdeman, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 01/31/2005
* USD 100,716.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) project aims to develop
biobased material for industrial and consumer products. Wheat gluten can be
formed into a tough plastic like substance when small quantities of tri-thiols
are added. This discovery offers the possibility of developing high performance
fibers, foams, and biodegradable composites from renewable resources that are
far superior to previous efforts. The important technical innovations will
involve controlled reduction of the intramolecular disulfide bonds and
subsequent formation of a limited number of intermolecular disulfide bonds. This
will greatly enhance the impact strength of the material with only minimal
decrease in stiffness and strength. The goal of this project is to develop an
engineering material. Therefore, the methods are designed to minimize the cost
of the final material by developing a simple process of formulation and
processing. The research plan will include efforts to understand the toughening
mechanisms and the optimal formulations for the gluten material. Processes to be
studied include fiber drawing, supercritical CO2 processing of gluten into
foams, electro spinning, and pultrusion, along with rheological
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If an economical processing route can be invented,
a gluten based material may claim a significant share of the 1.2 billion pound
per year automotive market for structural plastics currently occupied by sheet
molding compound, a non-degradable, and essentially unrecyclable synthetic
material. There are numerous other applications in the transportation,
recreation, and other industries. Just as important is the known
biodegradability of gluten. If a controllable degradation pathway can be
invented with work past this initial SGER project, the environmental benefits
may become very large. Currently, many plastics are processed with toxic
solvents, placing a large but unquantifiable health risk on workers in the
industry and on residents living near plastics processing facilities. The long-
term goal is to develop an aqueous based processing method using ambient
temperature to produce a green material with known lifetime and extraordinary
properties.&lt;br/&gt;