* 0330325
* Sensors and Sensor Networks:  Indoor Global Positioning System (GPS) Sensor Application to Actuator Metrology and Automated Manufacturing Workcell Calibration
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Delbert Tesar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 08/31/2006
* USD 250,000.00

This research uses newly available "indoor GPS" (iGPS) technology
to&lt;br/&gt;generate an accurate robotic reference model from a
parametric&lt;br/&gt;description (dimensions, compliance, etc.) of its "as-
built" components&lt;br/&gt;(actuators, links, etc.). The new metrology system
uses infrared&lt;br/&gt;transmitters and has sufficient accuracy to
parametrically describe even&lt;br/&gt;high precision systems. Completing the
initial model requires the&lt;br/&gt;construction of a 2 meter cube high-
precision sensor network. Once the&lt;br/&gt;parameters are known, they can be
used to populate a developed model&lt;br/&gt;allowing manipulator accuracy
resolution previously attainable only at&lt;br/&gt;laboriously taught locations.
This development then allows for the&lt;br/&gt;construction of open architecture
manufacturing cells (1, 3, and 10&lt;br/&gt;meter cubes). The iGPS and reference
model will be used to "calibrate&lt;br/&gt;as assembled" (i.e. on demand) and
maintain the cell preventing accuracy&lt;br/&gt;drift due to repair, upgrade,
aging, temperature, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits of modular robots
are clear. Such systems allow flexible&lt;br/&gt;manufacturing, rapid repair,
and upgrade, but these benefits have yet to&lt;br/&gt;be realized. A significant
barrier is the presence of error between the&lt;br/&gt;tool (actual) frame and
goal (ideal) frame. While the repeatability&lt;br/&gt;(returning to a taught
point) of a typical robot can be 0.005", its&lt;br/&gt;accuracy (commanded to a
new point) may not be better than 0.1" due to&lt;br/&gt;configuration, load,
model error, etc. Currently, teaching a robotic&lt;br/&gt;device is a time-
consuming process required after repair, upgrade, and&lt;br/&gt;process change.
But the accuracy is not sufficient to perform the&lt;br/&gt;required high-
precision operations without teaching. This fact trumps&lt;br/&gt;other modular
technology benefits. But the use of iGPS technology in&lt;br/&gt;tandem with
actuator metrology could lead to accuracy levels close
to&lt;br/&gt;repeatability and remove this technological barrier.&lt;br/&gt;