* 0330964
* U.S.- Central/East European Collaborative Research:  Making Competitive Markets in Central and Eastern Europe:  The Impact of Market Openness and Physical Infrastructure
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Robert Feinberg, American University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 07/31/2006
* USD 26,848.00

This is a U.S.-Central/East European cooperative research project that will
focus on competitive markets in Central and Easter Europe. The principal
investigators are Robert Feinberg and Mieke Meurs from American University in
Washington, DC, Sergey Tsvetarsky from the National Statistical Office in
Bulgaria, Stefan Stefanov from the New Bulgarian University and Krzysztof
Gorlach from Jagiellonian University in Krakow,
Poland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the roles of market
liberalization (through legal/institutional changes) and domestic infrastructure
in promoting competitive domestic markets. The first part of the project is a
statistical study using existing data sets to study "passthrough" penetration in
seven Central and East European countries. The second part of the project
involves collecting local data at the municipal level in Poland to study
infrastructure development. These two 'projects' could provide interesting
insights into the problems of modernizing the economic infrastructure in these
countries and the possible implications these developments have on the
development of private sector markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in
economics research fulfills the program objectives of bringing together leading
experts in the U.S. and Central/Eastern Europe to combine complementary efforts
and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis
of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.