* 0330240
* SENSORS:      Solid-State Imprinted Xerogel Arrays Integrated With Smart CMOS Detectors for Biological Agents
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Frank Bright, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Marshall M. Lih
* 08/31/2008
* USD 318,916.00

0330240&lt;br/&gt;Titus&lt;br/&gt;The multidisciplinary research team at the
University at Buffalo aims to develop new, portable integrated sensor/detector
packages. It involves the following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;[1] Develop new
ultrastable protein imprinted xerogels that selectively recognize a given
proteinaceous toxin, (e.g. Ricin, Botulinum toxin).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;[2]
Produce protein imprinted xerogels with integrated emission sites (PIXIES) that
transduce the proteinaceous toxin's presence within the
xerogel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;[3] Use the PIXIES-based sensors to construct
sensor arrays for simultaneous multi-toxin detection in which the xerogels are
directly written on low density, large device area, addressable arrays of III-N
based solid state light emitting diodes (LEDs)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;[4] Develop
silicon complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) smart detector arrays and
produce fully integrated CMOS smart array-based devices that will be battery
powered, light weight, robust, fast and small.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore,
the research is enhanced by the fact that each component (PIXIE array, LED
array, and CMOS detector array) is being developed with an understanding of how
it will interact with the other components, thus ensuring that the entire sensor
system operates optimally.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
work range from interdisciplinary training to societal benefits of developing
sensors for toxins. Graduate and undergraduate students will be intimately
involved in all aspects of the proposed work (from experiment design to the
analysis of data and results to the crafting and submission of manuscripts for
publication in the scientific literature and delivering professional lectures at
scientific meetings).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will gain training in state-
of-the-art instrumentation, lasers, diagnostic tools, spectrochemical analysis,
detector design, electronics, packaging, bioanalysis, synthesis, materials
chemistry and processing, and chemical instrumentation design, development, and
testing. This comprehensive level of student training will be a springboard for
further studies (undergraduate students) or serve as the jump point into
challenging and satisfying careers in academia, industry, or government
installations (graduate students).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant fraction
of the students that will be working on the proposed research will be from
under- represented groups (female). The entire research effort is
multidisciplinary. All key results from this work will be widely disseminated by
publication in the peer-reviewed scientific
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will participate fully in the drafting
and submission of all manuscripts for publication in peer-reviewed journals.
Student co-workers will also prepare for and present their work at national
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;