* 0330428
* SENSORS: Ocean Observing System Instrument Network Infrastructure
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2011
* Duane Edgington, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 02/28/2011
* USD 745,447.00

P.I. Edgington (MBARI) Proposal #: 0330428

Proposal Title: SENSORS: Ocean Observing System Instrument Network
Infrastructure

Project Summary In this proposal the PI addresses the key technology issue of
interfacing sensors with ocean observatories to a) decrease labor required for
preparing, deploying and supporting instruments, b) ensure real-time and
archived data is usable, c) make developing instruments for observatories
easier, and d) provide pathways for the support of instruments not purpose-
developed for observatories. If adopted by the community, this approach would
allow interoperability of instruments between different ocean observatory
systems. The testing program proposed here, and the involvement of instrument
manufacturers and observatory developers at other institutions, is structured to
ensure that development of the instrument infrastructure is responsive to
community needs and the results made widely available. For this development, the
PI is applying distributed object, smart network, plug-and-work, and XML
technologies to create a uniform software infrastructure to support the
development, deployment, and operation of mooring based, deep ocean observing
systems with the goal of simplifying the problems of configuring, interfacing,
and controlling instruments in networked observing systems with potentially
intermittent and limited bandwidth, as well as simplifying access to, and
management of, the data coming from such systems. Once completed, the prototype
will be tested at the MARS (Monterey Accelerated Research System) observatory.
The rationale behind this proposed development is that there is a pressing need
to develop a uniform infrastructure to configure, interface, and control
instruments as well as manage data from the instruments deployed in distributed
networked sensor systems. This proposal addresses three problems: 1) the need to
develop a standard instrument interface protocol and instrument adaptor that
will simplify ease of configuration at sea, as well as automated device and
service discovery in the system, 2) development of a standard methodology for
describing instrument metadata, using XML technology, and a means for delivering
sensor data, along with its metadata, to shore, and 3) a uniform application
programming interface (API) using distributed object, client-server technology,
that will simplify the task of controlling and accessing instruments by making
the network layer transparent to the application developer.