* 0330850
* SGER:  Exploratory Study of Imbedded Carbon Nanotubes to Improve Thermal Performance of Flexible Electronics Packages
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2003,04/30/2004
* Steve Tung, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 04/30/2004
* USD 89,878.00

Large heating loads in high performance microelectronics often require high
thermal conductivity materials to maintain the health and performance of the
electronics. In flex-based circuitry, where the need for flexibility limits the
use of such highly conductive but stiff materials like diamond, thermal vias or
solder bumps can only slightly enhance the thermal performance of the polymeric
substrates. Recent studies suggest that carbon nanotubes (CN) can dramatically
improve the thermal management of flex circuits. Preliminary results indicate
that the nanoscale diameter and high aspect ratio of the highly conductive CN (~
3000 W/mK in the axial direction) allow CN/polymer composites to achieve
unusually high thermal conductivities, unlike polymers composited with the
traditional microscale particles. Initial tests performed at our laboratory on a
commercial epoxy composited with 1 wt% of randomly dispersed CN showed that the
thermal conductivity was enhanced by a factor of 1.7, while theory predicts this
number to reach 100 if the CN were aligned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the
results of our limited experiments, we propose to fabricate and evaluate the
thermal performance of two different types of CN/Polyimide composites with (a)
randomly oriented and (b) vertically aligned CN. The proposed project is both
high-risk and high-payoff. It is especially suitable for SGER funding due to the
fact that the physical properties of CN are not well understood and the
microelectronics industry can potentially benefit tremendously from the highly
conductive polymer composite developed by the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of Proposed Activity&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project is important to the fields of nanotechnology and
microelectronics. It not only impacts the design of future electronics packaging
but also significantly enhances our current knowledge of CN materials. The
proposed work is very novel, original, and organized, and the proposal team is
well qualified to perform the required work. The PI's have extensive experience
in such diverse but complementary areas as MEMS, simulation, and heat transfer.
Additionally, the team has access to a complete line of micro fabrication
facilities in an on-campus cleanroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of
Proposed Activity&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will generate significant
educational opportunities for students at both the college and high school
levels. The UA graduate and undergraduate students supported under this effort
will benefit greatly from the experience of carrying out the proposed
nanotechnology research. The K-12 students and teachers recruited for the
project will become more aware of nanotechnology, which can lead to more K-12
students pursuing science and engineering as a career path. The PI will actively
recruit underrepresented students through his current role as a mentor for women
and minority engineering students. The processing techniques developed and
equipment purchased for the project will significantly enhance the capability of
the multi-user micro fabrication facilities at UA.&lt;br/&gt;