* 0330280
* SENSORS:  Multi-Channel Wearable Biosensors for Continuous Cardiovascular Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2006
* Haruhiko Asada, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 09/30/2006
* USD 420,000.00

Presently, there is no adequate wearable biosensor system (WBS) for circulation
monitoring. Enabling the continuous beat-to-beat monitoring of hemodynamics for
observation periods of weeks, months, or years, could prove revolutionary as a
tool for the study and management of chronic cardiovascular (CV) diseases such
as hypertension, heart failure, and peripheral vascular disease. This task
requires sensors on the body, which ideally can be worn for days at a time,
yielding real time data. Existing sensor modalities that are able to make useful
hemodynamic and vascular measurements are not actually wearable, whereas
existing wearable sensor modalities record biosignals that are problematic for
medical applications due to motion artifact and varying physiological
conditions. To overcome these problems, we propose a new system identification
approach based on multiple sensor fusion: the multi-channel blind system
identification (MBSI) technique. MBSI allows the estimation of both an unknown
input and the unknown dynamics by exploiting the correlation among sensor
outputs observed simultaneously at multiple points. Placing multiple non-
invasive biosensors on the surface of a subject yields simultaneous circulatory
signals. These measurements can be systematically processed with MBSI algorithms
to estimate the vascular channel dynamics and central hemodynamics, such as
arterial blood pressure (ABP) and cardiac output (CO). Although the
physiological conditions of the subject frequently change during an extended
period of monitoring, the MBSI method can identify the changes in real time, and
use the identified channel dynamics for correctly converting the observed
peripheral sensor signals to the deep-body signals, such as CO, which has been
measured only by invasive catheterization. In this project we will establish the
theoretical foundation of the MBSI-based CV monitoring, develop a prototype
wearable biosensor network having non-invasive, low-power, compact biosensors
connected by a wireless ad hoc network, and develop three major clinical
applications; 1) long-term cardiac output estimation with non-invasive sensors,
2) continuous arterial blood pressure monitoring with wearable sensors, 3)
diagnosis of peripheral arterial pathology such as focal atherosclerosis and
dissection. The highly interdisciplinary nature and the international
collaboration component of this project provide unique educational opportunities
to undergraduate and graduate students.

