* 0330016
* Sensors:      Smart RF Antennas for Reliable and Real-Time Sensor Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Catherine Rosenberg, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Scott F. Midkiff
* 08/31/2008
* USD 500,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Wireless networks of sensor nodes cooperating among themselves for
information gathering and analysis&lt;br/&gt;are becoming an important platform
in several domains. The area has seen growing research interest
in&lt;br/&gt;different layers - devices, communication, network protocols and to
a limited extent, applications. For&lt;br/&gt;sensor networks to become viable
platforms for the large class of applications it is being
targeted&lt;br/&gt;towards, there is the need to consider the cross-interaction
between the different layers. For example, the&lt;br/&gt;fact that the sensors
are equipped with smart antennas capable of power optimization should be
utilized&lt;br/&gt;by the routing protocols. The novelty of the proposed
research is manifold. We propose to design a&lt;br/&gt;sensor node that
integrates innovative ideas for the radio frequency (RF) based communication
device,&lt;br/&gt;the MAC layer, and a fault-tolerant and real-time middleware.
The integrated node will be used in building&lt;br/&gt;a sensor network and
evaluating the network for tradeoffs of performance, cost, robustness,
simplicity,&lt;br/&gt;and flexibility.&lt;br/&gt;Uncertainty will be an
undeniable fact of life with sensor networks in their real world deployments.
The&lt;br/&gt;uncertainty will stem from environmental variability (e.g., lack
of line of sight communication), node&lt;br/&gt;variability (e.g., faster
drainage of battery than expected), traffic variability (such as, higher than
expected&lt;br/&gt;sensed data traffic due to frequent occurrence of the event
of interest) and attacker induced variability&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., jamming of the
physical channels by a malicious intruder). In our research, we propose to
provide&lt;br/&gt;in-built support in the nodes to tolerate the uncertainty in
the different dimensions. We propose several&lt;br/&gt;novel low power modes of
operation based on the features of our proposed smart antenna in the
RF&lt;br/&gt;communication equipment. Our proposed sensor node will be capable
of not simply tolerating uncertainty,&lt;br/&gt;but exploiting the uncertainty
to its advantage. We propose to make use of limited mobility in case
it&lt;br/&gt;causes the neighbors of a node to be aligned in a narrow band. In
such a situation, the antenna can be&lt;br/&gt;switched from its omni-
directional mode of operation to a lower power unidirectional
mode.&lt;br/&gt;Adaptivity of the sensor node will be another important driving
factor in its design. The sensor node&lt;br/&gt;should lend itself to
reconfiguration in the face of uncertainty through easy to use mechanisms. In
our&lt;br/&gt;proposed node, a common thread of adaptivity will be built in at
all the three levels under investigation.&lt;br/&gt;The issues of trade-off
between adaptivity or flexibility and performance, cost, and simplicity will
be&lt;br/&gt;considered for each layer as well as for the cross-interaction
between layers. For example, at the&lt;br/&gt;communication device layer, the
key tradeoff against cost will feature prominently since
expensive&lt;br/&gt;antenna arrays can provide the flexibility we require, but
at a cost infeasible for the sensor nodes.&lt;br/&gt;Adaptivity at the system
software level will focus on performing tasks on an as-needed basis, such
as&lt;br/&gt;activating the sensor only when there is an event of interest.
Adaptivity at the middleware level will focus&lt;br/&gt;on adjusting the
communication and computation to tune the fault -tolerance and real-time quality
of&lt;br/&gt;service provided by the node.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
comprises three key tasks: (i) Building diverse and intelligent RF hardware
on&lt;br/&gt;electrically small nodes, which will enable more robust and lower
power operation. The key issues&lt;br/&gt;addressed here will be directionality,
electromagnetically small size, and tradeoff between
attractive&lt;br/&gt;radiation shaping and cost and complexity; (ii) Building
MAC and networking mechanisms which can&lt;br/&gt;leverage the flexibility
provided by the RF hardware and provide hooks to the middleware. The MAC
and&lt;br/&gt;network layers will balance the tradeoffs of resource cost against
performance and optimize it based on&lt;br/&gt;the application requirements;
(iii) Building a middleware layer that optimizes the operations for
fault-&lt;br/&gt;tolerance and real-time requirements and balances these
criteria against the cost and performance&lt;br/&gt;impact.&lt;br/&gt;Broad
Impact in Technology and Teaching: An important goal of the research is to
develop sensor&lt;br/&gt;nodes with the new technology and create a sensor
network testbed with the nodes equipped with&lt;br/&gt;mobility. The testbed
will serve as an intuitive and attractive vehicle for disseminating the
research&lt;br/&gt;results. This trend of popularizing research follows the
earlier experience of the co-PI Rosenberg who has&lt;br/&gt;developed and
deployed locality aware wireless services (such as, printing services) on the
Purdue&lt;br/&gt;campus for widespread community use. The research findings will
be disseminated to the RF, network,&lt;br/&gt;and middleware research community
through publications and conference presentations. This project
will&lt;br/&gt;help in teaching and training the graduate and undergraduate
students who are implementing the&lt;br/&gt;techniques and performing the
testbed development and evaluation. The research results may
be&lt;br/&gt;incorporated in several graduate and undergraduate courses taught
by the PI and the co-PIs (i-Fault&lt;br/&gt;Tolerant System Designlt, ieAdvanced
Course in Networkingl., ieDistributed Parameter Systemslr).