* 0330541
* Improved Convex Underestimators and Hybrid Methods for Deterministic Global Optimization
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2008
* Christodoulos Floudas, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/31/2008
* USD 330,716.00

Intellectual Content: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this
research is to develop novel theoretical, algorithmic and computational
techniques for global optimization problems that arise in a variety of chemical
engineering process design, synthesis and operations problems. It is the PI's
intention to investigate (i) the development of a new class of improved convex
underestimators for twice-continuously differentiable constrained nonlinear
programming problems which will enhance the aBB approach and will be applied in
a variety of phase equilibrium, design and synthesis problems; (ii) the
theoretical and algorithmic development of a novel cut and splice refinement of
the aBB convex subfunctional that will result in new types of tigher convex
underestimators; (iii) the theoretical and algorithmic issues for the
development of novel trigonometric convex underestimators for several classes of
nonconvex trigonometric functions; and (iv) the development of new hydrid global
optimization methods which combine the beneficial elements of the enhanced aBB
deterministic global optimization framework with stochastic based approaches,
and their distributed computing implementations, and their applications to
medium and large-scale nonconvex optimization problems that arise in pooling and
blending applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of research and education will be enhanced
through the introduction of lecture material and projects in the elective
graduate course on Nonlinear Mixed Integer Optimization, and the required
capstone senior design course Design, Synthesis and Optimization of Chemical
Processes. The research will broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups since it will aim at attracting female and minority students at the
graduate level and the undergraduate senior theses level. The results of the
work will be broadly disseminated to researchers in academia and industry
through presentations at domestic and international meetings, scholarly refereed
journal publications and through our web page (http://titan.princeton.edu) which
will describe the approaches, implementations and results. Many petrochemical,
chemical, pharmaceutical and services/software companies will benefit by the
development of rigorous global optimization methods that can address important
problems in process design and operations. This can lead to faster response to
the market demands, and hence more efficient use of the processing facilities,
which has direct benefit on the US economy.&lt;br/&gt;