* 0331379
* SGER:     Synthesis and Rheological Characterization of 'Smart' Complex Fluids:     Suspensions of Magnetically-Active Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Carlos Rinaldi-Ramos, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Judy A. Raper
* 07/31/2005
* USD 25,500.00

CTS-0331379 C. Rinaldi, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez

The proposed research concerns experimental and theoretical studies of the
synthesis and rheological response of novel magnetically active complex fluids.
Such fluids include colloidal dispersions of magnetizable micro-particles
(1-100micrometers) and permanently magnetized nanoparticles (1-100nm).
Experimental efforts will focus on synthesis of said dispersions, with
particular emphasis on stability, controllability of particle size, tailoring of
magnetic properties, functionalization of particle surfaces, and
characterization of the corresponding magnetorheological response to
alternating, traveling-wave, and rotating uniform/non-uniform electromagnetic
fields. Theoretical research will focus on formulation of proper balance laws,
constitutive equations, boundary conditions, and analytical/numerical solution
schemes for the associated coupled electromechanical fluid-flow problems. This
research-initiation grant will enable support of graduate students over the
summer months, principal investigator travel to professional meetings and
conferences, and acquisition of raw materials and supplies. The ultimate goal of
the proposed work is the establishment of an externally funded research
laboratory focusing on smart complex fluids at the Chemical Engineering
Department of the University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez.

Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of the proposed research lies in the
elucidation of proper constitutive forms for the stress and other
phenomenological fluxes in the continuum description of smart complex fluids.
This has immediate application in the description of magnetic fluids
(ferrofluids) and of magnetorheological fluids.

Broader Impact: The requested funds will support junior faculty from an
underrepresented group in the startup of a research laboratory. The research
proposed will serve to substantiate future proposals to external funding
agencies. Funds acquired will enhance the Puerto Rico research infrastructure
and develop the local workforce by fostering the growth of the recently
established Ph.D. program in Chemical Engineering at the University of Puerto
Rico at Mayaguez, one of the nations leading Hispanic Serving Institutions
producing graduates in science, mathematics, and engineering.