* 0331370
* Special Symposium: Engineering Applied to Alternative and Complementary Medicine, Sydney, Australia, August 24-29, 2003
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2004
* Dov Jaron, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 05/31/2004
* USD 15,000.00

0331370 Jaron This special symposium is a component of the 2003 World Congress
of the International Union of Physical and Engineering Sciences in Medicine.
Entitled "Engineering Applied to Alternative and Complementary Medicine: Health
Care Solutions with Potential to Reduce Health Care Costs", the focus is on how
biomedical engineering research can lead to a better understanding and
quantification of benefits of alternative and complementary medicine therapies
which are practiced and implemented at minimal cost throughout the world. From
traditional oriental medicine to the use of local herbal remedies, alternative
and complementary medicine therapies have the potential to be easily applied
therapies that can play a significant role in reducing the cost of health care
in developed countries and in the developing world. The symposium relates to the
National Science Foundation/Whitaker Foundation initiative on Cost Reducing
Health Care Technologies, initiated more than 10 years ago.

There are 3 sessions in the symposium. One session focuses on "western"
technologies (fMRI; millimeter wave pain relief; electric fields) and research
methodologies that are being applied to investigate the effects of traditional
medicine; a second on analysis and assessments of outcomes of alternative
medicine; and the third on the integration of engineering and quantitative
approaches to research in alternative and complementary therapeutics.

Abstracts of symposium presentations will appear as part of the World Congress
Proceedings. To take part in the special symposium, participants will commit to
provide a full paper for publication. A commitment already has been received
from the IEEE/EMBS Magazine to devote a special issue to the topic. Publication
of the proceedings of the symposium in the IEEE/EMBS Magazine will increase the
awareness and visibility of alternative techniques among the engineering
community and new research methodologies -- using engineering principles --
would be developed to enable the initiation of innovative scientific approaches
to research in alternative medicine and possibly understanding of new mechanisms
for addressing disease.