* 0331703
* SGER: Behavioral Factors in the Transmission of West Nile Virus in American Crows
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2003,09/30/2004
* Anne Clark, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Godfrey R. Bourne
* 09/30/2004
* USD 30,000.00

Proposal 0331703 Anne B. Clark, PI. BEHAVIORAL FACTORS IN THE TRANSMISSION OF
WEST NILE VIRUS IN AMERICAN CROWS (Corvus brachyrhynchos)

Disease is an under-appreciated but important selection pressure on the
evolution of behavior, particularly social behavior. This study takes advantage
of a rare opportunity to study the way in which the social behavior of wild
animals may contribute to the risks of contracting and transmitting a newly
invading disease, West Nile Virus (WNV). WNV threatens not only humans, but also
many other species, including endangered populations. Family group-living
American crows (Corvus brachyrhynchos) are especially susceptible and laboratory
studies suggest that their complex social behavior and close family
relationships may be involved in how they contract and transmit the disease. In
2002, WNV first appeared in a unique marked population of crows studied over 14
years. During 2003, this study will follow individual behavior and illness in
these crows to evaluate both the role of time spent in large summer roosts to
mosquito transmission and the importance of direct transmission within families
due to pro-social behaviors, including parental care of offspring, preening
among family members and especially crows' apparent tendency to attend or feed
sick group members. By investigating the role of social behavior in the spread
of an epidemiologically important disease, this project will contribute to the
understanding both of disease as a selection pressure on social behavior in
animals and of the risks factors for WNV transmission in wildlife and humans.