* 0331550
* Radiative Transfer Applications to the Remote Sensing of Ice Clouds: Theory and Experiment
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2009
* Kuo-Nan Liou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 10/31/2009
* USD 1,053,000.00

This project is a continuation of the Principal Investigator's ongoing research
on radiative transfer in ice clouds, with specific applications to remote
sensing in both cirrus cloudy atmospheres and a laboratory cloud chamber. The
Principal Investigator and his graduate students have developed a method to
infer ice crystal size and shape from airborne and satellite polarization and
reflectance observations at visible and near-infrared wavelengths. They also
employ a new theoretical approach using the reflected line spectrum in the 1.38
micrometer band to determine the vertical profile of ice crystal size in cirrus
clouds. Laboratory activities include construction of a cloud chamber used to
generate ice crystals of various shapes and sizes and equipped with a special
radiation sensing platform. The observational apparatus measures the reflected
light and polarization simultaneously at several scattering angles and at
specific wavelengths in the visible and near-infrared by using imaging grating
spectrometers, in a way that reproduces the bidirectional reflection geometry
observed by satellite and aircraft. The reflected spectrum in the 1.38
micrometer region is measured by a Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer for
application to vertical profiling. The broader impacts of the research include
advancing the understanding of radiative transfer in ice clouds containing
nonspherical crystals of intricate shape, size, and orientation. The combined
theoretical and experimental approach provides the physical foundation and
validation data for the development of new methods of remote sensing to infer
cirrus cloud composition from satellites and space-borne radar and lidar in
support of weather and climate research. It also supplies the correct light
scattering and radiative properties of ice clouds for their parameterization in
climate models, which information is critical for understanding the effect of
widespread cirrus clouds on the reflection of sunlight and the trapping of
thermal infrared radiation associated with greenhouse warming and climate
feedback processes.