* 0331140
* 3D Modeling of Flow Behind a Heated Backward-Facing Step using 3D Digital Particle Image Velocimetry &amp; Thermometry
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2003,12/31/2009
* James Riley, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 12/31/2009
* USD 300,713.00

Today's experimental studies of turbulence that use imaging methods, such as
Digital Particle Image Velocimetry (DPIV) and Digital Particle Image Thermometry
and Velocimetry (DPITV), are huge improvements over previous single-point
measurement techniques (e.g. hot-wire anemometry, Laser Doppler Velocimetry
(LDV), thermocouples, thermistors, pitot tubes). These new methods allow for
simultaneous 2-D measurements of time-evolving temperature and velocity, but
inherently cannot address turbulent flows, where 3-D information is absolutely
essential. While newly developed 3-D velocity techniques allow for 3-D time-
evolving velocity measurements, we have no technique to provide both temperature
and velocity in 3-D. &lt;br/&gt;The short-term research goal is to develop a
novel technique, 3D Defocusing Particle Image Thermometry and Velocimetry
(3DDPITV), to simultaneously measure time-evolving temperature and velocity
fields within a volume. The long-term research goal is to apply this new
technique to study coherent structures, their interactions, and their heat
transfer/mixing characteristics in order to develop an understanding of the
physics associated with their interactions. In addition, with this gained
understanding and with the availability of three-dimensional data fields,
subgrid-scale models to be used in LES simulations can be tested and, when
appropriate, new models will be proposed. &lt;br/&gt;The experiment of choice is
the backward-facing step. This flow has the advantage of having areas distinctly
different and unique in their flow physics: (1) The separated shear layer is
very similar to a mixing layer, thereby providing the opportunity to study the
role and effects of coherent structures on mixing and heat transfer across a
heated shear layer. (2) The unsteadiness of the shear layer's reattachment will
provide an opportunity to study the effects of coherent structures on heat
transfer in reattachments problems. (3) The recirculation zone, dominated by
convection due to the primary vortex, will provide the opportunity to study heat
transfer within recirculating regions, also dominated by coherent structures.
(4) The redeveloping boundary layer beyond the reattachment region, dominated by
the turbulent heat flux and directly related to the interaction of vortices
within the shear layer that impinge upon the wall during reattachment, will
provide an opportunity to study developing boundary layers. &lt;br/&gt;This
research will address broader impacts in three primary areas: integrating
education and research, enhancing infrastructure, and promoting benefits to
society. &lt;br/&gt; The award has been funded by the Thermal Transport and
Thermal Processing Program of the Chemical and Transport Systems Division, and
it is part of a joint program involving Sandia National Laboratory and the NSF
in the area of "Engineering Sciences for Modeling, Simulation, Decision-Making
and Emerging Technologies.&lt;br/&gt;