* 0331564
* Household Boundaries and Kinship Networks in Historical Family Reconstitution
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Eugene Hammel, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 05/31/2005
* USD 24,983.00

The study of demographic processes in past time was greatly advanced by the
adoption of family reconstitution methods using records of birth, marriage, and
death, usually from parish registers. However the methodology is quite limited
and ethnocentric. It rarely links persons beyond the nuclear family, and usually
assumes that that family is a household. It rarely links persons beyond two-
generations. It never examines the stochastic character of variant
reconstitutions from the same basic data. It rarely cross-validates the
reconstitution of event records by examination of census-type records such as
household registers. This last failing results from the fact that household
registers are composed of already reconstituted families and that if one's
analytical interest is limited to the coresidential group there is no need to go
further. This project is an exploratory and risky endeavor to test the
optimality of family reconstitution of parish records, using c. 225,000 records
of baptisms, marriages, and burials from central Slavonia, 1700-1900. This
research will take advantage of ecclesiastical household censuses that are now
machine-readable and can be matched to varying reconstitutions of the event
data. It will also test the reconstitutions to find the reconstitution rules
that achieve the best match with the censuses. The work is exploratory because
it is a necessary first step toward examination of the role of kinship beyond
the conjugal family and beyond the extended household. It is a significant
advance in historical anthropological demography. It is risky because no one has
done it, and although preliminary trials in some aspects are promising, it is
not known if the cross-validation with the censuses will actually work. The
intellectual merit of this proposal includes the application of a rigorous
anthropological and structural-functional point of view into discussions of
economic and social causality in historical demographic change. The broader
implications of this proposal are that all of the underlying and processed data
will be available on the Internet as a public good. The algorithms and code will
be available, to be adapted by other researchers to their own datasets. This
will enhance the adoption of these methods by other historical and
anthropological demographers, beyond what could be achieved by ordinary
scholarly publication.

