* 0331306
* QSB: Construction and Experimental Validation of Models of MAPK Signaling in Budding Yeast
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Andre Levchenko, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/2006
* USD 500,000.00

Successful development of the biotechnology industry holds great promise for
improving health and quality of life of the people in this country and all over
the world. The last decade has brought about the awareness of how complex and
finely organized biological systems are. Even the simplest yet highly
biotechnologically relevant organisms, such as bacteria and yeast, display an
amazing degree of complexity in regulation of their life cycles. An essential
part of this complexity is the function of their signaling pathways, the
biochemical multi-molecular links between their genes and the environment.
Understanding these biochemical links can help researchers to better control the
way organisms behave and respond to the changing biotechnological needs. To
investigate the complexity of signal transduction novel technologies are needed,
the technologies that are rooted in our ability to quantitatively model the
underlying processes and to precisely control cell behavior on the microscopic
scale. This project is aimed at an integrated experimental and computational
exploration of signaling pathways in yeast. This research will develop a novel,
high throughput method for collection of data that will allow performing
experiments with hundreds of individual cells exposed to a variety of conditions
in the same microfabricated chip over extended periods of time. The results of
these experiments will be analyzed using a detailed mathematical and
computational model of the underlying signaling mechanisms. The model will then
be used to guide further experimentation. This integrated approach will also be
used to investigate the interaction between several signaling systems
simultaneously exposed to multiple signaling stimuli changing in time and in
space. The results of this research will lead to both a better understanding of
the function of a biologically and biotechnologically important organism and to
creation of a prototype system for understanding cell signaling in other living
cells. Graduate students will be trained in this research, and this example of a
tightly coupled study integrating theory and experiment will be used in courses
taught at Johns Hopkins University and the University of California at San
Diego, and potentially at other institutions. This approach may influence the
way cellular signaling is studied by future scientists.

