* 0331232
* Earth2Class: Linking Research Scientists and Classroom Teachers
* GEO,GEO
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Michael Passow, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 12/31/2006
* USD 204,448.00

This project provides proof-of-concept evaluation of Earth2Class (E2C), an
innovative professional development program for middle and high school teachers
that brings together research scientists from the Lamont-Doherty Earth
Observatory of Columbia University (LDEO) and classroom educators. E2C has been
operating informally at LDEO for several years as a grass roots, teacher-
initiated and teacher-led program that has brought together scientists and
teachers in ways that participants find useful. The program provides background
information to help teachers understand more about cutting-edge investigations
and educational technology strategies for developing appropriate lessons. In
this project, the E2C team is evaluating prior accomplishments, building on
strengths, identifying weaknesses, and creating a more effective program of
peer-training that serves the needs of hundreds of teachers and thousands of
students. Many of the teachers and students are from districts with significant
percentages of minority students

The E2C web site, www.earth2class.org, provides resources for teachers and
students through archived versions of workshops and links to pertinent local and
national scientific projects. It also contains tested examples of how to
integrate research results into student-oriented lessons and assessment
criteria. The website also builds networks among teachers and scientists that
provide mentoring after workshops when teachers are ready to create a curriculum
unit and can effectively receive feedback about how to improve lessons. Web-
based communications and follow-up meetings throughout the year allow teachers
to share successes and failures, which significantly increase the chances they
will incorporate workshop materials into their curriculum. Intellectual merit of
the project lies in the identification of characteristics that serve as models
for establishing similar programs at other institutions. The project has a broad
impact on the education of large numbers of teachers and their students who
would not be likely to learn of the research discoveries unless the discoveries
are incorporated into textbooks. The E2C format provides teachers and students
with immediate access to a range of geoscience investigations, and introduces
students at the impressionable middle and high school levels to Earth Science
career possibilities. Formative and summative evaluations are assessing changes
in content knowledge of teachers and their ability to serve as effective peer-
trainers to disseminate geoscience research results. Information collected by
the assessments aids understanding of how to bridge gaps between the work of
researcher and the classroom teacher/student, create readily accessible
materials based on geoscience research suitable for Standards-based student
learning, and design programs tailored to diverse school cultures and needs.
Results from the program will be shared through the E2C web site and other
electronic formats linked to DLESE, presentations at science and science
education conferences, professional journals, and curriculum materials in CD or
other format.