* 0331560
* LSAMP: The Ohio Science and Engineering  Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2003,09/30/2009
* Patrick Osmer, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 09/30/2009
* USD 3,499,123.00

&lt;br/&gt;The Ohio Science and Engineering Alliance &lt;br/&gt;Summary
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Ohio Science and Engineering Alliance is a coalition
of fifteen universities working together &lt;br/&gt;with federal, state, and
community agencies1. It will significantly enhance the STEM infrastructure
&lt;br/&gt;within Ohio and will serve as a catalyst for change, innovation, and
resource enhancement &lt;br/&gt;throughout the state. &lt;br/&gt;The primary
goal and broad impact of the Alliance is to double the number of
underrepresented &lt;br/&gt;minority students who earn bachelor.s degrees in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics &lt;br/&gt;(STEM) fields and
to significantly increase the number who pursue graduate study in these fields.
&lt;br/&gt;This goal will be accomplished through the integration of new and
existing campus-based and &lt;br/&gt;statewide programs; the monitoring of
student progress through their undergraduate degrees and &lt;br/&gt;beyond; and
the promotion of the Alliance to students, their parents, faculty, and the
general public. &lt;br/&gt;The Ohio Alliance will focus on a comprehensive
series of effective recruitment and retention &lt;br/&gt;initiatives that
address key transition points from undergraduate recruitment through preparation
for &lt;br/&gt;graduate school. These transitions include: &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A. Transition to College . Effective Coordination and Quality
Programming; &lt;br/&gt;B. First-Year and Beyond Student Programming;
&lt;br/&gt;C. Research Experiences for Rising Juniors and Seniors; and
&lt;br/&gt;D. Professional Development for Students, Faculty, and Staff.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NSF funds will be used to support Alliance-wide
initiatives (e.g., cooperative recruitment, research &lt;br/&gt;internships,
professional development, Alliance Forum) as well as individual campus-based
&lt;br/&gt;programs (e.g., mentoring, bridge programs, tutoring, supplemental
instruction, drop-in centers, &lt;br/&gt;workshops). Research faculty will
continue to be involved in program planning and will play an &lt;br/&gt;active
role in the selection of student participants, matching students with their
research projects, &lt;br/&gt;mentoring, and assessing the quality of individual
student performance. STEM students who receive &lt;br/&gt;competitive funding
will be referred to as Glenn-Stokes Scholars. &lt;br/&gt;Ohio State University
will serve as the lead institution on behalf of the Alliance, and President
&lt;br/&gt;Karen Holbrook, a research scientist herself, will serve as the
principal investigator and chair of the &lt;br/&gt;Governing Board. Together
with the Board, Steering Committee, and research faculty, she will
&lt;br/&gt;provide intellectual leadership to the Alliance. The co-PI, Susan
Huntington, Dean of the Graduate &lt;br/&gt;School, will provide its
organizational home. The project director, Jean Girves, has served as the
&lt;br/&gt;associate director of the Committee on Institutional Cooperation
(CIC) for fifteen years, where she &lt;br/&gt;coordinated and raised funds for
numerous collaborative projects among the 12 member institutions,
&lt;br/&gt;including the Summer Research Opportunities Program (SROP) for
minority students, the Women in &lt;br/&gt;Science and Engineering (WISE)
Initiative, and the Graduate Minority Fellows program. In 2000, &lt;br/&gt;she
accepted the Presidential Award for Excellence in Science, Mathematics and
Engineering &lt;br/&gt;Mentoring on behalf of the SROP.