* 0331958
* Designing Educational Opportunities for the Hazard Manager of the 21st Century
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Dennis Mileti, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Roger Seals
* 07/31/2004
* USD 59,988.00

&lt;br/&gt;Recognizing that traditional approaches to emergency/hazard
management would not meet the challenge of minimizing disaster loss, the process
of re-defining the role and skills of emergency/hazard managers began in the
late 1980s and early 1990s. The terrorist events of September 11 and the
response efforts since have only further emphasized the need to re-think the
types of skills the hazard manager of the 21st century should possess. Hazard
managers are now required to have a center of knowledge much beyond incident
response and must have much stronger expertise in science, social science, and
technology. Several disconnected efforts to establish emergency management
higher education curriculum are already underway, but have not so far yielded a
standardized direction based on the consensus of leading
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;The Natural Hazard Center at the University of Colorado
at Boulder and the&lt;br/&gt;University of Colorado at Denver in partner with
the FEMA Higher Education Project are conducting a workshop to formulate a
consensus on the skills needed by the hazard manger of the 21st century, to
identify educational requirements, and to create a sample curriculum. There are
approximately 35-45 participants attending the 2-3 day workshop in the Denver,
Colorado area. The participants are from a wide-variety of academic disciplines,
government agencies involved with hazard management, and areas of
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop outcomes will provide guidance for the
creation of educational programs across the U.S. in support of disaster
reduction and would provide guidance for the development of educational
opportunities. These outcomes will directly supports the changing nature of
hazard management in the U.S. and will seek to create a professional image for
the emergency/hazard management field.&lt;br/&gt;