* 0331389
* Multicomponent Space-Charge Ion Uptake and Ion/Solvent Transport Models for Ion-Exchange Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2002,10/31/2004
* Peter Pintauro, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 10/31/2004
* USD 166,310.00

ABSTRACT



CTS-0085679

Multicomponent Space-Charge Ion Uptake and Ion/Solvent Transport Models for Ion-
Exchange Membranes

Peter N. Pintauro Department of Chemical Engineering Tulane University New
Orleans, LA 70118

Ion-exchange membranes are used in a variety of industrial processes and
electrochemical devices, including electrodialysis separations, electrochemical
reactors, sensors, and proton-exchange-membrane fuel cells. In order to
understand better the mechanism of selective ion transport by these membranes,
new space-charge equilibrium ion uptake and ion/solvent transport models are
being developed and tested. The models consider: (i) multivalent
counterion/fixed-charge-site ion-pair formation, (ii) concentration-dependent
ion diffusivities and solvent viscosity within the pores of a membrane, (iii)
variable Gibbs energy of ion solvation within the pore-fluid double layer, (iv)
electrostatic interactions between ions and the membrane's fixed charges, and
(iv) the orientation of solvent dipoles inside a membrane pore due to the strong
electric field generated by the membrane's fixed-charge groups. The models are
applied to a variety of systems: (i) commercially available cation-exchange and
anion-exchange membranes, (2) solutions composed of monovalent/monovalent cation
and anion salts, monovalent/divalent cation salts, alkali metal/quaternary
ammonium salt mixtures, and NaCl/amino acid (glycine) mixtures, and (3) water,
methanol, methanol/water, and acetonitrile/water solvents. Experimental
measurements include ion and solvent fluxes and bulk solution concentration
changes during multicomponent Donnan dialysis and electrodialysis as well as
membrane-phase counterion concentration levels during multicomponent ion uptake.
The data are used to test the space-charge membrane models.

The development of sufficiently detailed structure/function models that describe
accurately absorption and transport of multiple ionic species in ion-exchange
membranes would be of great value to polymer engineers and membrane scientists
who are developing new membrane applications and formulating new polymeric
membrane materials. Such models could be used (i) to simulate the performance of
a given ion-exchange membrane in a particular electrochemical device or
separation application, and (ii) to indicate new membrane structures with
desired ion-transport rates and selectivities. This research project seeks such
models by expanding the fundamental knowledge-base regarding the molecular-level
processes and interactions that control the separation of multicomponent salt
solutions from aqueous and non-aqueous solvents in anion and cation-exchange
membranes.