* 0331292
* Temperature Compensation in Antarctic Pteropods: An Integrative Approach
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2002,09/30/2003
* Robert Dudley, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 09/30/2003
* USD 5,464.00

Life in polar waters requires physiological specialization to overcome thermal
limits on reaction processes. The long-standing hypothesis of metabolic cold
adaptation, which proposes upregulation of basal and active metabolic rates in
polar taxa relative to temperate-zone counterparts, remains contentious and has
been taxonomically limited in evaluation to fish and benthic invertebrates.
Polar pteropods (Mollusca: Gastropoda) represent an abundant and metabolically
active taxon with potentially substantial thermal compensation of the
physiological processes underlying locomotion. This research will examine
metabolic cold adaptation in two pteropod taxa, with particular reference to the
thermal dependence of locomotor performance. Hypotheses of cold adaptation will
be tested by comparing representative temperate zone and polar species and by
evaluating possibly coordinated thermal compensation of metabolic, biomechanical
and neural underpinnings to locomotor behavior. The proposed research comprises
three parts: 1) comparison of basal and metabolic rates of sister pteropod
species from polar and temperate zones, together with comparisons of
mitochondrial energetics; 2) comparison of locomotor biomechanics for the same
pteropod taxa, with particular reference to the differential effects of reduced
temperature and concomitantly increased viscosity on locomotor performance and
3) comparison of the responses of swim system neurons to variable temperatures,
with particular reference to resting potentials, firing thresholds, action
potential durations and ion channel kinetics. The overall hypothesis of
temperature compensation in polar pteropods will be tested by evaluating
similarities and linkages in metabolic, biomechanical and neural responses to
variable water temperature. This research will provide fundamental physiological
and behavioral information for this taxon, will systematically evaluate the
hypothesis of cold adaptation across organizational levels in pteropods, and
more generally will evaluate the nature of thermal and locomotor constraints for
the many invertebrate taxa living and moving within polar waters.