* 0331155
* The Transects Program: Pathways to Ocean Research Using a Collaborative Team Approach
* GEO,GEO
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Leslie Sautter, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 07/31/2006
* USD 160,265.00

The Transects Program: Pathways to Ocean Research Using a Collaborative Team
Approach Sautter 0331155

The Transects Program provides the opportunity for as many as 32 undergraduate
and 16 graduate students to experience oceanography and the scientific process
first-hand. Teams of undergraduates work in collaboration with graduate
students, and are overseen by a multidisciplinary core of College of Charleston
oceanography faculty mentors.

Students participating in the Transects Program each identify a research
question and collect and process oceanographic samples during a 5-day cruise
aboard a research vessel. They then analyze their data and document results
during a post-cruise Oceanographic Research course, developed and co-instructed
by the PIs. There are four separate cruises to sample a newly established
Charleston Transect, each with a distinct collaborative team of students and
scientists, and each with an accompanying post-cruise research course.

In addition to student-generated research, one of the main scientific objectives
of this project is the development of a broad, multidisciplinary database,
monitoring the spatial and temporal variability of the continental shelf region
off Charleston, SC.

The Southeast Center for Ocean Science Education Excellence (SE-COSEE) is
assisting with identifying and recruiting 4 undergraduate students from HBCUs
and MSIs in the North Carolina/South Carolina/Georgia region. During the fall
semester each year, 4 to 6 students are invited to participate in an At Sea! day
program (with travel supported by the NOAA Coastal Services Center) so that they
are familiar with the sea-going process. At Sea! allows these students to
determine if they wish to participate in the full Transects Program experience.
Four of the students are chosen for the spring Transects cruise in May (each
year), and they are fully supported by the grant.

With assistance from the College of Charleston's Project Oceanica staff,
students generate interactive on-line resources to document research results and
databases, providing access to multiple audiences. Faculty and students
participating in the project present results at regional and national
conferences, and they publish results in professional journals.

SE-COSEE provides summative and formative program evaluations, critical to the
continual assessment and modification of the Transects Program.