* 0331332
* Response of saturated soil to the intense heat of tunnel fires
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2003,05/31/2004
* Deborah Goodings, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Juan M. Pestana
* 05/31/2004
* USD 99,001.00

The sensitivity of structures to the effect of fire is well established and was
stunningly demonstrated in the World Trade Center collapse of 9/11. Fires in
underground structures are not uncommon, and appear to be increasing in
frequency and severity. In prolonged tunnel fires, the temperature of the
adjacent soil can rise as much as 400C or more. These high temperatures and
associated temperature gradients in the soil are expected to impact the
stability of the entire underground structure. The specific objective of this
research program is to examine the response of saturated soil to temperature
gradients associated with severe tunnel fires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
exploratory experimental research will address the system response of saturated
soil subjected to prolonged, intense temperatures characteristic of public
access rail and highway tunnel fires. It is supported under the Small Grants for
Exploratory Research program. A physical model will be constructed that
represents a simple one-dimensional cylindrical core from a section of the
tunnel lining and the saturated soil above it. This model will be subjected to
the fire loads expected in tunnel fires. It will be instrumented, and changes in
the mechanical properties of the soil measured. This simple approach will
provide a preliminary view of the temperature distribution, the thermally
induced movement of water, vaporization of pore fluid, soil movement due to
consolidation and to other pore fluid behavior, and changes in soil properties
in response to representative insitu heat, fluid pressure, and surcharge
conditions. More sophisticated model investigations to be initiated subsequent
to this study will be based on these preliminary experimental
results.&lt;br/&gt;From a technical point of view, this basic research
ultimately will contribute to public safety through improved original design and
remedial design of underground civil engineering structures that may be subject
to intense and prolonged fire. In addition, it will generate a scientific
discussion between distinct engineering disciplines: Geotechnical Engineering
and Fire Protection Engineering.