* 0331509
* SGER: Black Public Opinion, the Supreme Court, and the University of Michigan Affirmative Action Decision
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2003,05/31/2005
* Rosalee Clawson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 05/31/2005
* USD 77,500.00

On December 2, 2002, the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to hear two cases arising out
of the University of Michigan's use of race-conscious criteria in its admissions
policies. That a decision is pending on an issue of such salience to black
Americans, a discrete and strategically important element of the American
electorate, presents researchers with a unique opportunity to take advantage of
unfolding events in order to systematically examine the relationship between
both the opinion of black Americans toward a policy articulated by the Court and
the Court as an institution. In this project, the researchers conduct a survey
of black Americans' reactions to the Court and its ruling. The survey will
include measures of attitudes toward these admissions policies, diffuse support
for the Court, racial identification and group consciousness, as well as
exposure to a variety of media sources. The inclusion of these measures and the
survey's panel design, before and after the decision is announced, yield
substantial intellectual payoffs. The researchers gain significant analytical
leverage on the Court's capacity to move public opinion with respect to a policy
it has articulated, as well as the forces affecting the public's reaction to the
Court and its outputs. Furthermore, the survey strengthens the theoretical and
empirical base of studies examining the correlates of mass black attitudes,
media effects, and Court legitimation. The study made possible by the proposed
survey will also result in broader impacts by creating publicly accessible
survey data on these attitudes held by African Americans. In addition, the
research program itself fosters collaboration among faculty who are members of
underrepresented groups.