* 0331446
* New Mexico Alliance for Minority Participation-Phase III
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2010
* Ricardo Jacquez, New Mexico State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2010
* USD 6,439,239.00

New Mexico AMP, established in 1993, is a partnership representing the state.s
public two-and four-year &lt;br/&gt;postsecondary institutions. The program
concentrates its efforts in three strategic areas: Outreach and Recruitment,
Undergraduate Education, and Undergraduate Research and Graduate School
Preparation. Core components include a multi-institutional freshman learning
seminar, undergraduate research, and an annual student conference. New Mexico
AMP also manages several leveraged student support and curriculum/faculty
development programs. Collectively, these programs represent a comprehensive
portfolio to develop multiple lines of inquiry into the issues of effective STEM
education. Since inception of the New Mexico AMP, the number of B.S. degrees
awarded in STEM fields to underrepresented minorities rose from 253 in 1992/93
to 455 in 2001/02 . an 80 percent increase. The percentage of B.S. STEM degrees
awarded to minority students increased from 23.1 percent in 1992/93 to 37.1
percent in 2001/01 . a 61 percent increase. Demonstration of the intellectual
merit and broader impacts of the program are exemplified by the SMET 101 Project
and the Undergraduate Research Assistantship Program. SMET 101 is an innovative
freshman-learning seminar for pre-transfer and first-year university students
that has resulted in significant changes to teaching and learning processes at
ten participating institutions. Through the Undergraduate Research Program,
faculty from across the state are now actively engaging undergraduate students
in research and using the program as a way to identify potential graduate
students. Through these and other projects, we will continue to ask meaningful
and, oftentimes, cross-disciplinary questions concerning student achievement and
to develop increasingly effective approaches for enhancing student and faculty
performance. In Phase III, continued focus on the primary program objectives
will allow this success to continue. Phase III objectives are to: Establish
meaningful partnerships with colleges and universities, school systems,
government agencies, national laboratories and centers, industry, private
foundations, and STEM professional organizations to support student development
and success and to achieve proposed New Mexico AMP objectives. Incorporate
academic, curricular, and co-curricular enrichment activities designed to
improve instructional performance as well as increase the motivation,
performance, and progression of talented students within undergraduate degree
programs. Provide direct student support as necessary to enable students to
attend academic year and summer enrichment activities without unnecessary loss
if income. Demonstrate an increase in movement of undergraduate students to
graduate school degree programs. &lt;br/&gt;Maintain program visibility and
student access at New Mexico 2-year colleges to 4-year degree programs.
&lt;br/&gt;Establish sustainability of the SMET 101 project at 50% of New Mexico
community colleges. &lt;br/&gt;These objectives will contribute significantly to
meeting the goals of the New Mexico AMP program, fostering the continued
integration of research and education, expanding access and participation, and
broadening the base of opportunity and support available to STEM students.
Management of the New Mexico AMP program will continue under the guidance of a
multi-sector Advisory Board representing Grade 6-12 education, community
colleges, universities, state government and educational agencies, and industry.
Additionally, partnership with the University of Arizona Graduate School to
provide summer research &lt;br/&gt;experiences, and collaborations with the New
Mexico AGEP, the NMSU Center for Learning Assistance, libraries and reference
staff, and other organizations will provide information and workshops on
available opportunities and resources to encourage and prepare students for
graduate study. &lt;br/&gt;Program evaluation activities are comprised of both
formative and summative components driven by a &lt;br/&gt;comprehensive set of
key evaluation questions. Adherence to the evaluation plan has led to formative
improvements in program activities that are increasingly responsive to
stakeholder needs as well as to evolving program goals and objectives.
Successful program practices and results are disseminated statewide and
nationally through a monthly one-page electronic bulletin (200 recipients), a
bi-annual newsletter (nearly 1200 recipients), a program website
(www.nmsu.edu/~nmamp) and conferen presentations and publications.