* 0331757
* International Group Travel to IARP Workshops.  August 2003 to September 2005
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Tzyh-Jong Tarn, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2008
* USD 83,888.00

The international Advanced Robotics Project (IARP) is an international
organization, consisting of fourteen countries and the European Union, devoted
to monitoring and promoting robotics related technology and utilization. The
United States helped to formulate this organization and has been an active
member participating in technology evaluations, workshops, and joint study
missions. Participation involves US technical experts traveling to various
functions, and interacting with their colleagues to discuss ongoing research and
developing technology relating to intelligent machines. This grant provides the
mechanism to insure that the selection process and procedure for selecting
participants is fair, efficient, organizationally viable. OBJECTIVES AND METHODS
TO BE EMPLOYED Since the IARP meetings are generally technology specific, the
selection of US participants must not only reflect the person's expertise but
also his or hers ability to communicate and interact with other participants.
The selection process will be performed by an ad hoc committee drawn from the
IEEE, Robotics and Automation Society. The traveler will receive reimbursement
for expense but an honorarium will only be provided in exceptional
circumstances. This rule also applies to attendance at the IARP, Joint
Coordinating Forum (JCF) which is the management, planning, and policy planning
body. The representatives of member and observer countries attend this meeting
in one of the host countries. A detailed description of the host country's
robotics program is an essential part of the agenda. INTELLECTUAL MERIT OF THE
PROPOSAL ACTIVITY Since NSF is the US representative to the IARP it is necessary
to seek the best, and most appropriate researchers to contribute to the
intellectual output of the meetings. This is a difficult and challenging task
because the subjects under discussion at the Workshops and the JCF require
participation by a variety of individuals who are knowledgeable of the specific
technology. Their intellectual contribution is critical to the success of the
event and the ability of the outcome to advance the technology. In the past,
contributors have made excellent contributions, but a need now exists to help
NSF to select new people in a fair minded and knowledgeable manner. The Robotics
and Automation Society, representing 6000 members, is a logical choice to
perform this selection by using senior, experienced, and knowledgeable decision
makers. BROADER IMPACT RESULTING FROM PROPOSED ACTIVITY The technical areas that
the IARP deals with include medical robotics, personal robotics, undersea
robotic vehicles, and others having a direct societal impact. Recently new
Working Groups have been formed to consider safety and security technology and
other applications that are central to society needs. The quality of the United
States participation is essential to enhancing these Working Groups so that
their deliberations and results will help to promote the advanced concepts
needed for success. The impact of this contribution cannot be underestimated.