* 0332532
* Eastern Virginia Biotechnology Training Partnership
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* William Wasilenko, Eastern Virginia Medical School
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2007
* USD 600,000.00

0332532&lt;br/&gt;Wasilenko&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the Eastern
Virginia Medical School to support the activity described below for 36 months.
The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation
Program Solicitation (NSF-03521).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The
partners include the Eastern Virginia Medical School (Lead Institution), Hampton
University, Bode Technology Group, Hampton Roads Research Partnership, InCell,
Incogen, Inc., NuOncology Labs, Inc., Opportunity, Inc., The Virginia
Biotechnology Association, and The Center for Innovative
Technologies,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project meets the need nationwide for a
workforce in biotechnology with expertise in genomics, proteomics, microarrays,
and bioinformatics. The overall goal of the effort is to foster innovation in
biotechnology through creation of a workforce highly trained in state-of-the-art
technologies that support research and development in the biotechnology sector.
The program combines didactic and hands-on biotechnology training designed to
qualify graduates for employment in a wide variety of fields including
biotechnology/pharmaceuticals and forensics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential
Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;The new jobs and workers to fill those jobs will make
a major impact on the economy of the region in Eastern Virginia. The effort will
be self-sustaining.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the activity
lies in teaching students in the latest state-of-the-art in biotechnology to
prepare them for a career in this field that is rapidly advancing to keep pace
with the enormous amount of research and development in this field. This effort
is based on the complete integration of research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the activity include
development of the human capital that will foster the growing needs of the
biotechnology sector. The program provides the infrastructure to integrate
research and education to ensure that the workforce is up to date with the
latest knowledge, experimental techniques and tools in this rapidly evolving
field. Involvement with SBIR companies provides new jobs for the workforce. The
program will serve as a model for other regions seeking to promote innovation in
biotechnology. Underrepresented groups are involved in the research and
workforce development programs.&lt;br/&gt;