* 0332478
* Engineering Carotenoid Derived Aroma Compound Pathways into E. coli by Exploring the Sequence Diversity of Putative Carotenoid Dioxygenases Present in Microbial Genome Sequences
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2007
* Claudia Schmidt-Dannert, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 10/31/2007
* USD 320,911.00

Schmidt-Dannert &lt;br/&gt;0332478&lt;br/&gt;The vast number of new gene
sequences generated by genome sequencing projects provides an enormous
opportunity for the design of new pathways in the post-genomic area. Yet
uncharacterized sequence homologs to known biosynthetic enzymes could be used
for in vitro recombination with the characterized homologs to access a much
larger sequence space (as opposed to using only characterized sequences) for the
discovery of new metabolic pathways in such created libraries. This application
seeks to expand on the unique set of novel carotenoid pathways available to
create for the first time new biosynthetic routes in E. coli for the synthesis
of carotenoid derived aroma and flavor compounds. By extending previously
engineered carotenoid pathways with novel, uncharacterized bacterial CCD
homologs identified in genome sequences, novel biosynthetic pathways for the
production of a diverse array of natural and non-natural aroma and color
compounds will be generated. Comparison of substrate specificities and cleavage
products of CCD homologs will improve our understanding of the mechanistic
aspects of carotenoid dioxygenase cleavage. To access the sequences diversity
presented by numerous uncharacterized gene homologs identified in genome
sequences for in vitro evolution of novel catalytic functions, a novel sequence
guided in vitro recombination approach allowing recombination of a large number
of fairly diverse sequences will be developed. &lt;br/&gt;