* 0332608
* Bridging the Technology Gap: A Culture-Based Model for Economic Development in Rural Alaska
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Steven Dinero, Philadelphia University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2007
* USD 595,512.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0332608&lt;br/&gt;Dinero&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is to Philadelphia University to support the activity described below for 36
months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for
Innovation Program Solicitation
(NSF-03521).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners include
Philadelphia University (Lead Institution), University of Alaska Fairbanks,
University of Alaska Anchorage, (Yukon Flats School District, Yukon Koyukuk)
School District, Arctic Village Local Council, Council of Athabascan Tribal
Governments, Nulato City Council, Doyon Ltd, First Alaska Management and
Marketing, GCI.net, and The Numi Group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objective of this award is to transfer technology training within existing
cultural frameworks of two rural regions of Alaska Yukon Flats and Yukon Koyukuk
by creating a computer skills, small business, and e-commerce learning model.
This model will broaden participation of existing educational institutions and
businesses by incorporating grade 9-16 competences and workplace skills in a
sequential educational path from secondary to post-secondary leading to
workforce credentials. The project will catalyze local, regional, and statewide
native infrastructures to develop e-commerce ventures to stimulate village cash
economy, codify traditional culture to support regional business ventures, and
provide venues to apply and increase technology skills. This model will
demonstrate how information technologies can be incorporated into indigenous
environments to enhance and strengthen traditional social and economic
structures rather than supplant them. Activities include: developing
intergenerational culturally-based computer training modules, training villagers
to replicate modules in other sites, creating state- of- the art computer
centers, and introducing small e- commerce businesses for native economic
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;Alaska is a
unique state. It is vast in size, 586,000 square miles; and its population of
less that 700,000 is diverse and dispersed, nearly a fifth of its population is
Native and 33 percent of the state's population live in rural areas that are off
the road. The Information Technology revolution provides an ideal opportunity
for former nomads to participate effectively in the global economy. Neither
agrarianism nor industrialization suited the mobile life style of many
indigenous peoples in the U.S. and around the world. But Information Technology
systems, like nomads, have virtually no geographic or temporal boundaries. This
partnership project proposes to forge connections between the new knowledge
available in academe and the expertise of the private sector to enable rural
Alaska Natives to participate regionally, nationally and internationally in an
economic development enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
the activity lies in developing a model for technology education that is
consistent with native cultural and spiritual traditions. Traditional approaches
have been based on western modes of teaching and learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the activity concentrate on
involving underrepresented groups in the innovation enterprise by providing
educational modules and technology tools that are totally consistent with the
spiritual and cultural traditions of the Native Alaskans, and provide e-commerce
economic opportunities for this indigenous society. The model will be replicable
for other indigenous societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;