* 0332605
* Consortium for Security and Medical Sensor Systems
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2007
* Yacov Shamash, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 04/30/2007
* USD 599,785.00

0332605&lt;br/&gt;Luryi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to SUNY Stony Brook
to support the activity described below for 36 months. The proposal was
submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation
(NSF-03521).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners include SUNY
Stony Brook (Lead Institution), Hofstra University, Farmingdale State
University, Suffolk County Community College, Brookhaven National Laboratory,
Northrop Grumman, Symbol, CardioMag Imaging, Transonics, Tracer Detection
Technology Corporation, Technology Next Corporation, BioPhotonics Corporation,
IEEE, LISTnet, WEDLI, Long Island Regional Incubator Council, Empire State
Development, Suffolk County, and New York State Sensor CAT
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to promote and increase
awareness of and expansion of entrepreneurship and technology transfer on Long
Island with emphasis on national security and medical sensor systems. The
collaboration includes research and technology partners from the private sector
and non-profit organizations and governmental agencies. The project has three
clear components: &lt;br/&gt;a) to introduce entrepreneurial skills to the
engineering and technology curriculum across Long Island, &lt;br/&gt;b) to
provide outreach and dissemination through outreach partners, &lt;br/&gt;c) to
provide an infrastructure to promote research and technology transfer in
security and medical sensor systems. The goal of the Research and Technology
Transfer component would be to promote research and technology transfer in
security and medical sensor systems. The goal of the Outreach and Dissemination
component would be to promote the Sensor Consortium's achievements through the
project's Outreach Partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The activities will result in more patentable inventions, more
startup technology companies, and more research and development in national
security and medical sensor systems in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the activity lies in creation of involvement of
undergraduate students in entrepreneurial training and planning to transfer
technology from the research at the Sensor CAT Center at SUNY Stony brook to
form startup companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed consortium broadens
the participation of several different types of educational institutions and an
even more diverse population of students in the innovation
enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;