* 0332943
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Novel Microwave-assisted Synthesis and Sintering of Nanomagnetic Materials for High Frequency Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Sridhar Komarneni, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 06/30/2008
* USD 14,587.00

Description: This award supports a US-India cooperative research project
entitled Novel Microwave-assisted Synthesis and Sintering of Nanomagnetic
Materials for High Frequency Applications. US PI Sridhar Komarneni, Pennsylvania
State University and S.R. Murthy, Osmania University will study properties of
magnetic materials, which are useful in power supply applications. Professor
Komarneni is a synthetic materials chemist and pioneer in the synthesis of nano-
sized ferrite magnetic materials by conventional and microwave assisted
reactions. He will synthesize nano-sized magnetic materials of differently
designed composition by a microwave-assisted process and then characterize them
with X-ray diffraction and electron microscopy. After these materials are
processed to solid form, collaborating scientist S.R. Murthy will investigate
their magnetic properties. The collaboration will enable them to develop better
materials for power applications through the tailoring of magnetic properties.
The synthesis of chemically uniform nano-sized magnetic materials by microwave-
assisted process is novel and environmentally benign. &lt;br/&gt;Scope: This
area of research is very important to the technology of low loss high frequency
switch mode power supplies which are required for continuing miniaturization of
electronic devices. The investigators are both well qualified and have
significant records of achievement in the field. The skills and experience of
the researchers are highly complimentary and the research envisioned will be
beneficial to the respective institutions and students. This project is jointly
funded by NSF's Division of Materials Research and the Government of India's
Department of Science &amp; Technology (DST) under the NSF/DST joint program.