* 0332275
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Gathering in the Late Paleoindian and Early Archaic Periods in the Middle Tennessee River Valley, Northwest Alabama
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2005
* Clara Scarry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2005
* USD 9,709.00

Plant foods comprise a significant portion of the diet of modern hunting-and-
gathering groups living in non-arctic environments. Accordingly, the decisions
and activities associated with the gathering and use of plants are important
aspects of their subsistence pursuits. Little is known, however, about the
impact of plant foods on the subsistence strategies and movements of early
hunter-gatherers living in the southeastern United States. Under the guidance of
Dr. C. Margaret Scarry, Kandace Detwiler will address this issue by analyzing
the carbonized remains of plants recovered from five rockshelter sites located
in northwest Alabama. The rockshelters contain archaeological deposits dating
between 8000 and 10,500 years ago. These deposits are noteworthy for their
excellent preservation of animal and plant remains, which are not commonly
recovered from open-air sites in the Southeast. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
the analysis of the plant remains, Detwiler will determine which plant species
these early hunting-and-gathering groups were targeting. She will then examine
the scheduling and labor demands associated with the use of these plant species.
This information will be obtained from botanical data regarding the preferred
ecology and the fruiting habits of these species, as well as ethnographic
descriptions and historic accounts of the gathering efforts and decisions of
contemporary hunting-and-gathering groups. Detwiler will then examine this
information about the use of plants with respect to other subsistence activities
at each site, suggested by the animal remains, stone tools, and residues of
fires recovered at the sites. At a broader regional level, she will explore the
relationship of the location of the rockshelters and other campsites to the
distribution of plant, animal, and stone resources on the landscape. This will
be done with the aid of a geographic information system (GIS). Using this
information, Detwiler will construct a model of subsistence strategies and
movements within this region for early hunting-and-gathering groups, based on
their decisions of how to most effectively utilize resources that may differ in
their availability in both time and space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
is significant for several reasons. First, it will provide baseline data, which
is currently lacking, regarding the range of plants used during these early
periods of occupation of the Southeast. Second, it can be used to suggest ways
in which gathering can be incorporated into models for early hunting-and-
gathering groups that tend to emphasize the influence of hunting on mobility and
subsistence strategies. Third, it will bring the activities and decisions of
gatherers, who are predominantly women, children, and the elderly, to the
foreground of such models. Finally, this research will allow the opportunity for
several undergraduate assistants, as well as the author, to gain training in the
analytical methods mentioned above. The results of the research will be
accessible to the scientific community both in the form of a dissertation as
well as publications in refereed journals and professional newsletters.
&lt;br/&gt;