* 0332843
* GDSE/DEM: Teaching Science with the Social Studies of Science for Gender Equity
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Muriel Lederman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 07/31/2006
* USD 152,426.00

The Biology Department at Virginia Tech will put in place a strategy to overcome
the decrease in the participation of women in biology during their undergraduate
years. Metaphorically referred to as the leaky pipeline, women and girls leave
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) as they move from
elementary school to professional careers. Increasing numbers of women are
recruited into science but they are not retained, even though the metaphor
assumes that they will persist under current pedagogical practices, that they
will be successful within the social constraints of scientific careers, and that
they will assimilate into the current practice of science. However, the pipeline
itself and the pond into which it empties may not be neutral; may promote
females' leaving science. If these cultures developed in the absence of a wide
variety of participants and perspectives, it is perhaps not surprising that it
is alienating to those who have been excluded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this demonstration project to investigate the hypothesis that the cultures of
science are responsible for alienating women and minorities. By integrating the
social studies of science into science education, the team will reveal these
cultures and then assess whether this novel pedagogy increases women's
retention. The team will teach a sophomore-level Cell and Molecular Biology
course that makes scientific cultures visible alongside traditional material,
e.g., mechanisms and regulation of DNA replication, transcription and
translation, protein trafficking. Students will have supplementary readings,
writing assignments and discussions that use the social studies of science to
see the assumptions, concepts, and practices of science in a new
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Writing assignments and oral responses (obtained in
semi-structured interviews) will be assessed for progressively deeper
understanding of the social characteristics of cell and molecular biology, for
students' increasing competence and sophistication in using the social studies
of science to examine the paradigms and practices of cell and molecular biology,
and for their attitudes toward studying cell and molecular biology from this
perspective. The benchmarks for the assessment are the epistemological stages
(silence, perceived knowledge, subjective knowledge objective knowledge,
contextual knowledge) developed by Belenky et al., (1986). These stages were
constructed using women's experiences, and their use is appropriate in this
project since we are giving women a perspective on the epistemology of science
that is different from the predominant masculine model. This assessment, along
with a measurement of self-efficacy in traditionally male-dominated occupations
(Betz and Hackett, 1998), will be correlated with persistence in science
education and progression to scientific careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If the
approach has the desired effect, students' awareness of the cultures of science
will give them the ability to develop strategies for persistence within the
status quo or strategies for change. Either result would have broad impact. Our
human and social capital in the scientific workforce would be augmented by
increasing the representation of under-represented groups, by fostering gender
and racial equity in science, and by bringing fresh viewpoints and creativity in
order to solve problems in science, engineering, and technology. As well, it
opens a completely new area of theory and practice in science teaching and
teacher preparation that benefits all learners. Consequently, the strategy and
the assessment of the strategy will be disseminated nationally and
internationally, within the university, at meetings of professional societies,
and through several publications and web sites.&lt;br/&gt;