* 0332251
* NSF Conference on Biologically Inspired Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2003,10/31/2003
* Harvey Rubin, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 10/31/2003
* USD 84,869.00

EIA 0332251 Harvey Rubin University of Pennsylvania Project Summary

Biologically-Inspired Reliable Computing Systems:

Biologically-inspired computing seeks to understand and replicate some of the
fundamental computational principles by which natural biological information
processing systems operate. Traditional computing systems today are extremely
brittle in situations for which they have not been explicitly designed. In
comparison, biological systems are adaptable to new environments, can handle a
large amount of uncertainty in their perception and processing of the
surrounding world, and can collaborate with other biological systems to solve
complex problems. Biological systems also have sophisticated protection and
repair mechanisms. Is it possible for computing systems to display the same
degree of robustness and reliability across a wide range of situations? What
types of computational architectures and algorithms are needed to achieve this
reliability? How can such systems be developed and organized to ensure they can
deal with faults? How can these systems be put together to leverage their
individual capabilities? Can their survivability be ensured? These are some of
the questions this workshop seeks to address.

The workshop brings together researchers who work in areas close to biology and
computer and information science to discuss how biological systems are able to
achieve their robustness and reliability, and how some of these computing
principles can be incorporated into artificial systems. The main focus of the
workshop will be the reliability of biological computation and information
processing, and will explore how this reliability is achieved in four areas:
cognitive computing processes, development and self-organization, social
interactions, and protection and immunity. The format will bring together
researchers in each of these fields to delve into the relevant questions of how
biological systems operate robustly and their applicability to computing
systems.

The resulting presentations and discussions of the workshop will be made
available through web-based publications as well as printed materials.

