* 0332648
* Bridging the Gap between New Materials , Fuel Cell Devices and Products:  An Alliance of Virginia Universities, Battelle , VA Center for Innovative Tech, Industry Partners and LANL
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* James McGrath, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 04/30/2007
* USD 600,000.00

0332648&lt;br/&gt;McGrath&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to Virginia
Polytechnic Institute &amp; State University to support the activity described
below for 36 months. The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships
for Innovation Program Solicitation
(NSF-03521).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners include
Virginia Polytechnic Institute &amp; State University (Lead Institution),
Virginia Commonwealth University, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Battelle,
Virginia Center for Innovative Technology, General Motors, Motorola, Hydrosize
Technologies, and TeleEnergy Systems, .In addition, student recruitment and
faculty exchanges with Grambling State University, Hampton University, Morgan
State University, and University of South Carolina Spartanburg will broaden the
participation of underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objective of this award is to integrate recently demonstrated proton exchange
membrane fuel cells, processes and related technologies in a partnership with
key universities, key industrial organizations, and national laboratories. New
membrane materials are being developed. The industrial partners are performing
the fuel cell system engineering analysis. The national laboratory partner is
Characterization of the molecular structure of the new materials and relating
that to the fuel cell performance. The universities and the industrial partners
are developing new processing and manufacturing methods. The Virginia Center for
Innovative Technology is promoting the outcomes of the work and
recruiting/developing new start-up companies. Students involved in the project
will become a significant part of the workforce necessary to support the
emerging fuel cell business. Long-term sustainability is a key component of the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;Thee fuel cell
business is predicted to be in excess of $11 billion by 2011. Fuel cells provide
clean, reliable energy in stationary, portable, and automotive
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the activity lies
in providing an integrated effort from fundamental research on new materials,
development of novel materials processing, fuel cell system performance
analysis, and fuel cell manufacturing scale-up. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the activity concentrate on creating a new student generation
for the fuel cell industry with an emphasis on recruitment and involvement of
underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;