* 0332453
* Pillared Layered Compounds:     Their Synthesis, Structure, and Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2006
* Abraham Clearfield, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 10/31/2006
* USD 566,858.00

This project will focus on two new families of porous materials, newly
synthesized and characterized by the PI, with surface areas of 400-600 m2/g and
pores in the range of 10-20A. One family consists of organic-inorganic hybrids
prepared from alpha, omega-diphosphonic acids interacting with metals in non-
aqueous solvents. These compounds contain cavities within a framework of metal
phosphate like layers bridged by alkyl or aryl groups of the phosphonic acid.
The aryl groups are amenable to functionalization by sulfonic acid groups which
converts them into highly reactive Bronsted acids. The aim is to now provide a
variety of functionalities, control hydrophobic-hydrophilic character and pore
size of these products. The sorption and separation capabilities and catalytic
behavior of the compounds as to their combined chemical selectivity and size
selective behavior will be probed. The second family of porous materials
consists of transition metal oxides-combined with either silica or zirconia also
with pores in the 10-20A range prepared in alcohol with hexylamine templates.
These two families bridge the gap between zeolites and the new mesoporous
materials. They should therefore serve needs in separations science, ion
exchange, sensors and catalysis for which other materials are unsuitable. The
structure and characterization of these materials will require the use of a
broad spectrum of spectroscopic, diffraction and surface tools providing ample
opportunities for students to be trained using state of the science equipment in
the latest techniques of materials chemistry. This study will be assisted by
collaboration with groups in Spain, Poland and India.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Porous materials have a variety of uses in separating
molecules based upon size, have extensive use in catalysis, sensors, drug
delivery, ion exchange and nanoscience. Among the best examples are zeolites,
used extensively for most of these purposes but best known as improving the
yield of gasoline and home heating oil in petroleum cracking. A disadvantage is
that their useful cavities are small, less than 1 nanometer (nm) or one
millionth of an inch. A decade ago a new family of inorganic porous materials
was discovered with narrow distribution of pores in the 2 to 15 nm range and
many potential uses.&lt;br/&gt;Two new families of porous materials with pores
in the 1 to 2 nm range, just the size that has largely been missin, has been
discovered. One group of materials contain organic as well as inorganic groups
and can be altered to attract different classes of medium sized molecules for
separations, drug delivery and catalytic transformations. The second group is
totally inorganic to be used mostly in catalysis as almost any catalytically
active metal oxide can be prepared in this form. This research will require the
training of students to utilize the state of the science equipment and the
latest techniques of materials chemistry. The research will be assisted by
collaboration with groups in Spain, Poland and India as well as undergraduates,
graduate students and post-doctoral students at Texas A&amp;M University.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;