* 0332596
* Software Partnerships in NYC: Identifying and Developing New Ideas
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Gillian Small, CUNY City University of New York
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2007
* USD 598,980.00

0332596&lt;br/&gt;Brown&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to the City
University of New York to support the activity described below for 24 months.
The proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation
Program Solicitation (NSF-03521).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The
partners include the City University of New York (Lead Institution), and the New
York Software Industry Association (NYSIA). The NYSIA has a large number of
small companies in the information technology industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
mission of this proposal is to spur the development and commercialization of
advanced software technologies and software engineering methods in the NYC
economic region. The focus will be on three aspects of the software industry: 1)
security, 2) imaging and visualization and 3) software development and system
design. To accomplish this, the City University of New York (CUNY) faculty will
be paired with software industry professionals from the New York Software
Industry Association (NYSIA) to develop and promote the research and development
of new technologies, provide specialized development courses, create job
opportunities and build upon CUNY's reputation. The group is a university wide
consortium and thus can reach all the colleges and the 200 faculty members
specializing in computer science. The expectation is that the industry groups
will convey to the university the commercial needs and uses for software while
the university will convey the technologies available and innovative approaches
to design through appropriate pairing of participants. Technical assistance will
be provided for small companies through joint university / industrial
partnership teams involving experts in business development and marketing
people. The expected outcome is to work with at least 50 companies, to get to
know 30 well, and to work intensively with 15 of
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
provides a unique outreach approach with an industry association, a more
standardized approach with seminars and workshops around industry needs, and an
approach of developing joint projects with industry. The project will help to
provide industry access to software expertise at CUNY campuses, a potential for
students to learn how to work with software companies, and allows important work
with smaller software companies. The development of the software industry by
providing software help in research and development for small companies that
cannot afford to fund research at the universities or to hire people as skilled
as students and faculty for development are the major benefits to NY and
NYSIA.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the activity lies in the
creation, transfer and application of information technologies and novel
education and training of the technologically literate workforce through
collaboration of the City University of New York with the regional companies.
The project will help to provide industry access to software expertise at CUNY
campuses, a potential for students to learn how to work with software companies,
especially with smaller software companies. The development of the software
industry by providing software help in research and development for small
companies that cannot afford to fund research at the universities or to hire
people as skilled as students and faculty for development will have a
significant economic impact in New York.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is
excellent in terms of Broader Impacts. This project is expected to have
significant impact on expanding participation to underserved populations and
among campuses that could then develop stronger industry relations. There was a
good balance between broad involvement and focused implementation on selected
high-success probability participants. The City University of New York has a
long history of providing educational opportunities to minorities, poorer City
young people who cannot afford private school educations. Of the nearly 20
colleges and universities within the system, fourteen the colleges are
officially considered minority institutions&lt;br/&gt;