* 0332315
* SENSORS: Multi-Analyte Affinity Micro-Columns with Amplified Multi-Parameter Fluorescence Detection
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2009
* Steven R. J. Brueck, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* George J. Antos
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,995,424.00

Researchers from the School of Engineering, College of Arts and Sciences and the
Health Science Center at the University of New Mexico have teamed in this
collaborative project to address critical issues in the development of a new,
versatile and adaptive multi-analyte sensing platform. This collaborative
research initiative will closely interface with researchers at other
Universities, at the National Laboratories and with local industry. It will
develop a wide range of technologies including sensing chemistry, biomimetic
nanomaterials, microfluidics, and novel optical transducers to yield an
integrated sensor system characterized by reliable high
performance.&lt;br/&gt;This project represents a synergistic combination of
fundamental and applied research that is requisite for the development of a new
generation of high performance biosensor systems based upon affinity
microcolumns. The sensor array systems will allow simultaneous, fast, reliable
determination of a wide range of trace analyte species. Model analytes are
chosen to be representative of broad classes of important chemical and
biological species. They are also directly relevant to current grand challenges
in trace detection, most notably in chemical and biological warfare defense and
in early detection of disease. Critical technology development is grouped into
four distinct work areas that will develop: (1) biomolecular assemblies for
amplified molecular transduction on microbeads, (2) optimum methods for sample
introduction and pumping through multi-analyte affinity microcolumns, (3)
multiparameter fluorescence instrumentation capable of reliable detection of
reactions in affinity microcolumns, and (4) system integration, optimization and
testing. The technical approaches leverage the broad range of expertise of an
interdisciplinary team with a recent history of productive collaboration in the
development of biosensor technology and systems. A clear mechanism for
integration of the sensor systems proposed with state-of-the-art air sampling
technology is also presented, through collaboration with industry. The research
program will offer significant opportunities for participation of students from
underrepresented groups through IGERT, REU, and RET programs and a statewide
initiative in nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;