* 0332975
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Development of Efficient Foraging Behavior in Aye-Ayes
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Carel van Schaik, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 10/31/2004
* USD 6,485.00

This project will investigate the factors that limit the development of
efficient tap-foraging skills in immature aye-ayes (Daubentonia
madagascariensis) at the Duke University Primate Center (DUPC). Using
experimental methods, this study will assess the age at which adult-level
foraging proficiency is reached, and will determine whether lack of experience,
small body size, and/or poor neuromuscular control prevent young aye-ayes from
foraging efficiently. Results will test whether the time needed to learn complex
foraging skills can explain the remarkably slow development of the aye-
aye.&lt;br/&gt;Study of the ontogeny of lemur foraging efficiency has important
implications for understanding the evolution of slow development, or slow life
history, in other primates, including humans. Human life history features,
including a long juvenile period and lifespan, may be explained by a dietary
shift towards more specialized, hard-to-obtain foods (e.g. meat, larvae).
Additionally, human behaviors, such as food sharing with offspring, can be
associated with slow life history. Recently, anthropologists have begun to test
this hypothesis with long-term data from hunter-gatherer groups, with specific
attention to the relative importance of experience and size to foraging
efficiency. Following in this vein, the proposed project will be among the first
to experimentally test hypotheses for life history evolution. Because aye-ayes,
like humans, are also characterized by a relatively slow life history and a
specialized, nutrient-rich diet, this study is directly relevant to our
understanding of derived human life history traits.&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, this
research project will provide multiple opportunities for promoting education and
participation in research. Preliminary data have been collected with the help of
three student research assistants trained in behavioral observations and data
collection techniques using hand-held computers. The proposed research will
continue to provide opportunities for education and training of student research
assistants. Additionally, the DUPC is an educational facility that provides
information about lemurs and their ecosystems to thousands of visitors annually.
Visitors to the center will have the opportunity to observe data collection
sessions and to learn about this research project via educational
materials.&lt;br/&gt;This research is also more broadly applicable to
understanding human dietary development. Like non-human primates and other
mammals, humans have been observed to learn about food socially. Eating
patterns, including obesity and dieting, appear to develop gradually throughout
childhood. Understanding the development of foraging behaviors in non-human
primates can help us understand the underlying stages of human dietary
development, and may provide insight into preventative treatment of food-related
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, this research will provide helpful information for
the reintroduction of aye-ayes and other mammals into the wild, and thus has
important implications for conservation. While the release of animals within
their current or former range is becoming increasingly important in conservation
and wildlife management, primates in particular appear to rehabilitate less
successfully than other mammals. Discerning how primates learn to forage will
help us predict at what age young animals reach foraging proficiency adequate
for independent survival, and whether reintroduced animals will be able to
forage in a novel environment. This is particularly relevant for the aye-aye,
which is highly threatened by habitat loss and hunting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;