* 0332378
* The Development of an Innovation Information Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Michael Song, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Continuing Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/2006
* USD 600,000.00

0332378&lt;br/&gt;Nichols&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to University of
Missouri Kansas City to support the activity described below for 36 months. The
proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
Solicitation (NSF-03521).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners&lt;br/&gt;The partners
include University of Missouri Kansas City (Lead Institution), University of
Missouri Outreach and Extension, University of Missouri Rolla, Washington
University, Missouri Department of Agriculture, Missouri Department of Economic
Development, U.S. Small Business Administration, Missouri Small Business
Development Centers, Boeing Company, Prolog Ventures, Wilkinson Evans
Consulting; Missouri Biotechnology Association, Kansas City Area Life Sciences
Institute, Ewing Marion Kauffman Center for Entrepreneurial
Leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Missouri and its partners
provide a solid critique of the conventional, linear model of technological
innovation and suggest an alternative social network model for study. The
hypothesis states that within the social network theory, innovation is an
outcome of interaction between financial, human, social, and physical capital.
Within this framework, the effort examines the role of social capital in the
process of technological innovation. The investigators will create an electronic
'innovation information infrastructure' that will provide access to technology
and business resources, and to then monitor interactions and conduct surveys of
participants to measure the relationship between types and levels of interaction
and innovation. A tool for predicting innovative behavior and the inputs to
maximize innovation will be a major outcome. This model will also create the
means for development of educational materials, databases and training focused
on the innovation process. This program provides a linkage between creativity
and new sources of economic growth. Findings will be used in real time to
improve access to innovation resources and to generate new knowledge concerning
the role of social capital in innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential
Economic Impact&lt;br/&gt;The database and predictive model will improve the
ability of universities to interact with industry and small businesses to
increase innovation in the region. The resulting new business will provide long-
term economic well-being for the region.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of the activity lies in developing a model for prediction of successful
innovative behavior by all of the partners, i.e., universities, small
businesses, venture capital funds, incubators, and regional and state government
agencies. Economically distressed communities do not fully benefit from the
activities of the national research enterprise and they often do not have the
expertise to know how to promote innovation. This model and analytical tool can
be adopted by other regions in the nation to promote
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the activity include the
development of research-based educational materials and databases for K-16
digital libraries, partnerships among researchers and students for education and
training and use of information technology and connectivity to enhance the
factors responsible for innovation. Identifying the individuals critical to the
region's innovation will allow the engagement of underserved individuals, groups
and communities in science and engineering. The model will demonstrate the
linkage between discovery and the societal benefits of creation of new
wealth.&lt;br/&gt;