* 0332217
* Transport of Solutes and Macromolecules through Reverse Osmosis and Nanofiltration Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2010
* Benito Marinas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Paul L. Bishop
* 08/31/2010
* USD 473,100.00

0332217 Marinas The primary objective of this research is to elucidate the
mechanisms by which water contaminants, ranging from small neutral molecules to
large macromolecules, permeate through reverse osmosis and nanofiltration
membranes. Selected solutes and macromolecules are arsenious acid, atrazine (216
Daltons), Rhodamine WT (480 Daltons), and three coliphages (fr, MS2, T4) ranging
in size from 19 to 80 nm. This list resulted from a compromise among several
criteria including the selection of water contaminants of current interest and
surrogates used to assess the performance of RO/NF membranes, small solutes and
macromolecules known to be poorly-rejected by some by RO/NF membranes, and
compounds quantifiable in multi-solute samples with relatively simple
interference-free analytical techniques. The scope of work of the project is
designed to develop a fundamental understanding for the mechanisms responsible
for the permeation of water and various types of solutes through RO and NF
membranes including elucidating the role of the concentration polarization
phenomenon in the overall transport of target solutes and macromolecules. In
order to accomplish this goal, permeation experiments will be performed to
characterize the contribution to overall solute/macromolecule permeation by
sorption/diffusion/desorption through the membrane polymer matrix and advection
through membrane nanopores, as well as the effect of concentration polarization
on both types of permeation. Experimental variables under consideration include
hydraulic pressure, background and target solute concentration, temperature, and
pH. Then, the size distribution of nanopores in the active layers of RO and NF
membranes will be characterized by a combination of atomic force and scanning
electron microscopy, and gas adsorption/desorption techniques. It is anticipated
that characterizing the pore size distribution of RO/NF membranes will require
integrating the results obtained with these three methods. The final task of the
study will be the development of a mechanistic model to represent the permeation
of water, solutes and macromolecules through RO and NF membranes.