* 0332910
* Predictability of Earth's Climate
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Jagadish Shukla, Institute of Global Environment and Society
* Continuing grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 12/31/2009
* USD 7,107,000.00

Intellectual Merit

This renewal project will work towards an understanding of the predictability of
Earth's current climate fluctuations on seasonal to decadal time scales using
state-of-the-art, comprehensive models of the global atmosphere, world oceans
and land surface. The PIs will investigate how seasonal to interannual
predictability is altered as climate changes. This is a major addition to their
ongoing research and an essential element of understanding the impact of global
climate change on regional climate, because the effects of global climate change
that are most relevant to a region will be manifested through changes in the
occurrence of natural climatic phenomena. The PIs will enhance their previous
work by investigating the realizable predictability of the total climate system.
In particular, they expect to establish quantitatively what seasonal and
regional climate variations can be predicted, in the current climate and in a
changing climate. Since regional climate variations in a changing climate are
largely manifestations of changes in the natural modes of variability, this
research is crucial to the Nation's efforts in climate change science.

Broader Impacts

COLA, as a part of the Institute of Global Environment and Society shares the
fruits of its research work with society as a whole, and has a long-standing
commitment to serve the research and educational communities as well as the
global society. COLA investigates the actual climate system, utilizes actual
global observations and uses the same complex models for predictability research
that are used for actual, routine climate prediction. Therefore, COLA research
is directly beneficial to the improvement of climate forecasts for many sectors
of society, including agriculture, energy, water resources, and human health,
among others. The contributions to teaching, training and learning include
involving graduate students in the research activities and using both conceptual
and state-of-the-art climate models in the classroom to aid in teaching. COLA
scientists have also contributed to enhancing the infrastructure for research by
establishing institutional collaborations; providing analytic software tools to
enable a very large number of students and other researchers to make direct use
of climate data; and ensuring the broadest and most timely distribution of its
scientific results through the print and web-based distribution, through public
lectures throughout the U.S. and abroad, and through other media outlets.