* 0333753
* Mathematics in America's Cities:  Children, Teachers and Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Roberta Schorr, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 06/30/2010
* USD 10,500,000.00

This Center for Learning and Teaching (CLT) project focuses on the best
approaches to teach urban students mathematics. The Center will form an
interdisciplinary scholarly community from the perspectives of mathematics and
mathematics education, urban studies, urban education and social and
environmental psychology. The CLT is a partnership between the State University
of New Jersey, the City University of New York, the University of Pennsylvania
and local school districts in New York City, Newark, Plainfield and
Philadelphia. Other partners include Lincoln University, University of
Pittsburgh LRDC, Bank Street College of Education, Education Works and the Merck
Institute for Science Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center will develop a
comprehensive, research-based framework to achieve effective mathematics
education for all students. The framework will include multiple perspectives on
urban children's mathematical learning and development; urban teachers'
learning, development, beliefs and expectations; community interactions with
influences on children, teachers and schools in relation to mathematics; and the
preparation of doctoral-level mathematics education leaders with the knowledge,
experience base and long-term support to bring about success in the nation's
urban schools. The Center's flagship program is a two-year, intensive, multi-
university Seminar/Practicum on mathematics in urban environments. This Mu
Seminar will be a team-taught, multidisciplinary experience that includes
mentored field internships. The Center will also offer an in-depth MILE program
(Mathematics Institutes for Leaders in Education) designed to develop urban
teachers' knowledge of mathematics, how it is learned, how it may be best
taught, and to enhance their leadership skills and understanding of urban
communities. Over 300 teachers from participating school districts will
participate in the MILE program over the life of the CLT. While the MILE program
and the Mu Seminars will address the full range of school mathematics, there
will be special emphases on rational numbers and discrete mathematics as
contrasting domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;