* 0333354
* Workshop to Advance Long-Term Data and  Metadata Interoperability in the Environmental and Earth Sciences
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* John Helly, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 08/31/2007
* USD 113,631.00

This project uses a pair workshops to bring together scientists, engineers and
data management system developers from a variety of disciplines and data
management projects in the environmental sciences "to identify methods and
tools" that may have applications beyond the disciplines for which they were
developed and to explore how to promote their broader adoption. The two
workshops, and a period of electronic communication in between them, are
intended (1) to collect, and publish, a set of best practices, tools, and
lessons learned from experience in data management system development, (ii) as
an experiment to see if it is possible to identify opportunities for
consolidation and standardization in environmental data management systems,
(iii) as a way for the environmental research and education community to make
recommendations on how the issue of interoperability between environmental data
systems should be addressed and promoted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
advance the discussion of how to address the issue of the interoperability of
environmental data systems and increase the interactions between groups
developing data systems in different environmental disciplines. The main impacts
are likely to be a strengthening of the data infrastructure of environmental
research and education. Easier and more extensive access to environmental data
advances not only the ability to do research on societally relevant topics
associated with the environment but also enhances the availability of data for
decision-making. &lt;br/&gt;