* 0333689
* Collaborative Project: The Rosetta Project- ALL Language Archive
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Michael Keller, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 10/31/2005
* USD 36,051.00

This collaborative project involves the Rosetta Project at The Long Now
Foundation, the LINGUIST List, Stanford University, Eastern Michigan University,
the Open Language Archive Community, and the Endangered Language Fund. The
investigators are leading a global team of language specialists and native
speakers to build a publicly accessible online archive for all documented human
languages that serves as the definitive reference work on the languages of the
world to date. Rosetta currently serves over 30,000 text pages documenting
writing systems, phonology, grammar, vernacular texts, core wordlists, numbering
systems, maps, audio files, and demographic/historical descriptions for over
1,000 languages. A major sub-component of the Rosetta archive is the ALL
Language Word List Database - a collection of 200 term core vocabulary lists for
the languages of the world, currently supporting 1,300 languages. This project
supports the growth of this aspect of the Rosetta library with an expectation of
increasing the coverage from 1,000 to 2,500 languages. Integral with this
effort, LINGUIST is expanding and elaborating the functions of its "people"
database - an index of the majority of the world's contemporary linguists,
searchable by languages and families of interest, current research and teaching
interests, course offerings, and contact information. This database is a
critical resource to support the open contribution and peer review process,
which builds Rosetta, as well as for educators wishing to find others with
related teaching interests and sharable pedagogical materials. A compelling web
environment offers "anywhere, anytime" tools for scholars and speakers to
contribute and collaboratively view, vet, comment, correct and contextualize all
the materials in the archive. These tools are combined with a user-focused site
design, enabling both skilled and unskilled users to easily browse, locate, and
download materials of interest. The result is an online digital library, which
enables educators, researchers and learners to engage language datasets of
unprecedented range and diversity. For many languages the Stanford Library and
other libraries are providing links to "shelf materials" that provide more
depth. This resource is also usable in linguistics courses that focus on
properties of language, and it facilitates student research projects. The
Cognitive, Psychological, and Language Sciences Program in the NSF Division of
Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences (BCS) is providing significant co-funding of
this project in recognition of its value in serving the broader educational
goals of BCS and its parent Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic
Sciences.