* 0333012
* Collaborative Research: Infection Decisions by Insect-Parasitic Nematodes
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* David Shapiro-Ilan, USDA-ARS, Southeast Fruit & Tree Nut Research Laboratory, GA
* Interagency Agreement
* Michelle Elekonich
* 08/31/2005
* USD 63,447.00

Parasite infective stages evaluate a potential host for its suitability before
committing to infection. A host has traditionally been regarded as a static
entity, but more than one individual often infects a single host. As the
infection in a host progresses, the value of the host as a resource to an
infective stage parasite changes. Thus, host-parasite interactions are dynamic
and infective stages are predicted to respond differently to hosts at different
points in the infection process. The objective of this research is to explain
behavioral interactions between insect-parasitic nematodes and their hosts.
Specifically, how parasite infective stage behavior (host attraction and
penetration) is affected by changes in volatile host cues and contact host cues
during the course of infection will be addressed. Then, the fitness consequences
of decisions based upon these cues by the parasites will be determined.
Ultimately, how parasites decide whether or not to infect a host, and how the
costs and benefits of decisions influence parasite success, will be explained.
The impact of this research includes: 1) improved understanding of parasite/host
relationships, 2) increased predictability of insect-parasitic nematodes as
biological control agents for insects, 3) increased opportunities for
undergraduate students of underrepresented groups to conduct research, 4)
development of insect-parasitic nematode/host association as a teaching tool for
advanced undergraduate courses.