* 0333455
* IGERT: Nanoscale Science and Engineering - From Building Blocks to Functional Systems
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2003,03/31/2012
* Peter Yu, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Boone
* 03/31/2012
* USD 3,918,073.00

This IGERT Program is in nanoscale science and engineering at the University of
California, Berkeley. The key scientific goals and intellectual merit of this
IGERT program address three important themes of this field: nanostructure
synthesis and processing of novel functional devices and systems, nanoscale
characterization, and modeling. Each of these is designed to facilitate the
integration of nanostructures into engineered systems. Students selected for
this program will focus on one of five research sub-areas: nanoelectronics,
nanophotonics, nanobiology, nanomagnetics, and nanomechanics. They will master
core courses offered across several disciplines and multiple departments.
Students will carry out their Ph.D. research under the joint supervision of two
advisors from both engineering and the physical sciences, and they will receive
additional practical training through cross-laboratory investigations within and
outside of the labs of IGERT faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A national and
international internship program will contribute to the broader impacts of this
program and constitute an integral part of the IGERT educational experience.
Students may elect to complete their internship either in an industrial or
national laboratory, or they can choose to work at institutions abroad with
several of which we already have established close contacts. An array of
services at the university will be utilized for the recruitment of a diverse
student body, with much-anticipated success. Women and underrepresented minority
groups will be recruited actively. We also plan to complement the IGERT program
with the National Consortium for Graduate Degrees for Minorities in Engineering
(the GEM Program) and the National Physical Sciences Consortium. Role models and
mentors are key to the successful recruitment and retention of women and
minorities. Our strong group of faculty and industrial mentors will provide
crucial guidance to our graduate fellows. Outreach programs to engage students
from underrepresented groups in local high schools will be implemented. They
include After-School Science Workshops and Summer High- School Internships in
Nanoscience and Engineering. The faculty comprising the IGERT program are
committed to leadership and participation in outreach and educational activities
that will foster knowledge and appreciation of nanoscience and engineering in
the community and nationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UC Berkeley is in the unique
position of having an unusual combination of resources committed to nanoscale
science and engineering. Significantly, the Chancellor of UC Berkeley has
identified nanoscience and nanoengineering as one of the top three research
priorities on campus and has made an institutional commitment to focus research
resources on areas that will be critical in the upcoming nanoengineering
revolution. This program will find its specific intellectual merit in the
establishment a new kind of graduate education at Berkeley in a research area
that is unprecedented in its impact across disciplines. The interdisciplinary
IGERT curriculum will allow to establish innovative educational concepts to
prepare qualified graduate students at the University of California, Berkeley,
for the future demands of this rapidly expanding field. This traineeship program
spans nine graduate programs in three colleges, each with its own unique
approaches to and robust research capabilities in nanoscale science and
engineering. The lasting impact of this project will not be limited to the
scientific achievements that will make an important contribution towards the
building, understanding, and controlling of engineered objects on the nanometer
length scale. Equally important will be a paradigm shift in graduate education,
especially in Engineering education at Berkeley that is expected to have long-
lasting impact beyond the scope of this program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is
an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D.
scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge
in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal skills
needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze
a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models
for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative
research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In this sixth year
of the program, awards are being made to institutions for programs that
collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported by
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;