* 0333314
* IGERT: Terahertz Science and Technology -  A Studio-Based Approach
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2012
* Toh-Ming Lu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Boone
* 09/30/2012
* USD 3,904,902.00

Terahertzs science and technology is one of the most intriguing and challenging
research fields to emerge in the 21st Century. In less than a decade, this
previously hidden section of the electromagnetic spectrum has caught the
imagination of scientists around the world. THz research will transform future
computing and communication systems while providing unprecedented opportunities
for biomedical imaging. Rensselaer researchers have played a leading role in the
quest to understand the science and the use of THz radiation. In this IGERT
program, physicists, computer scientists, biologists, electrical and biomedical
engineers will focus on research in THz electronics, THz data transfer and
networking systems, and THz spectroscopy and imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to the strong commitment to research, there is an equal dedication to
education. Rensselaer has won numerous awards for its revolutionary studio-based
approach to undergraduate education. The Institute is now adapting and extending
the pedagogical principles successfully implemented under this program to
doctoral education for students working at the leading edge of science and
technology. The IGERT program will integrate THz materials, devices, radiation,
photonics, imaging, spectroscopy, and computer algorithms for tomography into
THz courses that will be taught in an interactive studio setting by
interdisciplinary faculty from Rensselaer and by national and international
collaborators. We will provide industrial and international internships
opportunities for students. This will create an environment, in which students
learn from student-to-student interactions, on-campus researchers, and our
industrial and international partners, while forming a global network of
collaborators and contacts. Special programs in leadership, ethics, life skills,
and global citizenship will provide students with frequent opportunities to
present and defend their research. Outreach programs will focus on
undergraduates and K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this program is to produce top quality and diversified Ph.D. graduates in THz
science and technology to serve the research and leadership needs of the most
advanced industries, government laboratories, and academic institutions.
Potential broader impacts range from computers that send messages orders of
magnitude faster, to improved detection of breast and skin cancer, to security
searches for weapons and toxins. We will proactively disseminate this studio
model to other research universities that seek to create interdisciplinary
graduate programs in emerging areas of science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet
the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In this sixth year of the program, awards
are being made to institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;