* 0333580
* Web Lecture Archiving System for Professional Society Meetings
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Alan Chodos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2005
* USD 249,998.00

This project is focusing on the development of a device to permit the recording
of lectures in the environment of professional society meetings, and the
standardized software architecture that will permit the cataloging and playback
of these lectures on the world wide web, making them permanently available to
institutions and individuals around the world. Over the years the capture,
archiving and delivery of presentations via the web has become a technology that
is well understood, reliable and useful. The University of Michigan ATLAS
Project has been a leader in this area and has already compiled an archive of
over 300 lectures and talks, directed at undergraduates who participate in the
prestigious CERN Summer Student Program in Geneva, and also used for software
application training in the ATLAS Experiment at CERN. In addition, the American
Physical Society has utilized web lecture capture for selected conferences over
the past two years, including a conference in September, 2002, where the capture
and publishing process was done jointly by the APS and the University of
Michigan. This project is pursuing a real opportunity to advance the use of
technology in this important area of making conference presentations available
to faculty and other professionals that are unable to attend the conference but
are still very interested in some of the proceedings. For each person in this
interested-but-at-home group, there is likely to be a different set of talks of
keen interest, thus this effort is working towards the goal of allowing such
persons to sit at their computers, pull up the agenda for the conference, and
view talks that have occurred minutes before. They would experience superb
audio, good video and have access to all slides shown in synchronization with
video, with the option of downloading relevant supporting documents. This vision
can be extended well beyond professional society meetings, with enormous impact.
Libraries could house digital lecture archives containing lectures ranging from
government proceedings to seminars and lectures on any number of topics.
Students could view lectures given by some of the greatest scientific minds on
topics of current or historical interest. Industry would definitely be
interested in the device for training, workshops, and conferences. This project
is working on several challenges that must be addressed before the above vision
can be realized. Current recording approaches are so manpower intensive that
recording multiple sessions is not feasible for most organizations. Existing
software is not sufficiently robust. Standards do not exist that would permit
the sharing of lectures or in guaranteeing their accessibility a decade from
now. The PI team is developing solutions to each of these problems. The first
step is elimination of the technical barriers to the inexpensive capture and
analysis of the video, audio, and slides from a lecture, using a robust and
user-friendly hardware device. Such a device must be a compact piece of hardware
that can be distributed to untrained individuals, even session chairs, to permit
the capture of lectures, regardless of the format in which they were presented,
and that automatically publish them using wireless transmission to a conference
center server that would then post the talks on the web. Another needed step is
the development of a standard which could be used to insure the long term
availability of the lectures, regardless of what changes may occur in commercial
packages, and to guarantee that talks across different disciplines and societies
could be shared. A third needed innovation is a significantly improved meta-data
extraction from each lecture through automated techniques. Advanced capabilities
to archive keywords extracted from the audio track of a lecture would help to
produce a significantly higher degree of knowledge output from the archives.
Accomplishing these goals would result in an easy-to-use, highly effective
method of archiving lectures. Each lecture would be archived as a "lecture
object" representing the lecture video, audio, slides, and valuable metadata.