* 0333568
* Active Building Envelope for Energy Self-Sufficiency: Design, Optimization, and Experimental Validation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,02/28/2009
* Achille Messac, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Bank
* 02/28/2009
* USD 280,000.00

Space conditioning currently accounts for over 50% of the energy used in the
average American home, the bulk of this energy is needed to compensate for
energy losses that occur through the building envelope. This research effort
deals with design, optimize, and experimentally validation of a novel Active
Building Envelope (ABE) system for use in housing. The ABE-system will actively
use solar energy to pump heat in the direction opposite to the passive heat
conduction direction. This approach will effectively eliminate the need to
supply other energy sources to thermally condition houses. This multi-functional
ABE-system involves the integration of energy receptor, transducer, storage,
control, and distribution technologies into the building envelope. The research
will take three years to complete and will involve three Phases. The first Phase
will involve the development of representative ABE-system engineering and
economic computational models, and the subsequent optimization of these models
using the physical programming optimization method. A complete house will be
considered. During the second Phase, we propose to validate the modeling and
optimization results through testing of an ABE-system prototype. During the
third Phase we propose a comprehensive evaluation of the ABE-system modeling,
optimization, and testing effort. The research will proceed in close
collaboration with Solid State Cooling Systems Inc., our industry partner, who
has made a commitment to provide significant support.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: Conventional strategies to mitigate thermal losses or gains in building-
envelopes rely on passive insulation approaches. Separate heating and cooling
systems then compensate for energy losses or gains that do occur. The proposed
ABE-technology will actively tackle the heat dissipation problem at its source
(i.e. the envelope). This approach is completely new. The outcome of our
research&lt;br/&gt;will establish the intellectual framework needed to
accomplish economically viable ABE-systems applicable to both existing and new
American houses. The impact ABE-technology will have on American society and
economy is very broad. For example, ABE-technology will reduce US foreign energy
dependence; will reduce heating and&lt;br/&gt;cooling costs for American
families; and will reduce environmental pressures associated with the
exploitation of fossil energy sources. ABE-technology will also accommodate more
accurate control over indoor thermal comfort levels, which will result in more
healthy and productive environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;