* 0333296
* Doctoral Dissertation:  A Comparative Analysis of Femur Morphology in Australopithecus afarensis:  Implications for the Evolution of Bipedal Locomotion
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2004
* William Kimbel, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 11/30/2004
* USD 9,000.00

This project focuses on the proximal femur of the early hominin species
Australopithecus afarensis from the Pliocene of eastern Africa (ca. 3.6-3.0 Ma).
During the last decade, several new fossil specimens of the proximal femur have
been recovered at Hadar, Ethiopia, home of the well-known "Lucy" skeleton. The
combined A. afarensis proximal femur sample now numbers 15 primarily adult
specimens, some of which will be described for the first time in this study. It
is unusual to be able to draw on such a large fossil sample of a single
anatomical element to quantify size and shape variation in a fossil species.
Several significant questions about early hominins and their locomotor
strategies will be investigated using this relatively large fossil sample. The
degree of size and shape variation in the A. afarensis proximal femur will be
assessed to determine whether it is comparable to that of other hominoids, as it
should be if the fossils comprising A. afarensis represent a single species
practicing a single mode of locomotion (bipedal walking). The shape of the A.
afarensis proximal femur will be compared to that of recent humans, apes and
other early hominins in order to identify shared features among groups with
shared locomotor strategies, such as bipeds and quadrupeds. Finally, features of
the femur that have been argued to be adaptations to bipedal locomotion will be
explored in a novel way. A phylogenetic method will be used to examine the
pattern of change in femoral features from a hypothetical common (non-bipedal)
ancestor to bipedal descendants. The combined analyses will contribute to a
better understanding of the proximal femur of A. afarensis, and of the variation
in features of the proximal femur as they relate to the evolution of bipedal
walking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will add important new data to the
picture of early hominin evolution and adaptation in Africa. Beyond its
intellectual interest, research highlighting the importance of Ethiopian fossils
for the study of human evolution contributes to international awareness of the
importance of Ethiopia to field and laboratory research, and helps to create
local research and training opportunities. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a student to
establish a strong independent research career.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;