* 0333520
* Materials Digital Library: MatDL.org
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Laura Bartolo, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/2007
* USD 808,574.00

This collections project builds on the advances in information technology, the
Internet, and the World Wide Web that provide opportunities to create and
disseminate rich scientific content to many people. To capitalize on these
advances, this project provides bridges for novice and expert users to find
useful content. The project researches the best delivery of a materials digital
library using a three-pronged approach which consists of use of materials
digital library content in the curriculum, collection of materials content with
an emphasis on soft matter, and construction of authoring tools for improved
delivery. Submission, editing, and composing tools enable experts and novices to
characterize their contributions to the Materials Digital Library, as materials
scientists would, using metadata schemas such as Dublin Core and IEEE Learning
Object Metadata as well as domain-specific markup languages such as Materials
Markup Language. Metadata records are stored in XML based format to support
generation of other materials resources such as automated classification
schemes, glossaries, and thesauri.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initial content of the
Materials Digital Library is based on existing resources selected from the
Materials Science and Engineering Laboratory at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology. &lt;br/&gt;Students and educators in three Materials
Science Engineering (MSE) courses use and contribute to the Materials Digital
Library utilizing the proposed domain-specific tools. Two courses are part of
MIT's newly revised undergraduate MSE curriculum and its OpenCourseWare
Initiative. The first MIT course (Introduction to Solid State Chemistry) is a
large freshmen undergraduate chemistry course with no laboratory component. The
second MIT course, Introduction to Modeling and Simulation, is a
multidisciplinary science course team-taught across seven engineering
departments. The third course, Computational Nanoscience and Soft Matter taught
at the University of Michigan, introduces students to cutting edge research on
building new nanomaterials. MatWeb.com, the project's industrial partner, is
working with the investigators to build a business plan and to host the
Materials Digital Library as a sustainable enterprise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the NSF Directorate for Mathematical
and Physical Sciences (MPS) is providing significant co-funding of this project
in recognition of the importance of materials science education within the goals
of MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;