* 0333203
* Microbial Genome Sequencing: Genomic Sequencing of Two Globally Ubiquitous Members of the Epsilon Proteobacteria Found in Deep-Sea Hydrothermal Environments
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Stephen Cary, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2007
* USD 374,524.00

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Craig Cary and Barbara Campbell of the
University of Delaware College of Marine Studies to sequence the genome of Am-H,
a free-living bacterium that represents the dominant type of bacteria found at
deep-sea hydrothermal vents and the deep subsurface biosphere. In addition, a
pilot study will be undertaken in collaboration with Lucigen Corporation to
prove our ability to sequence a genome from a single cell of a bacterium found
in a symbiotic relationship with the deep-sea hydrothermal vent annelid,
Alvinella pompejana. Both target bacteria belong to the epsilon Proteobacteria.
No environmentally relevant epsilon Proteobacteria have been sequenced except
the human intestinal pathogens, Helicobacter and Campylobacter. Both marine
bacteria are physiologically distinct from these human pathogens, where they fix
carbon dioxide for their metabolism. They perform this task via a poorly
described alternative carbon fixation pathway. The investigators will sequence
the Am-H genome to completion using standard methods currently available at the
University of Delaware and at The Institute for Genome Research (TIGR).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genome sequence information from these bacteria will
expand the research of a wide range of investigators working on these globally
ubiquitous bacteria. Studying these genomes will also help researchers to
understand bacterial evolution and even the early history of life on Earth. This
study will advance the knowledge of researchers interested in global carbon
cycling and carbon dioxide fixation processes. Finally, the ramifications of
single cell genomic technology will make a substantial impact on the future of
environmental genomics. Directly, this research will provide extremely valuable
training for both graduate and undergraduate students in environmental genomics
and bioinformatics. This project will also be a focus of the University of
Delaware's national and international outreach program for secondary schools
that has directly reached over 100,000 students in the last 3 years of
operation. (www.ocean.udel.edu/expeditions/index.html). Sequences resulting from
this project will be submitted to two public databases and will be presented in
both presentation and publication form. &lt;br/&gt;