* 0333377
* IGERT:  Bio-Applications of Membrane Science and Technology
* EHR,DGE
* 10/15/2003,09/30/2012
* Ronald Millard, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Richard Boone
* 09/30/2012
* USD 3,644,410.00

This IGERT program is focused around three interrelated multi-disciplinary
themes: pharmaceutical, biosensor, and biomedical applications of membrane
science. Membranes are integral to controlled drug release, medical devices, and
biomimetics. The intellectual merit of this IGERT program is that it addresses a
major challenge identified by the North American Membrane Society to integrate
classical membrane science with bio-applications. This IGERT capitalizes on
several opportunities at the University of Cincinnati (UC): (1) the Colleges of
Engineering, Medicine and Pharmacy are on the same campus; (2) UC is a site of
the only NSF Membrane Center; (3) an NSF REU Program in membrane science is
established; (4) the State-funded Bio/Start technology incubator is on campus;
and (5) an industry-internship program is well-established.

The goals include developing an interdisciplinary graduate training program,
attracting pharmaceutical and biomedical industry participation, and
facilitating a revenue stream to insure self-sustaining operation. The training
program involves nine required courses and three courses focused within the
pharmaceutical, biosensor, or biomedical track in the traineeship program. A
series of required lab rotations is designed to facilitate cross-disciplinary
awareness. An international technical/cultural experience is possible with Kyoto
Technical University, the Australian National University and the University of
Twente. The broader impacts of this IGERT program are that it will provide a
forum for interdisciplinary training in a critical emerging research area,
stimulate a new research direction in bio-applications for the NSF Membrane
Center, create a formalized structure that integrates classical and bio-
applications of membranes, catalyze the growth of the new Biomedical Engineering
Department at UC, facilitate effective university/industry interaction,
encourage the formation of interdisciplinary research teams, lead to research
results that will improve health care and the quality of life, and generate
patentable intellectual property and industry funding to sustain this IGERT
program.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep
knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
this sixth year of the program, awards are being made to institutions for
programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported
by NSF.