* 0333257
* Ecosystem Informatics
* EHR,DGE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2011
* Edward Waymire, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Melur Ramasubramanian
* 09/30/2011
* USD 3,954,048.00

This IGERT program in Ecosystem Informatics builds on synergies among ecosystem
science, computer science, and mathematics in the context of regional, national
and global natural resource management and policy. Informatics - which includes
modeling, data analysis, interpretation, and management of information using
computerized systems; combined with ecosystem science; and study of the biotic
(living) and abiotic (nonliving) components of complex systems and their
interactions - contributes to basic theory as well as natural resource policy
and management. Practically every government agency, national and international
organization involved in natural resources and ecosystem management is engaged
in Ecosystem Informatics. The field is timely, participating scientists are
successfully collaborating across these disciplines, and the Pacific Northwest
of the U.S. has many pertinent issues and agencies.

Intellectual merit: The goals of the Ecosystem Informatics IGERT program are to:
(1) train young scientists who will make basic contributions to ecosystem
science, computer science, and mathematics; (2) promote discovery through team-
based research and education; and (3) further ecosystem and natural resources
management and policy. This IGERT enhances current efforts in eco-informatics,
many involving NSF-sponsored efforts (e.g. LTER, NCEAS, SDSC). This program will
train scientists who can work on interdisciplinary teams, supported by
internships at national and international organizations. Research efforts
integrate four ecosystem science areas of (1) diversity, stability, and invasion
in communities; (2) carbon and nitrogen fluxes in watersheds and airsheds; (3)
disturbance dynamics in landscapes, oceans, and coastal zones; and (4) fluxes of
material and energy through physical networks, with five areas of informatics:
(a) software engineering for model construction, experimentation, and
replication; (b) representation and modeling of complex ecosystems; (c)
information management and access; (d) spatio-temporal database systems; and (5)
data mining and pattern recognition.

Broader impacts: Ecosystem Informatics is largely missing from graduate
education today. The IGERT program will train students to become outstanding
interdisciplinary scientists and effective contributors to ecosystem informatics
research teams. Through cross-disciplinary team-based activities the program
will improve diversity, recruitment and retention of Ph.D. students in computer
science, mathematics, and ecosystem science. It will contribute to ecosystem
management and policy at the regional, national and international levels through
student-faculty team projects, presentations and symposia, and internships
across the US, Europe, and the Pacific Rim.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S.
Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the interdisciplinary background, deep
knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the technical, professional, and personal
skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
this sixth year of the program, awards are being made to institutions for
programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported
by NSF