* 0333032
* SGER: Collaborative Research: Sleep in Nocturnal Bird Migrants: An Interdisciplinary Study
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Verner Bingman, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 07/31/2006
* USD 20,768.00

Collaborative Research: Sleep in nocturnal bird migrants, an interdisciplinary
study &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Verner P. Bingman&lt;br/&gt;Bowling Green State
University&lt;br/&gt;Animals spend their lives either awake or asleep.
Wakefulness allows animals to interact effectively with their environment, while
waking performance is contingent on sleep, the function of which remains largely
unknown. An animal may mitigate the conflict between sleep and wakefulness by
engaging in unihemispheric sleep, a unique state during which one cerebral
hemisphere sleeps while the other remains awake. This interdisciplinary,
collaborative project takes advantage of nocturnal bird migrants as a natural
model system to study the behavioral and physiological properties of sleep, the
consequences of naturally occurring sleep loss, and the compensatory adjustments
that accompany sleep loss. Most bird species are active during the day and sleep
at night, exceQt during migration when their migratory flights occur at night.
By traveling at night a migrating bird experiences reduced threat of predation,
improved atmospheric conditions for flight, and more time to feed during the
day. Advantages of nocturnal migration aside, birds necessarily lose sleep by
migrating at night and changes in sleep behavior could have adverse
consequences. Laboratory and field studies of sleep in the Swainson' s Thrush,
an intercontinental bird migrant, are combined to ask how seasonally sleep
deprived birds compensate for that deprivation at the behavioral and
physiological level. The contribution of the study is measured in terms of both
application of methodology to the study of sleep and understanding the function
of sleep. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;