* 0333193
* IGERT:  Integrative Graduate Education, Research, and Training in Population and Environment
* EHR,DGE
* 10/01/2003,03/31/2012
* Barbara Entwisle, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Boone
* 03/31/2012
* USD 2,824,599.00

This IGERT program in population and environment has a focus on land use and
land cover change. It features three longstanding interdisciplinary projects as
"laboratories" for training and research: one based in Nang Rong, Thailand; a
second in the Ecuadorean Amazon; and a third in Ngorongoro, Tanzania. Each
project has as its overall goal a better understanding of human behavior and
agency in the transformation of the Earth's surface. Deforestation, agricultural
extensification, land fragmentation, intensification, degradation, secondary
plant succession, and urbanization are unifying themes. The great strength and
broader impacts of these projects collectively is their global reach and
regional coverage. All involve collaboration with in-country scientists, who
offer detailed local knowledge of field sites and data, facilitate fieldwork
opportunities for trainees, and help to foster global perspectives on
substantive and policy issues. The IGERT program will increase synergies within
and across projects to the direct benefit of the trainees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this program is that it builds
on a firm base in a discipline (Ph.D.s are in a discipline or curriculum),
adding coursework in complementary disciplines (population science for natural
scientists; natural and spatial science for population scholars) and
interdisciplinary training and research experiences. Scientists with a strong
disciplinary base but with training in multiple perspectives will be ideally
placed to bridge social, natural, and spatial science in research on population-
environment interactions. The elements of the IGERT program are: a research
apprenticeship on one of the population, land use, and environment projects;
formal course work; participation in an ongoing interdisciplinary seminar;
international field experience; and ethics training. In addition, an internship
program will be created to involve undergraduates who are members of
underrepresented groups in the projects and to encourage them to pursue
interests in population and environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IGERT
training program will be housed at the Carolina Population Center (CPC) at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC-CH). IGERT trainees will be
provided with fully equipped offices at the CPC, where IGERT project faculty
(the principal and co-investigators of the projects) maintain research offices
and where the projects are staffed and based. The IGERT program joins and
extends interdisciplinary training programs at the CPC and the Curriculum in
Ecology and UNC-CH. Further, as part of the IGERT program, CPC and the Nicholas
School of the Environment and Earth Sciences at Duke University will jointly
sponsor a series of distinguished lectures, colloquia, and workshops. These will
focus attention on population, land use, and environment issues on both campuses
and lay a foundation for future collaborations among students and faculty at
both institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended
to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
interdisciplinary background, deep knowledge in a chosen discipline, and the
technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
traditional disciplinary boundaries. In this sixth year of the program, awards
are being made to institutions for programs that collectively span the areas of
science and engineering supported by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;