* 0333532
* NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences -Non-Positive Curvature in Group Theory; Albany, NY;  August 15-20, 2004
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* Edward Turner, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/2005
* USD 32,000.00

We begin with a discussion of the origins of geometric group theory: the
importance of the core decision problems first formulated by Dehn; the emergence
of classes of groups that demand special attention; and the emergence of
negative and non-positive curvature from the core issues in group theory. This
leads to a description of the geography of the universe of finitely presented
groups, with emphasis on the role played by manifestations of non-positive
curvature.

From this platform, the following topics will be developed.

The study and construction of group actions; complexes of groups, the role of
non-positive curvature in devlopability. The fundamental groups of non-
positively curved (orbi)spaces. Rigidity. Concepts of dimension.

Hyperbolic groups. Towards semihyperbolic groups: competing theories and the
difficulties of discriminating between the associated classes of groups. The
rich and diverse subgroup theory.

Algorithmic structures: connecting the complexity of the basic decision problems
to the geometry of manifolds via diagrams; Dehn functions and the isoperimetric
spectrum; language-theoretic complexity, the geometry of normal forms, automatic
groups.

Conjugacy problems and cryptography.

Isomorphism problems for groups and manifolds in the presence of non-positive
curvature (positive and negative results).

Throughout, many examples will be given to complement the elegance of the
general theory and to illustrate how ideas from non-positive curvature in group
theory can be applied elsewhere, eg the solution to Grothendieck's problems
concerning profinite completions.