* 0333724
* Pervasive Production Space:  An Innovative Information Technology Framework for Homebuilding
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Anil Sawhney, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Perumalsamy N. Balaguru
* 08/31/2006
* USD 270,000.00

The overall goal of this research is to realize the vision of making appropriate
information available anywhere, anytime in the homebuilding process through the
use of innovative information technology tools. The project vision will be
accomplished through the development of a Pervasive Production Space (PPS) for
building code compliance results that uses the emerging field of pervasive
computing. This research will focus upon the development and identification of
pervasive computing paradigms, methodologies, design tools and technologies to
meet this vision for the US homebuilding industry. The project vision can
ultimately apply to all phases of the homebuilding process including land
development, house design, pre-construction, building construction, and post-
construction. While pervasive computing is being generally adapted to structured
home and office environments, this research will expand fundamental
underpinnings of such computing theory through its application in an
"unstructured" production environment. The intellectual merit of the proposed
research also relates to its confirmation of widely held, but insufficiently
documented, hypotheses about the value of IT implementation in the residential
construction industry. The broader impacts of the proposed research are
dramatic. Housing is a basic human need. Current management methods have led to
an increase in the cycle time for the construction of new housing units, and a
concomitant increase in the cost. The proposers estimate that some $90B in
excess capital is tied up in the industry due to communications-induced cycle
time waste. This capital could be put to other uses in the economy, and the
impact on housing prices would increase affordability nationwide. The proposed
data collection strategies will provide significant material for classroom
instruction in residential construction, improving education methods via conduct
of the research. The proposers will make every effort to disseminate the results
broadly; positive data vetted by industry partners could be a compelling tool to
drive other builders to seek similar partnerships, which could in turn lead to
wider partnerships. Revolving around the core research activity will be other
important activities that will ensure integration of research and education,
involvement of persons with diverse backgrounds and career aspirations, creation
of an enabling infrastructure that will foster and sustain innovation in the
long-term, and transformation of demand generated by diffusions of innovation
into new businesses.