* 0333746
* SGER:       Efficient Groebner Basis Computation for Finding Implicit Representations of Geometric Objects
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Quoc-Nam Tran, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 08/31/2005
* USD 75,886.00

This research uses new results and techniques from the method of Groebner bases
to devise an efficient and reliable algorithm for finding implicit
representations of geometric objects. The process of finding implicit
representations is also known as implicitization, which has applications in
areas such as computer aided geometric design (CAGD), visualization and solid
modeling. The approach is to utilize a novel method for implicitization that is
both reliable and efficient. A reliable method is a method that theoretically
never fails to give a correct answer. An efficient method is a method that has a
better complexity or a more reasonable running time and consumes less memory. An
efficient and reliable implicitization algorithm will facilitate the analysis
needed in the design of curves and surfaces. For example, it can be used for
finding the intersection of surfaces, to verify whether or not a point lies on a
surface, etc. Software products from this research project are being distributed
to researchers who are interested in using the new results.

The investigation uses a deterministic Groebner walk method to convert a
parametric representation of a surface into its implicit form. For rational
parametric surfaces, the author uses a different approach to deal with base
points in that the calculation of a Groebner basis for the starting cone is no
longer needed. This approach improves the efficiency of algorithms because the
usual calculation of the implicit representation, which often consumes a lot of
time and memory space, is replaced by a sequence of small calculations along the
walking path and then lift the results using linear transformations. A second
task is to reduce the number of terms of the intermediate polynomials and find
criteria for detecting unnecessary reduction. Experimental results with the
deterministic Groebner walk conversion method show that most of the time for
implicitization is used for reducing the minimal bases after lifting, but this
entails many unnecessary computations. This approach detects only necessary
reductions thus greatly improving the efficiency of algorithms and significantly
reducing the memory space.