* 0334176
* Network Startup Resource Center (NSRC)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Lucy Lynch, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 03/31/2007
* USD 539,695.00

The Network Startup Resource Center (NSRC) project provides technical
information, engineer- ing assistance, training, and equipment to research
institutions and networking organizations in developing areas. The primary goal
is to make it easier for US scientists and engineers, and those in developing
areas, to collaborate via the Internet. In FY04 the project will transition this
year to other programs and continue to develop network infrastructure in the
less-connected parts of the world continuing its tradition of high leveraging
through these ongoing partnerships and alliances. The NSRC.s activities develop
and enhance network infrastructure for collaborative research, education, and
international partnerships, while promoting teaching and training via the
transfer of technology.

The work provides significant benefits for US scientists and the international
research community by facilitating better access for researchers in developing
countries who participate in the global research enterprise. Regarding
intellectual merit, NSRC.s work advances knowledge and under- standing within
the fields of networking and telecommunications through a clearly focused strat-
egy: working on the specific problems of engineers and technologists in the
research and educational environments of poorer, less developed countries. The
improved communications resulting from these efforts are then available to
scientists and engineers, on both ends of the spectrum, enabling the application
of a wide variety of ideas, information, talent, and resources to a given
research question. The NSRC.s main focus areas are:

Helping develop and deploy Internet infrastructure in overseas R&E networks
Assisting US scientists with international collaboration and research
partnerships Providing technical information and resources to network operators
Providing direct network engineering and planning assistance Helping organize
regional training workshops and centers Coordinating donations and shipments of
networking books and equipment Developing Internet exchange points Helping build
and deploy wireless network infrastructure Hosting network engineering interns
Advising on the establishment of help desk and user support services Maintaining
a historical archive of Internet connectivity The NSRC and University of Oregon
team brings considerable operational experience in design- ing networks and
deploying Internet technology in places with minimal infrastructure and limited
resources. Colleagues from the extensive international contacts and
relationships that we have established over the past fifteen years are willing
to contribute their time and expertise to NSRC initiatives and activities,
putting special emphasis on scientific institutions when we request their help
on behalf of NSF and US scientists. Having assisted many of the initial network
efforts in developing economies, the NSRC is transitioning to assisting those
networks with issues of scal- ability, enrichment of services and applications
for end users, and national and regional coopera- tion. The substantial in-kind
support we have received from industry, equipment vendors, and book publishers,
in part because of NSF.s imprimatur, has significantly multiplied the return of
NSF.s investment in the NSRC project. By building on past successes and current
working rela- Tionships this project will formalize strategic alliances with
partners in industry and academia that support the NSRC.s activities.