* 0334694
* SGER:  Interfacial Phenomena Related to Prevention of Biofouling
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Roger Narayan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2005
* USD 74,824.00

Narayan, Roger J. GA Tech Res Corp - GIT "SGER: Interfacial Phenomena Related to
Biofouling"

The focus of this exploratory research is on the processing, characterization
and modeling of mesoporous diamondlike carbon (DLC) for use as a membrane in
artificial internal organs. DLC has been considered for use in medical devices
due to its exceptional mechanical, tribological and chemical properties.
Inflammatory reactions, fibrinogen absorption, and platelet adhesion are reduced
or eliminated, as DLC is a form of pure carbon. Attention has until now only
focused on developing DLC as a structural biomaterial. DLC composites have been
created in past work that contained biologically functional nanocrystals using
pulsed laser deposition (PLD). In order to achieve optimal biocompatibility,
biofunctional metal species were chosen for specific purposes. For example, in
order to convey antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory properties to the DLC
surface, silver nanocrystals were incorporated into the deposit. The DLC-silver
nanocomposite has been extensively studied by the PI. The exploratory research
is based on the hypothesis that mesoporous DLC can be created using pulsed laser
deposition. Processing parameters will be optimized to create a DLC film with a
continuous grid of 5-10 nm sized pores. These films will have an increased
lifetime as compared with current artificial organ membranes, all of which are
polymer-based. The specific goals of this research are as follows:

1. To process novel mesoporous diamondlike carbon structures 2. To characterize
the interfacial properties of mesoporous DLC nanocomposites using STEM-Z
microscopy, HRTEM, Raman spectroscopy, and mechanical testing (including
nanoindentation, wear, and adhesion) 3. To determine the biocompatibility:
Cytotoxicity and thrombogenicity.

This mesoporous morphology is not only important for use in artificial organs;
implanatable artificial kidneys and implantable biosensors may also benefit from
surfaces with similar morphologies. These studies will yield a general
assessment of material properties and can be used to support future device
development. This exploratory research is intended to determine the feasibility
of various pore processing techniques.

The broader impacts of this exploratory research are incorporation of concepts
from research into the graduate biomaterials course at Georgia Tech. Also,
outreach to underrepresented minorities regarding job and educational
opportunities in nanostructured biomaterials research has been undertaken by the
PI. The research could be helpful in developing specialized medical devices such
as sensors or purifiers.

