* 0334667
* US-EC Cooperative Activities:  Interactive Service Negotiation and Adaptive Delivery Platform for IP-Based Communications
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Boleslaw Szymanski, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Graham Harrison
* 08/31/2008
* USD 24,800.00

0334667&lt;br/&gt;Szymanski&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year award supports
US-European cooperative coordinating and educational activities related to an
EU-funded project, "Interactive Service Negotiation and Adaptive Delivery
Platform for IP-Based Communications (SNAP)," involving Boleslaw Szymanski of
Renssalaer Polytechnic Institute and Krzystof Malinowski of the Polish Research
and Academic Computer Network (NASK). Malinowski is the coordinator of SNAP,
which includes participants from France, Italy, Poland, and Spain, who represent
IP service providers, equipment manufacturers, and universities. Its goal is to
specify, develop and integrate innovative telecommunication technology by
exploring such concepts as service architecture, man-machine interface, data-
path reporting, and authentication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participation of
the PI is expected to lead to collaborative research. The RPI team's expertise
is complementary to that of SNAP, thus leveraging the European investment. The
RPI group has both tools and experience developed for distributed simulation of
large networks, which will be used in SNAP's simulation experiments. RPI will
also participate in the development of the tools for intrusion detection, and
will conduct research on network economics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;