* 0334866
* AToL: Collaborative Research: A Phylogenomic Toolbox for Assembling the Tree of Life
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2003,07/31/2009
* Junhyong Kim, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2009
* USD 537,949.00

The University of Pennsylvania, has been awarded a grant to develop new methods
and software tools to help construct the genealogical "tree of life" of all
biological species. The focus of these efforts will be on extracting information
from the vast molecular sequence databases to build collections of smaller trees
that can be assembled into larger, more comprehensive pictures of the tree of
life. The scale of the data input is large: GenBank, for example, contains tens
of millions of sequences sampled from over 100,000 species. Whereas extensive
research has focused on the problem of building a tree from a single data set;
relatively little is known about extracting these data sets en masse from
sequence databases and then assembling a synthesis. The proposal is to study a
set of novel computational problems that are as challenging as the basic tree
building problem itself. These occur in three broad areas: (1) assessment of the
potential information in sequence databases of various kinds; (2) optimal
extraction of data from databases to bring the best information to bear on
individual tree reconstruction; and (3) integration of these smaller trees into
"supertrees" (larger trees assembled from smaller ones that share species in
common), especially by identifying target sets of new sequences needed to
construct optimal supertrees. Theoretical results will be evaluated by analysis
of three diverse databases that pose a range of computational challenges (a
subset of GenBank, SWISS-PROT, and the TIGR EGO database). This work will
characterize the phylogenetic information content of these sequence sets,
identify maximal sets of combinable sequence information, construct nonredundant
partitions of the database to permit estimation of collections of trees, and
assemble supertrees from these collections. The interdisciplinary team includes
phylogenetic biologists and computer scientists with experience in phylogenetic
theory, data analysis, and algorithm development and implementation. The project
is also collaborating with three existing Tree-of-Life projects (each aimed at
reconstructing particular portions of the tree) to provide tests of the sequence
targeting algorithms.