* 0334122
* The Sondrestrom Upper Atmospheric Research Facility: A Vision for Science, Service, Education, and Leadership
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2003,01/31/2009
* Craig Heinselman, SRI International
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert M. Robinson
* 01/31/2009
* USD 12,310,519.00

The investigators will continue operating and maintaining the Sondrestrom upper
atmosphere research facility located near Kangerlussuaq, on the west coast of
Greenland. The management, operation, and maintenance of the facility includes
all technical aspects of the incoherent-scatter (IS) radar, the Rayleigh and
resonance lidars, and the all-sky imager. The investigators will also provide
the vision for science, service, education, and leadership of the facility.
Plans for the operation of the facility include evolutionary development of the
facility with further implementation of state-of-the-art radar data acquisition
and processing schemes that are becoming practicable with new technology,
further advancements in lidar and all-sky imager capabilities, upgrades in
telescience capabilities, and improvements to the facility infrastructure that
will enable key instrument deployments in the future. To provide an environment
that promotes education and training, an education advisory board, consisting of
a group of diversified, education research experts, will be established to
determine and develop the most effective way of formulating, implementing,
communicating and disseminating information and data to public and educational
institutions. Also, a post-doctoral program will help train the future research
professionals in ionospheric physics, and the existing graduate student research
experience program will be augmented to increase student involvement. To foster
new ideas in upper atmospheric research, the investigators will support advanced
instrumentation to promote scientific discovery, ensure data are of high
research quality, and maintain expertise in the related sciences conducted at
the facility. The specific areas of research include efforts to investigate the
response and variability of the high-latitude ionosphere from seconds to solar
cycles, the exploration of the ionosphere's role in the coupled magnetosphere-
ionosphere system, and the deciphering of the myriad processes occurring in the
mesosphere/lower thermosphere-ionosphere region. To respond to the evolving
needs of the community, the facility will provide flexibility in radar
operations to capture space weather events, and make more data available for
retrospective analysis. In addition to the contribution these observations will
make to the data acquired by the longitudinal chain of IS radars, the utility of
grouping the existing and planned high-latitude radars will be exploited. Thus,
the Sondrestrom facility will be made an element of a high-latitude IS radar
consortium to optimize coordinated operations and encourage the exchange of
scientific and technical developments among the IS radar facilities. The
investigators will provide ready access to real-time data products, immediate
analysis of 20 years of radar data, and assimilation of radar data into physics-
based community models. The investigators will develop a data handling and
processing strategy that will provide the first comprehensive statistical view
of the high-latitude ionosphere by IS radar. In addition to enabling scientific
research with the Sondrestrom facility, the investigators will schedule and
operate the radar; maintain and upgrade the radar and lidar as necessary; plan
and design experiments for the radar, lidar, and all-sky imager; coordinate user
visits and provide logistics support; act as scientific, technical, and logistic
liaisons for user experiments; sustain high-quality data products; preserve a
comprehensive data library; provide data to qualified researchers; maintain,
enhance, and develop software for acquiring, reducing, and interpreting data;
collaborate with scientists; serve as science liaison to the Greenland Home Rule
Government, Danish Commission for Scientific Research in Greenland, and the
National Science Foundation, and employ highly qualified site personnel.