* 0334447
* US-Brazil Workshop:  Methods for Studying Human Development in Culturally Diverse Contexts, April 2004, Serrambi, Brazil
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Cynthia Lightfoot, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 02/28/2005
* USD 17,232.00

The Americas Program of the Office of International Science and Engineering and
the Developmental and Learning Sciences Program in the Division of Behavioral
and Cognitive Sciences support a three-day workshop organized by Cynthia
Lightfoot of the Pennsylvania State University, Delaware County with the
assistance of Brazilian co-organizer Maria Lyra of the Federal University of
Pernambuco. This workshop will convene April 8-10, 2004 in Serrambi, Pernambuco,
Brazil. Graduate students, early-career faculty, and senior faculty from the
U.S., Brazil, Canada, and Europe will formulate research methods appropriate for
studying human development in diverse sociocultural contexts. The focus of this
school will be on human development as culturally situated, both
metatheoretically and in its implications for addressing developmental
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will bring together young scholars
from underrepresented groups in the early phases of developing research programs
as well as young faculty who are in tenure-track positions at undergraduate
institutions. In addition to exposing these young researchers to scientific
discussions in an international context, the workshops are expected to result in
significant professional opportunities, including international joint projects
and publications. &lt;br/&gt;The students and faculty will work jointly on
methodologies that are relevant to works in progress, particularly research
programs of the young scholars, and substantive international research
collaborations are expected to result.&lt;br/&gt;