* 0334056
* STI:  Network Measurement, Monitoring and Analysis in Cluster Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2003,09/30/2007
* Jon Dugan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2007
* USD 793,000.00

High-speed networks are vital to next-generation Grid applications, enabling
rapid access to remote resources and allowing users to mask latency via
aggressive data staging. This project intends to build tools that will allow the
collection, analysis and visualization of the network interactions of nodes
within a cluster. Further, the investigators anticipate building and publishing
what will become the foundation for a body of knowledge about the
characteristics and limitations of cluster networks. The outcome of this project
should also provide those involved in the design and implementation of cluster
networks both the tools to make new measurements and empirical data about how
these networks operate.

To ensure that the tools developed are able to interoperate with the largest
variety of cluster environments, the authors propose a modular and extensible
system of data collection and processing. In the proposed configuration, the
tools created would determine the status of the network from several different
data sources at a variety of granularities. These data sources include
information obtained from the switching hardware in the network, passive tapping
of links, instruments in the networking stacks of the nodes, and instruments in
the message passing libraries. These tools may be repackaged and used for a
several purposes that extend beyond the primary scope of the project. Possible
purposes include monitoring the health and status of an operational cluster,
aiding an understanding of a particular application for user support, detection
of suspicious traffic patterns for security, and detailed accounting of the
utilization of the networks in a Grid environment.

The networks that form the interconnections between the elements of the Grid
are similar in many ways to the networks that have been built for general use by
the Research and Education Community (such as the vBNS and Abilene). However the
ways in which these networks are used is significantly different and thus
require the development of tools and methodologies specifically designed for the
distributed cluster and Grid environment. The capabilities of traditional tools
and methodologies will be harnessed and built upon as is appropriate.

The NSF Distributed Terascale Facility, TeraGrid, represents the pre-eminent
laboratory for exploring the network implications of distributed and Grid
computing. NCSA and Argonne designed the State of Illinois funded I-WIRE [4]
DWDM network in the Midwest, and have together with SDSC and CalTech, designed
and have deployed the TeraGrid.s 40 Gbit/s national scale wide area network.
NCSA is a major TeraGrid site and has strong working relationships with the
other sites and is in an excellent position to instrument TeraGrid with the
tools developed by this project. Looking beyond TeraGrid, The Extensible
Terascale Facility (ETF) will bring networks with TeraGrid speed networks to
clusters and other high performance computing systems throughout the research
and education community in the US. NCSA will be actively involved in the
development of the ETF, which will also benefit greatly from the proceeds of
this project. NCSA has a rich history of high-speed network research,
development, and deployment. wide area network performance optimization tools
and assists with high-performance applications.