* 0334140
* STI:      Implementation of a Handle/DNS Server
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Robert Kahn, Corporation for National Research Initiatives (NRI)
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 499,649.00

The demand for DNS protocol extensions has grown in recent years, especially
from countries where English is not the native language. The traditional DNS
protocol is based on 7-bit character encoding and thus prevents non-ASCII
characters from being used to name network resources. The situation has made it
very difficult for users in non-English speaking countries to take full
advantage of the Internet. It has also prompted many independent DNSroot
implementations that are not interoperable with the global DNS. DNS resolution
also lacks access control and service security. This has restricted certain
applications that are&lt;br/&gt;trying to use or otherwise relying on the DNS
namespace (e.g. ENUM). Efforts to extend the DNS for better security and
manageability have been undertaken, but these are all subject to backward
compatibility requirements, which can introduce deployment obstacles. The Handle
System, developed by CNRI with U.S. Government support, has no such backward
compatibility limitations. It can fully support the existing DNS and also
extensions that have no convenient way to be made available in the current
DNS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CNRI proposes to develop and demonstrate an integrated
Handle System/DNS capability that will support the current DNS functions. The
proposed integration would allow traditional DNS requests to be mapped to
traditional DNS servers and non-traditional requests to be sent to handle
servers for advanced applications. A Handle Server API will be developed and
deployed that will support addition of modules to a Handle Server without
affecting or requiring changes to the basic Handle Server software. Advanced
query and administrative functions will be provided for secure handle
resolution. In addition, the Handle System&lt;br/&gt;reference implementation,
now in widespread use on the Internet, will be updated to include a variety of
new features such as wildcard queries, advanced service site selection, caching
mechanisms and delegation of name authority
registration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Performance data will be collected in a
testbed environment at CNRI and one or more coordination efforts will be
undertaken to demonstrate the functionality of the Handle/DNS Server in real
deployments with international collaboration. One example of potential
collaboration in the use of such a server is with various elements of the
publishing community now using digital object identifiers, which are handles
that begin with the number "10". Specifically, CNRI proposes to collaborate with
the International DOI Foundation in this regard. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A second
example involves the China Internet Network Information Center (CNNIC). CNNIC is
a non-profit organization responsible for domain name registration and
administration for top level domain names under the TLD ".CN" and for Internet
related policies and regulations issued from Chinese Ministry of Information
Industry (MII). CNNIC believes that, as a secured global naming service, the
Handle System has resolved many of the issues they face in today's DNS and, as a
result, CNNIC has asked to work with CNRI on&lt;br/&gt;deploying a Handle/DNS
system in China. CNRI proposes to collaborate with CNNIC toward this
objective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The smaller scope project is the system design
and implementing of key elements of the system to integrate DNS features
seamlessly with the Handle System. With in-house experimentation, CNRI will
determine its feasibility for use with both Ipv4 and Ipv6. This effort will
produce concepts and software components that will enable important DNS related
strides to enhance Internet applications that depend on the use of DNS and those
that require handle resolution.&lt;br/&gt;