* 0334785
* Thermodynamic Origins of Sequence-Recognition in Ligand-DNA Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2003,03/31/2006
* David Graves, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/2006
* USD 254,253.00

Graves, David E. MCB-0092177

The long-term objective of this research is to gain biophysical insight into the
key aspects of sequence selective interactions of small molecules with nucleic
acids. The model system that has been studied thus far involves the sequence-
specific DNA binding agent, actinomycin D. This compounds shows a marked
preference for DNA binding at the d(GpC) step through intercalation of the
phenoxazone chromophore between the adjacent G and C base pairs. Concomitant
with this intercalative binding is the interactions of the two cyclic
pentapeptide sidechains with the floor of the DNA minor groove. This laboratory
has recently demonstrated the bases that flank this intercalation site play a
major role in directing the thermodynamic mechanism for complex formation. If
the 5'-flanking sequence is T (-TGCA-), the change in binding enthalpy has been
measured to be -2.5 kcal/mol. In contrast, when the 5'-flanking base is C
(-CGCA-), the change in binding enthalpy is found to be -5.8 kcal/mol, nearly 3
kcal/mol more favorable than the other flanking sequences. 5 Historically, the
binding of actinomycin D to DNA has been reported to be enthalpy driven as
signified by large positive (favorable) binding enthalpies and binding
enthalpies of near zero or -1 kcal/mol. These recent results from this
laboratory indicate that the thermodynamic binding properties of actinomycin D
to oligonucleotides with specifically designed single binding sites are quite
varied, depending on the sequence of bases flanking the actinomycin D binding
site. Based on the variances observed in the enthalpy and entropy components
associated with complex formation, linkages between thermodynamic binding
mechanism(s) and structural features of the actinomycin D-DNA complexeswil be
explored. Specifically the structures of the actinomycin D complexes formed with
the -TGCA- duplex and the -CGCA- duplex will be examined by high-resolution NMR
methods to discern differences in the structural features of the complex that
may explain the enhanced enthalpy contribution toward actinomycin D binding to
the CGCA- duplex.

The use of non-self complimentary deoxyoligonucleotides was serendipitous toward
the finding of sequence selective interactions of actinomycin D to single-strand
DNA. The influence of DNA base sequence on the energetics and structural
properties of actinomycin D-single strand DNA interactions is being examined.
These observations could be of considerable benefit in gaining insight into how
proteins bind single-strand DNA in a sequence-selective manner and expanded to
biological roles of single-strand DNA interactions. The in vivo interactions of
actinomycin D to double stranded DNA are characterized by high affinity and slow
dissociation and have been suggested to carry out their biological function of
specifically inhibiting transcription through blocking the progression of the
RNA polymerase along the DNA template. With the recent findings of a high
affinity of actinomycin D for single-stranded DNA, additional caveats may be
added to this proposed mechanism, including the possible binding of the drug to
single-strand DNA within the open complex, and/or to inhibiting reannealing of
the single-strand DNA.