* 0334952
* AToL: Collaborative Research: AmphibiaTree, An integrated Phylogenetic and Phyloinformatics Approach to the Tree of Amphibians
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* David Hillis, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 12/31/2009
* USD 1,411,214.00

0334952&lt;br/&gt;Cannatella and Hillis&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to
Drs. David Cannatella and David Hillis at the University of Texas at Austin, as
part of a four-institution collaboration, to study phylogenetic relationships of
the living amphibians and their close fossil relatives. Living Amphibians are a
prominent part of the Earth's vertebrate fauna and include three orders: the
caecilians (Gymnophiona), salamanders (Caudata), and frogs and toads (Anura).
Despite recent advances in discovering and describing their diversity, many
critical questions in amphibian evolution remain unresolved and a fresh analysis
of evolutionary relationships is needed to take new discoveries into account.
Furthermore, the recent decline and apparent extinction of amphibians from many
environments makes it urgent that we discover and classify the diversity present
today. A team of seven investigators from diverse institutions (University of
Texas at Austin, University of California at Berkeley, Harvard University, and
the University of Kansas) and their colleagues will collaborate to resolve
modern amphibian relationships. Field sampling in biodiversity hotspots will
provide materials of new or previously unsampled lineages. Anatomical and
morphological data from living and fossil forms will be combined with DNA
sequences from a set of defined mitochondrial and nuclear genes for as many
species as possible, and will be integrated with existing data sets. Analysis of
these large data sets will be used to gain insight into such questions as
repeated patterns of evolution, geographic patterns, and rates of evolution.
Drs. Cannatella and Hillis will be responsible for coordinating the research
amongst the different labs, with an emphasis on field work in South America and
integration with nuclear and mitochondrial DNA data as well as overall
coordination to construct a phylogeny from the combined and integrated molecular
and morphological data. &lt;br/&gt;Understanding the evolutionary history of
modern amphibians is critical for developing conservation strategies for
amphibians as well as completing the vertebrate portion of the tree of life. The
project will involve extensive student training and interaction with US and
international colleagues. Communication with the public will utilize web
resources, especially AmphibiaWeb, an existing site that will be expanded and
further developed to provide information on all species of amphibians for
professionals and the public at large. AmphibiaWeb will also provide training
opportunities for students and senior professionals to enable them more
effectively to communicate their findings.&lt;br/&gt;