* 0334499
* Mesoscopic Effects in Metal Grains and Quantum Dots
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Piet Brouwer, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2007
* USD 276,000.00

Single-particle properties of a small metal grain or semiconductor quantum dot
can be described by random-matrix theory: energy levels and wavefunctions have
the same statistics as eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a large hermitian matrix
with real, complex or quaternion numbers, depending on the presence or absence
of time-reversal symmetry and spin-rotation symmetry. Kurland, Aleiner and
Altshuler proposed that electron-electron interaction effects in this "random
matrix limit" are described by a "universal interaction Hamiltonian," which has
only interaction terms that are invariant under the symmetry transformations of
the random matrix ensemble. These interactions are self-averaging and non-
random, hence the label "universal." The first part of this research addresses
the role of interactions when symmetries are "partially" broken, e.g., in the
presence of spin-orbit scattering that is too weak to fully randomize the
electron spin within the time to ergodically explore the grain or dot. For such
"partially broken symmetries," the interaction Hamiltonian is a random quantity,
since interaction matrix elements are no longer self-averaging. Such
fluctuations of the interaction Hamiltonian may effect g factors of individual
electronic levels in metal grains, or the suppression of superconducting
fluctuations in a superconducting metal grain near the critical temperature.

This research also addresses the Stoner instability in metal grains and the
ferromagnetic state formed beyond the instability. Both the approach of the
instability and the ferromagnetic state itself display interesting mesoscopic
phenomena if spin-orbit scattering is present. With strong spin-orbit coupling,
exchange interaction matrix elements are small and violate the symplectic
symmetry of random matrix theory, yet, they are many, and trigger the formation
of a ferromagnetic state irrespective of the spin-orbit scattering strength.
Hence, this instability provides the context for a controlled calculation how
interactions may drive systems away from the random matrix. For a ferromagnet,
randomness in the spatial part of the wavefunction couples to the magnetization
through spin-orbit coupling, giving rise to a "mesoscopic" component of the
anisotropy energy.

The second part of the research deals with time-dependent transport in quantum
dots. Time-dependent transport has both practical and fundamental interest.
Practical interest arises because speed is a concern in most electronic devices.
Time-dependent transport (as well as nonlinear response) is of fundamental
interest because electron-electron interactions play a much more important role
for time-dependent transport than for time-independent transport. A detailed
calculation will be done that should give insight how the capacitive charging
energy affects phase-coherent time-dependent transport in quantum dots connected
to electrodes via point contacts. Although charge quantization is lifted in
those systems, Coulomb blockade continues to be important for transport
properties.

Besides advancing the fundamental scientific understanding of metals and
semiconductors on the nanometer scale, the research will provide training
material to help theory graduate students develop into well-rounded condensed
matter physicists. Undergraduates will also participate in the research.
Graduate students will also participate in the outreach activities of the
Cornell MRSEC. %%% This theoretical research will address a number of issues
relating to the properties of nanoscale metals and semiconductors. The research
has very fundamental ramifications and, as is typical of this field, practical
applications are near.

Besides advancing the fundamental scientific understanding of metals and
semiconductors on the nanometer scale, the research will provide training
material to help theory graduate students develop into well-rounded condensed
matter physicists. Undergraduates will also participate in the research.
Graduate students will also participate in the outreach activities of the
Cornell MRSEC. ***