* 0334383
* CEDAR Postdoc: Photo-Chemistry and Neutral-Plasma Coupling at Earth and Mars
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2005
* Michael Mendillo, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B. Kerr
* 11/30/2005
* USD 160,596.00

The investigators will study the photo-chemistry and neutral-plasma coupling
of&lt;br/&gt;Earth and Mars. The approach is to compare the ionospheres of Earth
and Mars using data and theory in order to better understand the basic physical
processes that are common to both. The objectives are to (1) test the
predictions of simple photochemical equilibrium models for how peak electron
densities in the ionospheres of Earth and Mars vary with solar flux, distance
from the Sun, and solar zenith angle using standard terrestrial observations and
Martian observations from the radio science experiment on the Mars Global
Surveyor spacecraft; (2) study the effects of solar flares and coronal mass
ejections on simultaneous observations of the terrestrial and Martian
ionospheres to understand how Space Weather impacts these different
environments; (3) examine the effects of waves and tides in the neutral
atmosphere of Mars on the ionosphere, and then compare to predictions from
models developed for Earth for ionosphere-neutral atmosphere coupling. Areas of
weakness and potential improvement in the models will be identified. The
research will improve understanding of ionospheric processes by testing
predictions derived from terrestrial experience on simultaneous observations of
the ionospheres of Earth and Mars. The coordination of terrestrial and Martian
observations is a creative and original concept that will build links between
the disciplines of planetary and terrestrial aeronomy. By studying the effects
of solar changes on more than one planet, any shortfalls in models for how the
terrestrial ionosphere responds to the Sun will be identified and areas for
potential improvement highlighted. This will facilitate the separation of solar
and anthropogenic impacts on the terrestrial atmosphere, a goal of the Global
Change Program. Simultaneous studies of the effects of space weather on more
than one planet will similarly benefit the National Space Weather Program. Since
the physics governing ionospheric processes should be the same on Earth and
beyond Earth, models based on terrestrial observations should be valid beyond
Earth's ionosphere. These models will be tested, especially in the areas of
solar variability and the effects of magnetic fields, by comparing solar-
terrestrial interactions on Earth and Mars. Studies of waves and tides will
address how ionospheres couple with lower altitudes and test if waves and tides
are as important in coupling different atmospheric regions on Mars as they are
on Earth.