* 0334141
* STI:  Plethora: A Wide-Area Read-Write Object Repository for the Internet
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Ananth Grama, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2007
* USD 549,635.00

Conventional computing infrastructure is characterized by several unmistakable
trends: (i) in the past decade, storage capacity per unit cost has increased at
a rate in excess of Moore's law; at this rate, it is predicted that a terabyte
of IDE storage will cost less than $100 within five years; (ii) applications
have exploited storage trends by increasing their storage requirements, they are
increasingly dependent on collaborative/concurrent access, and support
service/process mobility; for example, the Virtual Observatory is a large-scale
collaborative effort that will allow astronomy researchers to query and mine
potentially hundreds of terabytes of data distributed among distant geographical
locations, and (iii) the emergence of IP-based storage protocols such as iSCSI
or FcIP will allow applications to access distributed storage seamlessly over
wide-area networks. These trends motivate the development of foundational
technologies for building a wide-area read-write storage repository capable of
providing a single image of a distributed storage resource. The overarching
design goals of such an infrastructure include client performance, global
resource utilization, system scalability (providing a single logical view of
larger resource and user pools) and application scalability (enabling single
applications with large resource requirements).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal describes ongoing research and proposed work towards building such a
repository, Plethora, for semi-static peer-to-peer (P2P) networks implemented on
a wide-area Internet testbed. In contrast to many current efforts that focus
entirely on unstructured dynamic P2P environments, Plethora focuses on semi-
static peers with strong network connectivity and a partially persistent network
state. In a semistaticP2P network, peers are likely to remain participants in
the network over long periods of time (e.g. compute servers), and are capable of
providing reasonably high availability and response-time guarantees. The
repository integrates novel concepts in locality enhancing overlay networks,
transactional semantics for read-write data coupled with hierarchical
versioning, intelligent replication for robustness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; At the
heart of Plethora is a routing mechanism that relies on two distinct networks -
a local overlay for content caching and a global overlay for content location.
The local overlay optimizes network proximity by relying on existing Internet
infrastructure that defines Autonomous Systems (AS). In doing so, it achieves
excellent peer performance and optimizes global network utilization. Built upon
this routing core is support for transactional semantics, which enhances
scalability by aggregating commits within a local overlay before propagating
them to the global overlay. Finally, robustness and availability are
incorporated by suitable replication through synthetic demand generation. This
project aims to fully develop the core algorithms and software underlying
Plethora, exhaustively validate it using simulations (on our P2P evaluation
testbed, PET)and experimentation (using the PlanetLab infrastructure), and
deploy it in the context of selected applications.&lt;br/&gt;