* 0334186
* STI:     XCP Development
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2008
* Robert Braden, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Schopf
* 10/31/2008
* USD 5,023,662.00

&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to turn important recent research in
TCP congestion control into a practical, validated, and deployable Internet
technology. Recent and future changes in transmission technologies and user
demands are challenging the fundamental assumptions of the Internet's design,
especially the current TCP congestion control. Fiber deployment is soaring,
increasing network capacity, and wireless and satellite channels are
proliferating, driving up round trip times (RTT). Internet applications,
including a variety of scientific and Grid networking applications, are
suffering in performance. Need exists to send petabyte files in 15 minutes,
i.e., at over 1 Gigabit per second. Technically, large bandwidth-delay product
applications perform poorly even in un-congested networks because of TCP
congestion control. Large RTT flows get unfair allocations of bandwidth when
competing against short flows and TCP has been shown to be unstable when window
size becomes very large, causing large bandwidth oscillations. TCP is being
patched and tweaked, but a new approach to Internet resource management is
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The XCP congestion control mechanism that was
recently developed by Dina Katabi [Katabi02] fills this need. XCP can exploit
rapid changes in available Internet resources in a stable, scalable way, and it
can separate link utilization control from bandwidth sharing policies. From
these simple capabilities, XCP enables network-friendly data transfer at higher
speeds with less jitter and almost no packet loss.The goal of this project is to
make XCP real and demonstrate its capabilities and value. This will include
full, rigorous design and specification of the protocol, developing a high-speed
prototype implementation, testing and validating XCP in a series of increasingly
real-life Internet environments, developing migration plans, and moving XCP
towards community acceptance and standardization. The proposer will enlist
several scientific networking communities to serve as test environments for
initial XCP deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Final XCP deployment will
ultimately take many years. This project will include near-term deployment in
research networks and will play a central role in getting this work started - -
and in forming a collaborative, community effort for advancing XCP. In
particular, the proposer work will both catalyze and leverage the efforts of
many groups, including the research community, specific scientific network user
communities, router vendors, and the IETF. It is this leverage and synergy,
building on their own modest technical effort, that will bring about the
generational change in Internet technology that is the central objective of our
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;