* 0335530
* SGER:  A Feasibility Study of Estimation of Structural Systems Reliability Under Hurricane Hazard
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Ross Corotis, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 07/31/2004
* USD 40,000.00

PI: Rajagopalan Balaji; University of Colorado&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
assessment and prediction of structural system reliability in the face of
hurricanes are &lt;br/&gt;of great interest to our nation. Several public and
private planning and disaster management agencies need such information for
developmental planning and disaster mitigation strategies. Also, insurance
agencies are interested in the structural reliability estimates to evaluate and
set premium levels. Models for structural risk and reliability exist in the
private sector but they are not public domain, and often they are adhoc in
nature. Furthermore, these models evaluate structural reliability in isolation
of realistic likelihood estimates of hurricane frequencies, magnitudes and their
associated characteristics (such as winds, precipitation and floods). Thus,
there is a real need for the development of an integrative framework that has a
realistic hurricane track simulation model coupled with a structural
risk/reliability model, to generate static (long term) and dynamic (time
varying) structural risks and also the capability to classify structures as per
their reliability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives of the study &lt;br/&gt;With
the need for a comprehensive and integrated framework as the motivation, the aim
of the proposed study is to demonstrate the feasibility of the integrative
framework. To this end the objectives are: &lt;br/&gt;1. Use the historical
hurricane track data to compute probabilities of occurrences of .events at any
desired location (events are defined by threshold exceedence of wind speed and
precipitation, as wind speed are the key loading factors on structures). Also
estimate these probabilities conditioned on climate indications [e.g., El-Nino
Southern Oscillation, North Atlantic Oscillation etc.]. &lt;br/&gt;2. To develop
structural load probabilities on different class of structures (e.g., timber,
masonary, concrete etc.) based on .event. probabilities developed from above.
&lt;br/&gt;3. To develop structural reliability estimates (both stationary and
time varying) conditioned upon the load probabilities. These outcomes will help
us in implementing this framework with hurricane track simulation
&lt;br/&gt;models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;This
proposal attempts to develop cross-disciplinary framework for structural
risk/reliability assessment in the face of hurricanes. The approach is unique in
that it brings together the knowledge of (a) Atlantic hurricane variability
(both in terms of the number of hurricanes and the tracks); (b) Estimating
probabilities of associated components (precipitation, winds, flooding etc.)
using nonparametric functional estimation techniques, (c) probabilistic
structural load estimation, and (d) Bayesian techniques for structural
risk/reliability assessment to develop long term and time varying risk
estimates. This unique and integrative approach to a practical problem is the
main intellectual merit of this proposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes from this study will significantly help in developing
applying this framework in conjunction with a stochastic hurricane track
simulation model, for the entire US coast and for different structural groups.
This will also supplement the HAZUS initiative by FEMA for enhancing the
nation.s risk assessment capabilities under natural hazards. These outcomes will
be extremely helpful for their contributions to the knowledge base and
intellectual growth in the area of civil infrastructure assessment as well as
the reduction of risks induced by hurricanes. &lt;br/&gt;