* 0335748
* Robert Noyce Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Claude Baker, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 12/31/2007
* USD 498,228.00

This Noyce Stipend Program supports recently initiated efforts to address the
critical shortage of qualified&lt;br/&gt;science and mathematics teachers in the
Chicago Public Schools, particularly in urban areas of high need.&lt;br/&gt;It
builds on a successful partnership between CPS and the University of Illinois at
Chicago (UIC) that&lt;br/&gt;offers standards-based program opportunities for
career-change candidates with strong science, technology,&lt;br/&gt;engineering
and mathematics (STEM) backgrounds interested in becoming a certified teacher.
This Noyce&lt;br/&gt;Project specifically features two such program
opportunities: 1) the Middle Grades Science (MGS) and&lt;br/&gt;Middle Grades
Mathematics (MGM) Program, and 2) the Master of Science in Teaching Secondary
School&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics (MST) Program. Teacher candidates in the MGS/MGM
Program earn an elementary school&lt;br/&gt;certificate (K- 9) with a middle
grades (5 - 8) endorsement in science or mathematics. It is an
alternative&lt;br/&gt;route program, with separate science and mathematics
cohorts, offered through the College of Education.&lt;br/&gt;The MST is a
conventional secondary teacher preparation program (6-12) offered through the
Department&lt;br/&gt;of Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science. The
beneficiaries of a Noyce Stipend Award are&lt;br/&gt;career-change candidates
with strong academic abilities and STEM qualifications and
demonstrated&lt;br/&gt;financial need, within the broader social commitment to
preparing a diverse workforce of science and&lt;br/&gt;mathematics teachers
prepared to address the needs of urban youth (Ladson-Billings, 1995). There are
three specific objectives: 1) to enhance the recruitment of STEM candidates to
the MGS/MGM and MST programs; 2) to support the retention of MGS/MGM candidates,
given the documented need for heightened support for those entering through
alternative certification routes across the first three years (CSMPT, 2001;
Huling, Resta, &amp; Rainwater, 2001); and 3) to redirect the MST student
pipeline at UIC to teacher employment in CPS in high-need areas. These goals are
being attained by awarding stipends to the appropriate students. The program
includes two types of stipend awards: one to aid the recruitment of new
candidates, and the other to assist with the retention of recently admitted
candidates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;