* 0335256
* NRT:  Agile and Efficient Ultra-Wideband Wireless Network Testbed for Challenged  Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2008
* Vincent Chan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2008
* USD 3,100,000.00

The emergence of ubiquitous high-bandwidth networked services has prompted
the&lt;br/&gt;exploration of using ever-increasing bands of spectrum, often in
demanding environments and&lt;br/&gt;over bandwidth portions that are already in
use for legacy systems. This trend, which we loosely&lt;br/&gt;label ultra-
wideband (UWB), poses significant challenges for networking,
communications&lt;br/&gt;design and hardware development. Our goal is to provide
a network that makes best use of the&lt;br/&gt;resources available in terms of
nodes, energy and bandwidth. To that end, we are signaling-&lt;br/&gt;agnostic.
Rather than propose a signaling scheme and construct a network
architecture&lt;br/&gt;predicated on that specific scheme, we propose a testbed
built upon an agile architecture that&lt;br/&gt;provides the network the most
useful control capabilities under varying operating conditions.&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers propose an integrated approach for UWB networks that considers
networking,&lt;br/&gt;communications design and hardware development jointly.
The integration of these design&lt;br/&gt;components requires significant cross-
layer interaction. Due to the new opportunities of ultra-&lt;br/&gt;wideband
systems and its properties, network layers above the Physical Layer can take
full&lt;br/&gt;advantage and design a network with superior performance. Thus,
we will explore Network&lt;br/&gt;Layer protocols that make its routing
decisions based on the time-varying UWB link states and&lt;br/&gt;dynamic
traffic demands; Transport Layer protocols that deals with errors and congestion
in&lt;br/&gt;much more efficient manner and an integrated architecture that is
jointly optimized across-layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The
intellectual merit of our proposed work is in the following areas:&lt;br/&gt;A
network architecture and testbed that make use, in an agile manner, of
different&lt;br/&gt;communication configurations.&lt;br/&gt;The first attempt at
integrating ultra-wide-band into a networked system, an important
and&lt;br/&gt;necessary step in the development of this technology&lt;br/&gt;The
development of a cross-layer approach to optimize network performance
with&lt;br/&gt;parsimonious but effective visibility into lower
layers.&lt;br/&gt;The dual development of time-domain and frequency-domain
communication systems&lt;br/&gt;allowing the network to adapt the signaling
scheme to the specific environment in terms&lt;br/&gt;of fades, bandwidth and
energy. The challenges of these systems lie in the efficient and
high&lt;br/&gt;performance implementation of these nodes in CMOS and demonstrate
co-existence in the&lt;br/&gt;network .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: Our
proposed activity couples research and educational development
closely&lt;br/&gt;and will integrate communication theory, networking and
hardware design in a natural and&lt;br/&gt;unique fashion. We will introduce a
quantitative, systematic and, we believe, fundamental&lt;br/&gt;approach to UWB
networked communications. In particular, our approach will allow the field
to&lt;br/&gt;move beyond an arbitrary and inflexible signaling-centric approach,
and move towards&lt;br/&gt;architectures based on network requirements and
fundamental communications considerations.&lt;br/&gt;The educational impact of
our approach will be in both classroom education and
cross-&lt;br/&gt;disciplinary research for graduate and undergraduate students.
The researchers have already&lt;br/&gt;begun an extensive educational effort to
bring wireless technology into the classroom. First, two&lt;br/&gt;of the
researchers are developing a graduate-level wireless communication course.
Secondly, one&lt;br/&gt;of the researchers is incorporating wireless hardware in
undergraduate digital design laboratory&lt;br/&gt;coursework at MIT. Finally two
of the researchers have begun a joint graduate-level teaching&lt;br/&gt;project
combining application and analysis of networking.