* 0335289
* EIN:  Collaborative Research: PlanetLab:  An Overlay Testbed for Disruptive Network Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2006
* David Culler, University of California-Berkeley
* Cooperative Agreement
* Gurudatta M. Parulkar
* 08/31/2006
* USD 574,465.00

Overlay networks have recently emerged as a promising technique for deploying
new network services, and more generally, for introducing disruptive technology
into the Internet. However, there is a pressing need for a testbed that allows
the research community to experiment with overlay services at scale, and under
real-world conditions. The proposed project will build-out and enhance a global
overlay network, called PlanetLab, that provides just such a capability.
Enhancements to be made to the PlanetLab software include the following:

-Implement system-level mechanisms that isolate experimental services from each
other, and protect the network from faulty and malicious traffic; -Build
mechanisms to monitor the health of PlanetLab nodes and services, diagnose
unexpected behavior, and map suspicious behavior to the responsible individuals;
-Provide mechanisms to allow researchers to discover the set of available
PlanetLab nodes that meet their needs and acquire resources on those nodes
according to a market that respects resource availability; and provide the
instrumentation hooks and measurement tools needed to collect, archive, and
analyze performance data collected on PlanetLab.

Broader Impact and Intellectual Merit: PI's envision PlanetLab serving as a
microcosm for the next generation Internet. For the networking research
community, PlanetLab offers the opportunity to regain the now-lost ability to
rapidly and seamlessly move from idea to evaluation to practice. For the
educational community, it offers a rich and realistic platform for teaching and
experimentation, and a body of courseware and tools to support it. For the
broader community of users, commercial developers, and society at large, it
offers a path to re-energizing the innovative process that has led to new
Internet services, widespread consumer adoption and generation of new economic
and social value. This proposal aims to enhance the software substrate and build
out the number of nodes in PlanetLab - a global overlay network that will serve
as both a research testbed and a deployment platform. It can play a potentially
momentous role in helping define a next generation (overlay) Internet by
allowing researchers to experiment at scale and under real-world conditions.