* 0335772
* Robert Noyce Scholarship Program
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Elizabeth Ambos, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 09/30/2009
* USD 460,000.00

The Robert Noyce Scholarship program at California State University, Long Beach,
is supporting approximately ten (10) science or mathematics Single Subject
(middle or high school) preliminary credential seekers per year for four years.
In return for two years of stipend support, at the level of $10,000 per year,
the twenty or so new teachers produced by this program are each dedicating the
initial four years of their teaching careers to service in high-needs schools in
Long Beach Unified School District (approximately 97,000 students) and Whittier
Union High School District or Whittier Union Elementary District (approximately
20,000 students). Both of these districts include schools that meet the criteria
of high-needs through the free or reduced lunch and/or high teacher turnover
criteria. Both pre-service and in-service teacher support programs are being
provided to Scholarship recipients. The intellectual merit of this proposed work
lies in the strong linkages between research theories of student cohort
engagement, retention, mentoring, and corresponding program activities.
Longitudinal studies of the effectiveness of the program are being reported to
augment existing research in this field. The principal investigator team is well
qualified to lead and manage the program, and represent faculty and staff from
mathematics, science, and education disciplines. This program is leveraging
extensive resources already in place at California State University, Long Beach,
and is building on existing teacher preparation programs, including a well-
developed student support center available to all mathematics and science
undergraduate students at California State University, Long Beach. One strategy
is to partner more closely with two area community colleges (Long Beach City and
Cerritos) who have both a commitment to teacher preparation, and who routinely
transfer significant numbers of mathematics and science undergraduate majors
and/or pre-service teachers to California State University, Long Beach. The
broader impact of this proposed work lies in the leveraging of scholarship
resources to recruit, educate, and mentor approximately twenty (20) highly
qualified mathematics and science undergraduate majors to enter teaching
professions, who might not otherwise consider such careers. Given the diversity
of institutions involved in the project, considerable broadening of
participation of underrepresented groups will be achieved, particularly in light
of the preference given to scholarship recipients from underrepresented groups.
Partnerships between and among three higher education institutions and two large
school districts are being strengthened through this collaboration.