* 0335296
* NRT:  Collaborative Research: A Unified Experimental Environment for Diverse Network Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2008
* Jay Lepreau, University of Utah
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2008
* USD 3,837,717.00

A critical issue for t e development of future network and distributed system
technologies is the availabil-&lt;br/&gt;ity of testbed infrastructure for
conducting research.Availability as three components.First,it
requires&lt;br/&gt;that testbeds provide a set of diverse and modern networking
resources in realistic scenarios:environments&lt;br/&gt;that include
PCs,(potentially mobile)wireless and sensor nodes,commercial-quality switches
and routers,&lt;br/&gt;and modern network interconnects.Second,availability
requires software to e .ectively manage the use of&lt;br/&gt;these
resources:this requires providing "hardware level" access to
experimenters,through a uni .ed and re-&lt;br/&gt;motely accessible user
interface,in a manner that also ensures security both inside and outside
experimental&lt;br/&gt;environments.Third,availability requires infrastructure
for experiment manipulation,monitoring,measure-&lt;br/&gt;ment,and
validation:e.g.,the ability to inject network tra .c and faults,the ability to
obtain precise data&lt;br/&gt;from experiments,and the assurance that the
testbed is an accurate model of the real world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
described in this proposal is to build on the University of Utah 's Netbed to
address the three&lt;br/&gt;aspects of availability described above.The 165,000
line Netbed software system is e .ectively an operating&lt;br/&gt;system for
experiments in distributed systems and networking.The bulk of its code is
independent of&lt;br/&gt;the network 's actual mec anisms,so it presents a
common interface to experimenters across a variety of&lt;br/&gt;mec
anisms,including real networks,emulated networks in a cluster,and simulated
networks.Netbed 's&lt;br/&gt;support for ybrid experimentation allows .exible
combinations of real code,abstracted tra .c generation,&lt;br/&gt;synthetic
network environments,and real networks.Emulab Netbed 's primary resource,is an
extremely&lt;br/&gt;successful 170-node,time-and space-shared automated cluster
testbed that as been in 24/7 production use&lt;br/&gt;for several years.Netbed
is currently being used by 440 researchers,from 50 institutions,for over 80
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will provide deliverables in
four areas.First,the existing Emulab cluster and its&lt;br/&gt;interconnect will
be enlarged and modernized.Emulab will grow to provide continuing service to the
public,&lt;br/&gt;including user support.The complementary Utah and Wisconsin
facilities (WAIL)will be linked,allowing&lt;br/&gt;resource allocation and co-
scheduling across them.This will provide a seamless transition from
simulation,&lt;br/&gt;through emulation on PC-based routers,to large-scale
testing on real routers.Second,Netbed will be&lt;br/&gt;extended to control,as
transparently to users as possible,many additional kinds of network devices
and&lt;br/&gt;deployments.Netbed will provide four di .erent platforms of
wireless,sensor,and mobile devices,ranging&lt;br/&gt;from a .xed array of
wireless nodes (a "tabletop" environment)to an actual set of mobile devices
deployed&lt;br/&gt;on a campus scale.The Netbed facilities will also be
generalized with the addition of "hard" devices -&lt;br/&gt;IP routers,layer 1
switches,optical devices,Intel IXPs,and nodes deployed in the wide-area - as
well&lt;br/&gt;as new "soft" devices suc as virtual nodes and links to enable
experiments at 1 - 2 orders of magnitude&lt;br/&gt;greater scale.Third,the
Netbed system,speci .cally the Emulab cluster,will be "hardened" so
that,when&lt;br/&gt;deployed,it can safely quarantine malicious code while still
being remotely accessible to researchers.The&lt;br/&gt;enhanced Emulab will be
able to serve as a testbed for most network security researc and
evaluation,suc&lt;br/&gt;as worm containment,IP traceback,intrusion
detection,and counter measures for denial-of-service (DoS),&lt;br/&gt;and
distributed denial-of-service (DDoS)attacks.Support for researc in these areas
will require Emulab to&lt;br/&gt;support osts running Microsoft
Windows.Fourth,new software will provide a comprehensive system
for&lt;br/&gt;realistic network tra .c generation,network tra .c
measurements,and a measurement arc ive.A wide area&lt;br/&gt;network monitoring
system and measurement archive will provide important data to Netbed researchers
and&lt;br/&gt;the community at large.It will also serve as the primary source of
data from whic we can validate our&lt;br/&gt;modeling and test e
.orts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed work lies in
the creation of new technologies for networking and&lt;br/&gt;distributed system
experimentation.This work will develop new techniques for integrating widely
varied&lt;br/&gt;resources,both actual and simulated,both hardware and
software,within a single and uni .ed experimental&lt;br/&gt;framework.This work
will be realized in an expanded Emulab cluster,whic will continue to be
available to&lt;br/&gt;researchers,and it will also be realized in Netbed 's
software that can be used by other institutions that wish&lt;br/&gt;to run their
own testbeds - separately,or in cooperation with Netbed.This ties directly to
the broader&lt;br/&gt;impacts of the proposed work.The creation and delivery of
an expanded Emulab,as well as the software&lt;br/&gt;capable of managing similar
testbeds,will result in new testbeds and new testbed capabilities being
made&lt;br/&gt;available to researchers worldwide.This will directly advance the
development of future systems,as well as&lt;br/&gt;the teac ing and training of
students and computing professionals.