* 0335221
* Collaborative Research:  A Longitudinal Study of Race Socialization and Achievement Striving in African American Adolescents
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Beth Kurtz-Costes, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Amy L. Sussman
* 07/31/2008
* USD 390,480.00

The transition to middle school is a time of great change for most youth.
Although many of these changes are positive, the middle school transition is
also associated with declines in motivation, self-concept, and achievement for
many young adolescents. Little research on this critical transition has focused
on African American students, who face additional challenges associated with
their growing awareness of racial differences and racial discrimination. The
goal of this project is to identify factors that lead to success across the
transition to middle school for Black youth, and to investigate how the process
differs for students transitioning into a racially consonant middle school
environment versus those moving into a racially dissonant context. A primary
focus of the study is the role of parents' attitudes and beliefs about
achievement and their race socialization strategies on the achievement striving
of African American adolescents. At Time 1, 300 African American fifth graders
in predominantly Black elementary schools (i.e., at least 75% African American
students) will complete measures of parent race socialization, race centrality,
attributional beliefs, educational utility, perceived competence, and classroom
engagement. Their parents will complete measures of race socialization, race
centrality, attributional beliefs, educational utility, and perceptions of the
child's competence. Teachers will rate students' abilities and classroom
engagement. Two years later, when these youth are in middle schools that vary in
racial composition, the adolescents, parents, and teachers will again complete
the study measures. Achievement data will be collected from schools for both
assessment points. Analyses will distinguish among the experiences of Black
youth in predominantly Black versus racially integrated schools and will
elucidate parental socialization that leads to successful academic achievement
for African American youth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will inform both
general developmental theory and research specific to African American families
and children. In terms of general development, it will further explicate the
critical role that parenting plays during the transition to middle school. The
study will also address how the development of race-specific attitudes (racial
identity and race-related achievement attributions) affect the educational
experiences of Black youth. Finally, the study will be a timely assessment of
the role of school racial composition during this age of rapid resegregation of
America's schools. Thus, these results will inform post-desegregation
educational policy, policies aimed at eliminating the Black-White test score
gap, and policies directed toward school reform at the middle school level more
broadly. &lt;br/&gt;