* 0335299
* NRT:  Collaborative:  Testing and Benchmarking Methodologies for Future Network Security Mechanisms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Karl Levitt, University of California-Davis
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jie Wu
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,469,825.00

Networks and computer systems are becoming increasingly attractive targets to
large-scale programmed attacks such as worms and Distributed Denial of Service
attacks (DDoS), which can compromise a vast number of vulnerable targets in a
few minutes. Critical end-user applications vulnerable to such attacks include
e-commerce, e-medicine, command-and-control applications, video surveillance and
tracking, and many other applications. While there is a growing body of research
techniques, prototypes, and commercial products that purport to protect these
applications and the network infrastructure on which they rely, there is little
existing scientific methodology by which to objectively evaluate the merits of
such claims. Moreover, thorough testing of a defense system for worms or for
attacks on the infrastructure cannot be evaluated safely on a live network
without affecting its operation.

To make rapid advancements in defending against these and future attacks, the
state of the art in the evaluation of network security mechanisms must be
improved. This will require the emergence of large-scale security testbeds
coupled with new standards for testing and benchmarking that can make these
testbeds truly useful. Current shortcomings and impediments to evaluating
network security mechanisms include lack of scientific rigor;lack of relevant
and representative network data;inadequate models of defense mechanisms; and
inadequate models of both the network and the transmitted data (benign and
attack traffic). The latter is challenging because of the complexity of
interactions among traffic, topology and protocols.

The researchers propose to develop thorough, realistic,and scientifically
rigorous testing frameworks and methodologies for particular classes of network
attacks and defense mechanisms. These testing frameworks will be adapted for
different kinds of testbeds, including simulators such as NS, emulation
facilities such as Emulab, and both small and large hardware testbeds. They will
include attack scenarios; attack simulators; generators for topology and
background traffic; data sets derived from live traffic; and tools to monitor
and summarize test results. These frameworks will allow researchers to
experiment with a variety of parameters representing the network environment,
attack behaviors, and the configuration of the mechanisms under test.

In addition to developing testing frameworks, the researchers propose to
validate them by conducting tests on representative network defense mechanisms.
Defense mechanisms of interest include network-based Intrusion Detection Systems
(IDS); automated attack traceback mechanisms;t raffic rate-limiting to control
DDoS attacks; and mechanisms to detect large-scale worm attacks. Conducting
these tests will require incorporating real defense mechanisms into a testbed,
and applying and evaluating frameworks and methodologies. Conducting these tests
will also help us to ensure that the testbed framework allows other researchers
to easily integrate and test network defense echanisms of their own.

The research team includes experts in security, networking, data analysis,
software engineering, and operating systems who are committed to developing
these challenging integrated testing frameworks.

Intellectual Merit: The development of testing methodologies for network defense
mechanisms requires significant advances in our understanding of network attacks
and the interactions between attacks and their environment including:deployed
defense technology, traffic, topology, protocols, and applications. It will also
require advances in our understanding of metrics for evaluating defenses.

Education: The research into testing methodologies for network defense
mechanisms will involve graduate students and provide new curriculum material
for universities.

Broader Impact: By providing new testing frameworks, the work will accelerate
improvements in network defense mechanisms and facilitate their evaluation and
deployment. The researchers will hold yearly workshops to disseminate results
and obtain community feedback.