* 0335264
* EIN:  Collaborative Research:Cyber Defense Technology Experimental Research Network
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2007
* Anthony Joseph, University of California-Berkeley
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jie Wu
* 02/28/2007
* USD 2,449,017.00

This proposal creates an experimental infrastructure network to support the
development and demonstration of next-generation information security
technologies for cyber defense. This cyber Defense Technology Experimental
Research Network (DETER Network) will provide the necessary infrastructure --
networks, tools, methodologies and supporting process -- to support national-
scale experimentation on emerging security research and advanced development
technologies. The DETER network will be designed and operated to ensure direct
participation from government entities and their sponsored researchers in a wide
and varied community. Early activities and deliverables will describe policies
procedures for use of the experimental facility along with a users guide. The
work will facilitate scientific experimentation and validation against
established baselines of attack behavior and allow experimental approaches that
involve breaking the network infrastructure. The DETER network will promote and
catalyze expanded research and commercialization efforts in this vital area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposal will develop
architectures for test bed networks that are representative of the Internet
itself at a somewhat smaller scale. It will leverage work from ACIR at the
International Computer Science Institute, Berkeley on traffic generation for use
in the DETER network. The development of both of these is itself a significant
research challenge. On versions of the DETER network the researcher will study
cyber security solutions to Distributed Denial of Service, Worm Defense and
other network attacks through a combination of experiments, emulation, and
analytical solutions. The aim is to integrate analytic methods with experiments
on networks of adequate scale and complexity so as to be able to have confidence
in solutions and transfer them to industrial partners participating in the test
bed through their equipment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This proposal
is expected to be the key building block for bringing network security initially
against Distributed Denial of Service and then Worm attacks but in general all
intrusions. The testbed network will be integrated into course work at both the
upper division and graduate level Berkeley, USC and at partner institutions at
UC Davis, Purdue, and Penn State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;