* 0335300
* EIN:  Collaborative Research: Dynamic Resource Allocation via GMPLS Optical Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Herbert Schorr, University of Southern California
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jennifer Schopf
* 08/31/2008
* USD 1,813,000.00

This purpose of the proposal is to create dynamic, deterministic, and manageable
end-to-end network transport services for high-end e-Science applications. This
service capability will build on the success and reach of the IP infrastructure,
and will complement it with deterministic end-to-end multi-protocol services
spanning multiple administrative domains and a variety of conventional campus
network technologies. The project will create a Generalized MultiProtocol Label
Switching (GMPLS) capable optical core network. Optical transport and switching
equipment acting as Label Switching Routers (LSRs) will provide deterministic
network resources at the packet, wavelength, and fiber cross connect levels. The
all-optical capabilities proposed for this core network will be based on
connection and resource management mechanisms defined in GMPLS and will model
many of the functions of an inter-regional, national, or even global wavelength
based Research and Education (R&amp;E) networks. Attached to the core
infrastructure will be experimental campus networks carved out from
collaborating institutional campus infrastructure. Network requirements will be
driven by tight integration with application team members.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important part of the project will be the development
of the necessary software components to address unresolved GMPLS-related issues
as well as a host of practical end-to-end issues. The architecture describes a
Network Aware Resource Broker (NARB) that will peer with Interior Gateway
Protocol/Exterior Gateway Protocol (IGP/EGP) routing protocols to advertise
inter-domain service capabilities, perform inter-domain path computation,
resource allocation, scheduling, provisioning, proxy signaling services, and
authorization/accounting for the requested network services. The architecture of
the NARB function will integrate emerging advanced services from the NSF
Middleware Initiative (NMI) program and Grid services, particularly for security
and advanced scheduling. The project includes collaboration with specific
e-Science applications support facilities that will be adapted to and directly
benefit from the experimental infrastructure. The electronic-Very Long Baseline
Interferometry (e-VLBI) project from MIT Haystack Observatory will utilize the
experimental network to acquire and correlate radio-telescope data in real time
as a pilot to demonstrate effective coordination of multiple remote instruments.
USC/ISI East, University of Maryland Visualization and Presentation Lab, and
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center will collaborate to use the resources as part
of ongoing efforts to integrate streaming HDTV, Access Grid Nodes, and
interactive remote 3D visualizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project includes greatly expanding the knowledge and technologies
relating to intelligent management of dynamic optical transport networks. This
will be necessary in order for the larger R&amp;E community to realize maximum
benefits from its current efforts to procure a national footprint of lambda and
fiber resources. Broader impacts will be realized via the participation of
regional universities that will directly enhance the research and education
infrastructure and provide educational opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students as well as involve women and underrepresented minorities as
interns in the activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;