* 0335172
* Investigation of Embedded Sensing Architecture for Damage Detection
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2005
* Aditi Chattopadhyay, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 03/31/2005
* USD 23,937.00

PI: Adita Chattopadhyay, Arizona State University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
investigation on embedded sensor architecture is proposed for improved signal
processing, &lt;br/&gt;which is directly related to damage detection. A high-
fidelity structural analysis procedure will be &lt;br/&gt;developed to integrate
the embedded sensing architecture with a composite host structure. The results
&lt;br/&gt;from the analysis will be verified experimentally using a Scanning
Laser Doppler Vibrometer (SLDV). A &lt;br/&gt;comprehensive investigation into
characterization and detection of multi-scale seeded damage is
&lt;br/&gt;proposed. To address feasibility, signal processing and
instrumentation will be studied. It is expected &lt;br/&gt;that the proposed
sensing architecture will reduce the required number of channels for data
acquisition &lt;br/&gt;considerably, and in addition, will increase the spatial
advantage to cover a large structural area for monitoring. &lt;br/&gt;Statement
of Objectives &lt;br/&gt;1. Development of efficient sensing architecture,
capable of detecting damage. &lt;br/&gt;2. Analysis of the integrated sensor
architecture and composite host structure. &lt;br/&gt;3. Parametric studies to
establish detection and quantification of seeded damage in composite structures
&lt;br/&gt;using the proposed sensing architecture. &lt;br/&gt;4. Address
practical implications regarding the acquisition, collection and processing of
the data to &lt;br/&gt;establish the feasibility of using the proposed sensing
architecture in the development of a robust &lt;br/&gt;damage detection
technique. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structural integrity is a key issue in both
civil and mechanical systems and the proposed research will have significant
impact on the advancement of knowledge in structural health monitoring.
Currently used damage detection methods are visual or localized methods using
acoustic, ultrasonic, magnetic field, X-ray or thermal principles. All these
techniques require a priori knowledge on the vicinity of the damage. The
development of a robust, quantitative, global damage detection method,
applicable to complex structures will have a major impact on engineering
systems. The impact of the research will be multifaceted ranging from
development of new theory, course development and training new students to
collaborative efforts with other related research establishments. Developing a
mutually beneficial working relationship with national research organizations
will be an integral part of the proposed research effort. Interaction with other
research organizations will enhance and expand the infrastructure for related
research efforts as well as initiate mutually beneficial collaborative efforts
and partnerships. Dissemination of the developed technology will be made via
peer reviewed journal articles, seminars, workshops, short courses and technical
conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the educational front, training graduate
students in the research area will be an integral part of &lt;br/&gt;the
research effort. It is anticipated that a graduate level course, entitled
.Structural Health Monitoring,. &lt;br/&gt;will result from this research
effort. In addition, interaction with similar facilities at other educational
and &lt;br/&gt;research institutions will help develop a network of interrelated
teaching and research facilities that will &lt;br/&gt;help in expanding the
educational impact of the proposed research. Minority and/or women graduate
students will be encouraged to participate in the research effort. ASU has an
Office of Minority Engineering Programs (OMEP) and Women in Science and
Engineering (WISE) program. They work with the faculty to increase the
participation of under represented minority and women in undergraduate and
graduate levels in the College of Engineering at ASU. The PI is an active member
of the WISE program and has two minority students who will participate in the
proposed research effort. &lt;br/&gt;