* 0335644
* Enhanced Evaluation of Learning in Complex Domains (DEEP)
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Jonathan Spector, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Gabriel M. Della-Piana
* 12/31/2004
* USD 350,000.00

This proposal seeks funds to validate a Dynamic Evaluation of Enhanced Problem-
solving (DEEP) methodology that has shown promise in limited studies. The
overall aim is to advance knowledge in assessment methods for complex domains in
SMET disciplines. The DEEP methodology is based on a view of learning as
becoming more expert-like and more skilled in higher-order causal reasoning and
problem solving. In this view learning is treated as a continuous process of
growth and assessment involves tapping that process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The panel felt that this was
a very strong proposal. The approach was seen as novel. It was judged to be
addressing an important type of student&lt;br/&gt;learning:-- complex problem
solving.) characterized as Dynamic Evaluation of Enhanced Problem Solving
(DEEP). The DEEP process itself is grounded in literature on solving ill
structured problems and involves (briefly stated): 1) identifying characteristic
complex problems in appropriate modules of a problem-centered curriculum; 2)
eliciting expert patterns of problem solving in that curriculum; 3) representing
expert patterns in both textual and graphic formats; 4) determining salient
features of these representations; 5) establishing measures of similarity in
salient features of expert representations; 6) eliciting novice patterns for the
same problem-solving activities; 7) representing novice patterns in the same
formats as used for experts; 8) identifying the presence or absence of salient
features (from experts responses) in novice representations; 9) establishing
measures of distance from expert patterns for each salient feature; and 10)
tracking and analyzing changes in learner responses over time and through
instructional interventions. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
DEEP project has the potential for broad applicability of the approach to
assessment of complex domains of problem solving. By development in multiple
subject matter areas and educational levels generalizability is enhanced. By
developing formal frameworks for analysis of expert and novice problem solving
and a technological base for representations, the potential for tracking student
progress is enhanced. By building on research with less complex problems the
potential for tackling the complex domains is enhanced. The project thus has the
potential to provide the foundation for further research and development of
tools for assessment of progress of student learning in important complex
domains.&lt;br/&gt;