* 0335345
* Dynamics Of Mediated Electrochemical Synthesis In Microemulsions
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2008
* James Rusling, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 01/31/2008
* USD 396,000.00

Microemulsions are clear, stable, non-toxic fluids made from oil, water and
detergent. Prior research has shown how microemulsions can enhance rates and
control pathways of electrolytic chemical formation. The long-term scientific
goal is to develop a fundamental understanding of how dynamic processes at
interfaces in microemulsions can be used to control reactivity and reaction
pathways. From a practical point of view, this project seeks to uncover
methodology to make chiral chemicals stereoselectively in microemulsions using
films of inexpensive proteins and other chiral catalysts. Chirality, the
property of a molecule being non-superimposable on its mirror image, is a key to
drug activity. One chiral form of a drug often possesses all the desired
activity. The drug industry is currently leading a large effort toward
production of chiral drugs, with a future market predicted at over $15 billion.
If developed properly, catalytic synthesis in microemulsions may be an important
contributor to future toolboxes of clean chiral synthetic methods. The
technological impact of stable, efficient catalytic electrodes and surfaces
designed for stereoselective chemical production in microemulsions could be very
large. They would enable reusable catalysts to make fine chemicals, such as
drugs, employing only electricity and consumable feed reactants. Problems with
side products, catalyst recovery, or solvent toxicity would be
minimized.&lt;br/&gt; Specific aims in this project period involve understanding
how dynamic interactions between microemulsions, catalytic films, and reactants
control reaction rates, pathways and stereochemistry. Representative reactions
that are catalyzed by stable films of polymer and protein catalysts will be
examined. A number of modern spectroscopic, microscopic and physical methods
will be used to characterize reactant-film interactions with a view to
optimizing the reaction systems. &lt;br/&gt; The broader impact of the work
includes fundamental guidance to develop future electrochemical syntheses in
relatively inexpensive, low toxicity, water-based fluids. This project will
build a basis for future cost-effective, environmentally benign processes to
make high value chemicals such as drugs. The project includes a broad-based
education component, and will involve high school, college undergraduate, and
graduate students, including underrepresented groups and women, in the research.
Senior graduate students will be involved in training students at the beginning
levels. Mentoring activities will be used at all levels. Students will take
advanced courses preparing them for research on the project and will present
their research findings at national conferences and workshops. Overall, the
project provides a rich training ground in modern cross-disciplinary research
and education for participants at several levels of expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;----------------------------------------------------------------&lt;br/&gt;
. Rouhi, A. M. "Chiral Roundup" Chem. &amp; Eng. News, June 10, 2002, pp. 43-57.