* 0335392
* Probing the QCD Equation of State and Hadronization at RHIC
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2007
* Steffen Bass, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 11/30/2007
* USD 56,160.00

0335392&lt;br/&gt;Bass&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a three-year
international collaborative research project between Professor Steffen Bass at
Duke University whose group will be carrying out research at the Relativistic
Heavy-ion Collider (RHIC) at Brookhaven National Laboratory in New York and
Professor Masayuki Asakawa of the Physics Department of Kyoto University in
Japan. They will undertake a study that consists of probing the QCD (theory of
quantum chromodynamics) Equation of State and Hadronization. Hadronic, strongly
interacting, matter is described by the theory of quantum chromodynamics (QCD).
The basic constituents of QCD, quarks and gluons, are normally confined to
hadrons. However, it is believed that under extreme conditions, such as shortly
after the creation of the universe in the Big Bang, quarks and gluons can exist
as independent particles. This state of matter is called a quark-gluon plasma
(QGP). Due to the rapid expansion of the Universe, this plasma went through a
phase transition to form hadrons - most importantly nucleons - which constitute
the building blocks of matter as we know it today. The researchers will be
undertaking studies on the following four projects: (1) probing the QGP equation
of state, (2) net charge and baryon number fluctuations as signal of
deconfinement, (3) quantum description of field transport and (4) hadron
spectral functions on the lattice.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project brings
together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and
research capabilities. The U.S. researchers are experts in simulating heavy ion
collisions and the Japanese researchers are well known for their work on pion
condensates. The investigation of the QGP, under laboratory conditions, should
yield important novel insights into the development of the early universe and
the behavior of matter under extreme conditions. The project advances
international human resources through the participation of a number of postdocs,
graduate students and undergraduate students. Through the exchange of ideas and
technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote
international understanding and cooperation. Results of the research will be
disseminated at scientific meetings and in scientific journals. &lt;br/&gt;