* 0335328
* Assessing Teacher Learning About Science Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2011
* Iris Weiss, Horizon Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 09/30/2011
* USD 3,144,790.00

Professional development for science teachers operates with an implicit theory
that is largely untested. The theory asserts that professional development
brings about changes in teachers' science content and pedagogical content
knowledge, which then leads to changes in classroom practice, ultimately
improving student achievement. Testing this theory requires a coherent set of
tools, which currently does not exist. Without these tools, professional
development providers (including those working in the context of the MSPs) often
lack data they need to inform revisions to their program designs and
implementations. Horizon Research, Inc. (HRI) and Project 2061 of the American
Association of the Advancement of Science (AAAS) jointly propose to develop
these tools in specific science content areas. The project will create and
disseminate instruments that assess teacher opportunities to learn, and that
measure changes in teacher science content knowledge, teacher pedagogical
content knowledge, classroom practice, as well as changes in student
achievement. Three sets of instruments will be developed, one for each of three
science areas or benchmarks. These are force and motion, plate tectonics, and
flow of matter and energy. The teacher instruments will mainly be for middle
school, but might have implications for younger grades. The project will refine,
document, and disseminate the processes used to create the tools. The project
has strong connections to the MSP key features of Evidence-Based Design and
Outcomes and Teacher Quantity, Quality, and Diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
tools that will be developed, and the processes used to create them, will
increase the capacity of the field to design and implement professional
development experiences with documented impacts on: (1) teachers' science
content and pedagogical content knowledge; (2) their classroom practice; and
most importantly; and (3) student achievement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tools
will enable MSPs (and professional development providers at large) to monitor
the effectiveness of their interventions and identify differences in impacts
that may exist between groups of participants (e.g., differences by teacher
background and years of experience), thereby promoting the most equitable
implementation of professional development. Equitable implementation of
professional development ultimately addresses inequities in student
opportunities to learn. By refining and completely documenting the processes
used to create the tools, the project extends its impacts beyond the areas in
which the tools are created. The project will disseminate its products through:
(1) a web-based handbook for tool creation; (2) invited conferences for MSPs and
others; (3) internships for doctoral students and post-doctoral students from
CLTs; (4) presentations and workshops at annual meetings of professional
organizations; (5) journal articles; and (6) a project web-site, including a
discussion forum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;