* 0335882
* Building the Eurasian Supercontinent: Paleomagnetic Study of Kazakhstan to Assess its Role in Uniting Baltica with Siberia
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Rob Van der Voo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2007
* USD 274,330.00

Eurasia contains several older cratonic blocks that are united by intervening
younger mountain belts; the latter account for about half of the Eurasian
landmass. Whereas the motions during the last 500 million years of these large
Eurasian blocks and the evolution of the Alpine-Himalayan-Indonesian belt are
relatively well defined, the tectonic history of the Paleozoic mountain belts
remains enigmatic. One of the largest and least understood is the Ural-Mongol
belt, which unites the North-European, Siberian, North China, and Tarim blocks.
In its central part in Kazakhstan, the Ural-Mongol belt attains great width and
consists of a nest of some three or more horseshoe-shaped, strongly curved
structures. The ages of the rocks in these structures range from about 520 to
about 280 million years ago, and all represent ancient island-arcs, which
undoubtedly were built above subduction zones where large ancient oceanic
domains were recycled into the Earth's mantle. How these structures became
assembled in the Ural-Mongol belt of Kazakhstan and how this assembly occurred
within the large-scale late Paleozoic amalgamation of Eurasia can become better
understood if the prior spatial distribution of its tectonic elements can be
determined. Detailed paleomagnetic studies on rocks of varying ages within the
structures are able to achieve this goal. Rocks from different parts of the
highly arcuate structures in Kazakhstan are being collected in order to
determine the latitudinal motions of the island-arc units prior to and during
their assembly into the structures. These motions of Kazakhstan units can then
be compared with the motions of the surrounding cratons of Northern Europe,
Siberia and Tarim during the assembly of Eurasia. In addition the project will
test the hypothesis that the strongly curved structure of Kazakhstan resulted
from large-scale bending of an originally nearly straight series of island arcs.
In the broadest geological sense, it is noteworthy that the late Paleozoic
mountain belt of southern Europe and several late Precambrian belts (e.g., in
Arabia and northeast Africa) show important similarities with Kazakhstan. A
successful model for the Kazakhstan domain may serve as a useful analog for
other pre-Mesozoic accretion processes during the amalgamation of
supercontinents.