* 0336644
* The Basic and Advanced Science and Technology Academies of Research (B A STAR) Project
* EHR,DUE
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2008
* Derrick Booth, Butte-Glenn Community College
* Standard Grant
* Ning Fang
* 10/31/2008
* USD 2,000,000.00

The California Alliance of MESA Directors (CAMD) composed of thirty-four
community colleges is seeking new ways to increase the number of under-
represented and disadvantaged students obtaining technical degrees. The MESA
model specifically targets these students through outreach and access to the
program and its components reaching to approximately 3,500 students per year.
Our focus is to build and expand on MESA's existing service infrastructure by
establishing the Basic and Advanced Science and Technology Academies of Research
(B A STAR) project. We believe that the BA STAR has the potential to directly
and indirectly increase the number of students obtaining technical degrees by
providing students the opportunity to develop technical, teamwork and leadership
abilities. The BA STAR Program consists of four major components:

(1) Leadership Development Conference (Year 1) (2) Basic Science and Technology
Academy of Research (Year 1) (3) Training and Employment as Academic Workshop
Leaders (Year 2) (4) Advanced Science and Technology Academy of Research (Year
2)

During the first year students participate in a Leadership Development
Conference (LDC). A cohort of these students is then invited to participate in
the Basic Science and Technology Academy of Research (B STAR) following the LDC.
The B STAR focuses on providing a core understanding of physics principles as
well as developing technical computer skills. During Year Two of the program,
the cohort is employed as facilitators for Academic Excellence Workshops (AEW)
during the academic year. An AEW is a small community of students working
collaboratively to master technical course material with the facilitator's
guidance. During the summer of Year Two, the same cohort participates in one of
five Advanced Science and Technology Academies of Research (A STAR). Each A STAR
is research and project oriented, relating to the participant's academic major
with the guidance of a faculty or industry mentor. The BA STAR project collects
appropriate data for both formative and summative evaluation. The project also
tracks and evaluates student participants to verify increased persistence,
completion and/or transfer or job placement. Information regarding this project
is included in MESA recruitment strategies and materials. Moreover, we intend to
disseminate the project's results across the nation via peer-reviewed published
articles, presented at relevant conferences, and posted on the Internet.

