* 0336546
* Symposium on Metals for the Future, 2004 Annual Meeting of the TMS; Charlotte, N.C.; March 14-18, 2004
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Sreeramamurthy Ankem, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 10/31/2004
* USD 29,430.00

This is a proposal for a two-day symposium to explore future metals research to
be held in Charlotte, NC from March 14 to March 18, 2004 in conjunction with the
Annual Meeting of The Metallurgical Society of America. The symposium will
feature invited speakers who will present their views and divers opportunities
for research in metals. Panel discussions will sharpen the research
opportunities that exist in the field of &lt;br/&gt;metals and identify
promising areas of interdisciplinary opportunities. The intellectual merit of
the symposium will consist of formulating new promising avenues of metals
research. Its venue will guarantee that the ideas to be formulated will be
widely disseminated thereby ensuring a broad impact of the
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium is believed to result in a road
map of the expected new trends in this important field of metals research. The
plan is to have invited talks by recent MET CAREER grantees followed by open
discussions by both invitees and participants; the symposium is open to public
in attendance at the TMS meeting. The final outcome of the symposium is planned
to be published in the Journal of Metals and to create a web page. Funds are
geared towards supporting travel and meeting registration for young researchers
from diversified groups.