* 0336339
* Cooperative Participation in CFT-Buckling Restrained Braced Frame Testing and International Workshop on Steel and Concrete Composite Construction at NCREE, Taiwan
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2003,01/31/2005
* Subhash Goel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 01/31/2005
* USD 23,747.00

PI: Subhash Goel, University of Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of
this research proposal is to seek NSF funding for: (1) travel support for a
group of 10-12&lt;br/&gt;invited US side participants to attend the
International Workshop on Steel and Concrete Composite&lt;br/&gt;Construction in
Seismic Regions (IWSCCC-2003) to be held at the National Center for Research
on&lt;br/&gt;Earthquake Engineering (NCREE), Taipei, Taiwan, on October 8-9,
2003, in conjunction with Pseudo-&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic Testing of a Full Scale
3-Story composite CFT- Buckling Restrained Braced (BRB) Frame
on&lt;br/&gt;October 2-7, 2003, and (2) to partially support a doctoral student
to be able to continue analysis and&lt;br/&gt;design studies jointly with the
NCREE research team prior to and after the full scale test. The
&lt;br/&gt;analysis/design methodologies to be developed will be formulated for
incorporation in the new&lt;br/&gt;generation of performance-based design codes.
The P.I.'s believe that this program is a good example&lt;br/&gt;indicative of
the future trend when international cooperative research will become more common
using&lt;br/&gt;globally networked facilities and modern information technology,
including the NEES facilities&lt;br/&gt;currently being established in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Plan&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is a
follow up of Phase 5 of the US-Japan Cooperative Research Program
on&lt;br/&gt;Composite and Hybrid Structures (1993-2000) where major emphasis
was place on obtaining more&lt;br/&gt;basic knowledge through studies of
components and sub-assemblages. In this current US-Taiwan&lt;br/&gt;Cooperative
Program two full scale frames (RCS and CFT-BRB) are subjects of thorough study.
The&lt;br/&gt;RCS frame study has been completed, and the study and testing of
the CFT-BRBF is currently in&lt;br/&gt;progress. The proposed research proposal
has two components. The first component involves carrying&lt;br/&gt;out pretest
and post-test analyses and related design implication study of the CFT frame
cooperatively&lt;br/&gt;with the Taiwan research team. The second component
includes travel of a group of 10-12 US&lt;br/&gt;participants to attend the
International Workshop on Steel and Concrete Composite Construction
that&lt;br/&gt;will follow immediately after the testing of the CFT frame. The
main purpose of the workshop is to&lt;br/&gt;create a forum of researchers,
practitioners and constructors to discuss the recent developments
and&lt;br/&gt;experiences as well as to explore the challenges and opportunities
for further research and&lt;br/&gt;development of innovative composite and
hybrid structures in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact - Research:
The research work will result in rational and well founded
seismic&lt;br/&gt;modeling, analysis and performance-based design methodologies
for advanced composite structures,&lt;br/&gt;which show promise of excellent
structural efficiency and performance. That will accelerate the use
of&lt;br/&gt;those structural systems in seismic design practice. The
performance-based design and analysis&lt;br/&gt;methodologies as developed in
this research will have been validated by testing on full size
structures,&lt;br/&gt;thereby convincing the profession and the code writing
bodies to incorporate the recommendations&lt;br/&gt;quickly in the future codes
and practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact - Educational and
International Cooperation: The research work in this project
will&lt;br/&gt;constitute a major part of one doctoral student's research
training and education. Therefore, the project&lt;br/&gt;will not only
contribute to further advancement of the knowledge base and improvement in
the&lt;br/&gt;professional practice and codes, but will also help in educating
highly qualified professionals needed to&lt;br/&gt;carry out the earthquake
hazard mitigation program in the future. Results from this project will
also&lt;br/&gt;lead to important advances in inelastic modeling and design tools
that are used in structural analysis&lt;br/&gt;and design courses. Additionally,
the project will provide great opportunity for
international&lt;br/&gt;cooperation and exchange of research
personnel.&lt;br/&gt;