* 0336591
* Retention Through an Applied Physics, Engineering, and Mathematics (PEM) Model
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2009
* William Bassichis, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* David Matty
* 08/31/2009
* USD 1,999,999.00

The College of Engineering is increasing the number of graduates in physics,
engineering, and mathematics by improving the retention rate of students. A
special emphasis is being placed on retaining students through the freshman year
of study. A three-pronged approach is being used. An integrated first year
physics, engineering and mathematics (PEM) curriculum is proving effective in
reducing the first year attrition rate of students majoring in these fields. The
approach is having the greatest effect on the retention of first generation
college attendees and underrepresented groups. Use of the Learning and Studies
Strategy Inventory (LASSI) instrument coupled to a package of training modules
is giving students an understanding of their individual learning strategies and
how to adapt them to the challenging environment of PEM courses. Workshops for
teaching teams complete the triad of approaches. The teaching teams consisting
of one or two faculty members, a graduate teaching assistant, and an
undergraduate peer teacher are receiving training in using collaborative
learning in the classroom, team training, and behavior profiles training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the focus on first-year retention is to
increase the graduation rates in the PEM subjects by year five of the project by
a minimum of ten percent.&lt;br/&gt;