* 0336736
* Bioerodible Matrices for Bone Tissue Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2003,07/31/2006
* Cato Laurencin, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 07/31/2006
* USD 428,000.00

0201923&lt;br/&gt;Laurencin&lt;br/&gt;This research effort is aimed at
developing useful biomimetic constructs for bone while furthering our
fundamental understanding of factors important in determining the success of
these designs. A multidisciplinary tissue engineering approach is to be followed
using principles from chemical, mechanical, and materials engineering as well as
cell and molecular biology. The development of constructs of this sort is
expected to have clinical applications in grafting of non-unions, surgical
arthrodeses, cranio-facial defects, and prosthetic implants and/or implant
coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project builds on the knowledge
produced during a series of research projects directed by the Principal
Investigator dating from 1990. This new project seeks to design, develop and
optimize three-dimensional matrices for use in bone repair. The first aim is to
explore the development of new polymer-ceramic constructs fabricated by direct
synthesis and incorporation of amorphous calcium phosphate into microspheres
used to form the matrix, as well as optimize physicochemical parameters
surrounding these new composite microspheres. In the second aim, the delivery of
growth factors will also be studied further, building on the previous work by
incorporating proteins and factors into the matrix that may enhance cellular
endothelialization and bone growth. Finally, in the third aim, extensive in vivo
studies will be performed utilizing the constructs designed from aims 1 and 2,
paying careful attention to the mechanical strength of the healing defect and
the short- and long-term histology and histomorphometry of the defect
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a basic science standpoint, studies under this
work have provided and will continue to provide a better understanding of
polymer and ceramic chemistry as it relates to cellular response, matrix
fabrication, and ultimate matrix performance (both in vitro and in vivo).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to furthering our basic science knowledge, the
development of matrices for bone tissue engineering may lead to graft materials
for healing bony defects, and thus provide direct benefits to society. As one of
only a handful of underrepresented minority principal investigators in
bioengineering in America, the Principal Investigator is committed to
encouraging the academic growth of younger minority undergraduate and graduate
students currently so underrepresented in science.