* 0336932
* Genomic Instability and the Evolution of the Antarctic Notothenioid Fishes
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2007
* Harry Detrich, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 09/30/2007
* USD 440,000.00

The ancestral Notothenioid fish stock of Antarctica probably arose as a
sluggish, bottom-dwelling species that evolved some 40-60 million years ago in
the then temperate shelf waters of the Antarctic continent. The grounding of the
ice sheet on the continental shelf and changing trophic conditions may have
eliminated the taxonomically diverse late Eocene fauna and initiated the rapid
diversification of the Notothenioids. On the High Antarctic shelf, Notothenioids
today dominate the fish fauna and are recognized as one of the few examples of a
species flock of marine fishes. Recent work conducted by this investigator and
others suggests strongly that evolutionary change at the level of the genome
permeates the Notothenioids and perhaps has been a major driver of the rapid
diversification of this suborder of bony fishes. One striking example is the
loss by the icefishes (Channichthyidae) of the ability to produce functional
erythrocytes and hemoglobin. This natural "knockout" of the erythroid lineage
makes the icefish taxon a unique genetic resource for analyzing the signaling
pathways and transcriptional machinery involved in erythroid determination and
differentiation. The hemoglobin-null and erythrocyte-null phenotypes appear to
have been caused, at least in part, by genomic rearrangements and/or deletions
mediated by repetitive elements and retrotransposons. One objective of this
proposal will be to evaluate the role of genome instability in the evolution of
the hematopoietic program of the icefishes. Using fluorescence in situ
hybridization-based cytogenetics and bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)
libraries,&lt;br/&gt;erythropoietic gene loci will be mapped physically to the
genomes of two notothenioids, the red-blooded rockcod Notothenia coriiceps and
the white-blooded icefish Chaenocephalus aceratus, to determine the patterns of
gene retention, inactivation, and/or loss that cause the erythrocyte-null
condition. A second objective will be to exploit the absence of erythrocytes in
icefishes to discover novel genes involved in the erythropoietic genetic program
by use of new comparative genomic technologies. A third objective will be to
determine the functions of newly discovered erythroid genes and their encoded
proteins by functional analysis of zebrafish orthologs in zebrafish embryos. In
summary, this research will evaluate the evolutionary mechanisms that generated
the novel erythropoietic phenotype of the Antarctic icefishes and will exploit
this novel taxon to conduct an unbiased, genome-wide scan for genes involved in
red cell formation. The broader impacts include graduate student training in
genomic molecular biology, including the bioinformatic strategies necessary to
mine the data set for the potential functions of novel erythroid genes, and the
use of a model system, the zebrafish, to test the hypothetical functions of
these genes. A Web-hosted database will be created so that other laboratories
can make use of the genome mapping data generated by this research project and
lay audiences can learn about the uses of genomics for solving important
questions in polar biology. In addition, the discovery of novel genes that
participate in hematopoiesis may contribute important targets for the
development by the biotechnology industry of therapeutics to treat anemias,
leukemias, and other blood diseases. &lt;br/&gt;