* 0336349
* Categories and Criteria of Evaluation of Research Proposals in the Social Sciences and the Humanities
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2003,12/31/2005
* Michele Lamont, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2005
* USD 32,363.00

SES-0096889&lt;br/&gt;Michele Lamont&lt;br/&gt;Princeton University
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will analyze the categories and criteria used by
scholars to evaluate research proposals in the social sciences and humanities.
Data will be gathered on the process used to evaluate research and training
projects seeking funding from the American Council of Learned Societies, the
Social Science Research Council, the Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship
Foundation - Women's Studies program, the Princeton Society of Fellows, and an
anonymous foundation in the social sciences. Of these programs, two are
interdisciplinary competitions in the social sciences, two are interdisciplinary
competitions in the humanities, and one is concerned specifically with funding
research in the field of Women's Studies. The primary focus of the analysis is
to explore (1) differences in how proposal in the social and sciences and
humanities in general are evaluated, (2) investigate differences in the
evaluation process of "interpretive and "empirical" disciplines, and (3) compare
the criteria used in the elite competition, the Princeton Society of Fellows,
with those used by other programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study asks: What
categories of evaluation are used? How much weight is given to formal and
informal categories of evaluation such as excellence, significance, originality,
feasibility, social usefulness, political relevance, elegance, sophistication
and objectivity? What criteria are used to assess proposals along these
dimensions? Data will be collected through observing funding panels, interviews
with panel members and an analysis of written evaluation of proposals submitted.
Fieldnotes, interviews and written evaluations will be analyzed qualitatively
and quantitatively using content analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike most
studies of the peer review process, this study is not aimed primarily at
determining whether the evaluation process is fair, but rather at understanding
the substance of how quality is assessed. It will contribute directly to
promoting excellence in the social sciences and humanities. It is expected that
empirical knowledge generated will aid experts in addressing normative
questions, such as what should count for excellence in the fields under
consideration. The project will also make a contribution to the study of
distribution of grants and fellowships, a neglected topic in the sociology of
higher education and sociology of
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;