* 0336527
* Conference: Improving Climate Science Communications Between Scientists and the News Media; Kingston, RI; Fall  2003
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Jackleen de La Harpe, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 12/31/2004
* USD 36,410.00

This awards provides partial support for a conference entitled, "Improving
Climate Science Communication Between Scientists and the News Media" in the
autumn of 2003 at the University of Rhode Island. The workshop is a one-and-one-
half day workshop involving climate scientists, environmental/science
journalists, journalism educators, and students to address institutional and
other professional and cultural issues related to clear and concise
communication of science news to broad audiences through the mass media.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the workshop is to share practical information
among scientists and journalists on challenges in communicating science-based
news and information, and to lay the groundwork for improving science
communications initially between scientists and journalists and therefore to the
general public, which depends on the mass media for most of its science news. An
important element of the workshop will be the intellectual merit resulting from
the cross-fertilization between the disciplines of science and journalism, and
an improved understanding of the mores, ethics, and accepted practices critical
to each.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will achieve broader impacts for
society, beyond the workshop participants themselves, by ensuring that the
workshop participants take part both to teach and to learn, and by ensuring
their active involvement in sharing lessons learned with broad segments of their
own professional peer groups. Their ability and commitment to participate in
post-workshop information sharing/information transfer activities will be an
important selection criterion in identifying workshop participants. In addition,
workshop planners will establish mechanisms through which subsequent
scientist/journalist workshops can benefit from the prior activities of this
workshop, thereby avoiding reinventing the wheel.