* 0336493
* Dream Catchers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Steve McGouyrk, Northwest-Shoals Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2008
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this project is to increase the number of minority students pursuing
and receiving associate or baccalaureate degrees in the fields of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). We are targeting for our
program students of all minority groups in the College's service area with
special emphasis on populations of Native Americans and Hispanics. These
students have been historically underrepresented in the STEM disciplines and we
believe that a systematic approach to alleviate this problem is needed. Our
specific objectives for the program include improving educational opportunities
for minority students in the STEM disciplines, increasing retention of students
to degree achievement, improving students support programs at our institution,
and strengthening partnerships between secondary education institutions and
postsecondary education within Northwest-Shoals Community College's service
areas. The project consists of the following components: Recruitment and
Selection, Student Needs Assessment, Support Services, Academic Achievement,
Retention and Tracking, Career and Personal Counseling, Graduation, and
Transfer. Specifically, the strategies for the program include outreach
activities to encourage interest in STEM fields of study among minority
students, use of state-of-the-art technological facilities for instruction,
mentoring, student tutoring, offering developmental education, campus visits,
professional seminars, and facilitating student transfer to four-year
institutions. We believe that these activities would provide all STEP
participants at NW-SCC a solid foundation to obtain academic and personal
success and would help us to achieve our goal. The results from this project
will be disseminated locally through campus publications, emails and
professional meetings. We also plan to develop a website in order to disseminate
the project's activities and results throughout the state and nationwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;