* 0336499
* The 2003 Digital Library for Earth System Education (DLESE) Annual Meeting, University of Colorado, Boulder, August 2 through Ausust 5, 2003
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2004
* Edward Geary, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 06/30/2004
* USD 243,720.00

This award supports the fourth DLESE Annual Meeting. The theme of the meeting is
"Broadening DLESE", and builds upon the theme of the third Annual Meeting,
"Using DLESE". This Annual Meeting will provide DLESE the opportunity to
demonstrate the new DSLESE version 2 and to launch the new Core Service Centers.
The four main goals for the meeting, loosely aligned with the new Core Service
areas, are to develop strategies to: expand the number and diversity of users
and contributors to DLESE; facilitate and encourage efforts to develop Earth
science data/tools for educational use; expand DLESE's collection of excellent
Earth science educational materials; and broaden the ties between research and
educational practice. Each goal or strand area is further broken into substrands
for a total of thirteen substrands. Strand participants will be made up of a
distribution of teachers, college instructors' curriculum developers, visual
tools developers, evaluators, instructional designers, librarians, scientists,
students, and software developers. Each attendee will be assigned to a group
based upon their interests expressed at registration. Strand leaders from the
community will help facilitate organizing their particular strand and moving the
efforts of their group forward, through email prior to the meeting, chairing the
working sessions during the meeting, and facilitating follow through after the
meeting. A special effort has been made to recruit attendees who represent
diverse communities, including diversity of ethnicity, disabilities, geographic
distribution, and socio-economic status. An effort has also been made to recruit
attendees who represent differing segments of the Earth science research and
educational communities. Attendees will have many opportunities to network, to
demonstrarte their services, and to develop collaborations, including skills
workshops and Share Fair participation. Evaluation of the meeting is included to
gauge the extent to which we meet our goals.