* 0336961
* The Tuff of San Felipe: A Widespread Ignimbritic Marker Unit for Gulf of California Extension
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Joann Stock, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2008
* USD 218,796.00

The Tuff of San Felipe is a large-volume ash-flow tuff that erupted from a
Mexican volcano near the present Gulf of California, 12.6 million years ago,
before the Gulf of California opened. At this time, Baja California was adjacent
to Sonora, Mexico. This tuff was initially deposited as a continuous sheet in
both Baja California and Sonora, but later faulting has broken the region into
different mountain ranges in which exposures of the Tuff of San Felipe are
tilted and rotated. In some of the blocks the Tuff has been eroded away, but it
is still preserved in many places, including the mountain ranges W and SW of San
Felipe, Baja California, on Tiburon Island in the Gulf of California, and from
Kino Bay to Hermosillo in Sonora. In this project, the Tuff of San Felipe is
being studied in great detail, so that the original relative positions of all
the different mountain ranges can be determined. The aspects of the tuff that
are being studied include: overall thickness, compositional variations from
bottom to top (including bulk chemical composition and chemical compositions of
the individual crystals, or phenocrysts, found in the tuff), clast content from
bottom to top, direction of paleomagnetic remanence from bottom to top,
direction of flow of the tuff when it left the vent (which is determined from
the anisotropy of the magnetic susceptibility, measured on paleomagnetic cores),
and age determined by isotopic dating. The tuff is thickest near the vent, the
source of the eruption, and thinner with distance away from the vent. In
addition, it is thicker where it filled pre-existing channels or river valleys.
The changes from bottom to top and with distance from the vent (facies
variations) are a guide to the initial morphology of the tuff just after it was
erupted and deposited. By understanding better what the tuff looked like just
after it was deposited, and which way it was subsequently faulted, tilted and
rotated in different mountain ranges, allows understanding of how all of the
mountain ranges have deformed in this area since 12.6 million years ago. One of
the major questions being answered is how much plate boundary deformation
occurred in this region between 12.6 and 6 million years ago (after the time of
eruption of the Tuff of San Felipe, but before the eruption of some younger,
smaller ash-flow tuff sheets that have already been mapped by geologists). Other
techniques predict that possibly several hundreds of kilometers of strike-slip
and extensional motion occurred here during this time period. The Tuff of San
Felipe covered a very large area and therefore provides good marker horizon for
evaluating whether this amount of motion occurred here or not. This will help
understand how the San Andreas fault system initiated.