* 0336874
* What are the Parental Magma Compositions for Historical Kilauea Lavas?
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Aaron Pietruszka, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* William P. Leeman
* 01/31/2009
* USD 352,218.00

Kilauea Volcano, on the Island of Hawaii, is one of the most active and best
monitored volcanoes in the world. Previous field, petrologic, geochemical and
geophysical studies have established the basic structure of Kilauea's magmatic
plumbing system, leading it to be called "the best understood basaltic volcano
in the world". This makes Kilauea an ideal venue for addressing fundamental
questions about how magma is formed in basaltic volcanoes. The physical
mechanisms behind the long-term and short-term geochemical fluctuations in lavas
chemistry at Kilauea are poorly understood. Why does the volcano exhibit
distinctive geochemical variations over different time scales? What process
caused the change in the trajectory of the temporal geochemical trends? What is
the origin of the "common" trend? Our hypothesis is that the short-term and
long-term variations in lava chemistry at Kilauea reflect the dynamics of melt
generation, extraction and transport within the heterogeneous Hawaiian mantle
plume.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes for this four year study will include
new analyses of the petrography, mineral chemistry, whole-rock major element and
trace element abundances, and Pb, Sr, Nd and U-series isotope ratios for lavas
from the current eruption, prehistoric summit lavas exposed in Uwekahuna Bluff,
selected rift zone lavas, and olivine-hosted melt inclusions from these and
other olivine-rich basalts. These data will be used to determine the mantle
causes for compositional variation in the Kilauea lavas, for example, source
variations vs. changes in the amount of melting. These processes control the
eruption rate of volcanoes, so our work will have implications for predicting
the duration of future eruptions. The broader impacts of this research include
mentoring graduate and undergraduate students, teaching volcanology, petrology
and geochemistry courses at universities with a large population of
underrepresented students using examples from our research, involving
underrepresented students in our research, giving public lectures to school
groups and the local community, gaining a better understanding of volcanoes that
can negatively influence the quality of life, and increasing international and
national scientific cooperation through collaboration and utilization of multi-
user facilities. &lt;br/&gt;