* 0337876
* Continuation of Ice Crystal Observations at South Pole Station and Collection of Cloud Microphysical Data on Ross Island in Support of ANTCI and RIME
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2009
* R. Paul Lawson, SPEC, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2009
* USD 263,712.00

This project is the continuation of a previous study that supported the
collection of the size, shape, concentration and scattering phase function of
over 1 million individual ice crystals at South Pole Station during February
2001 and 2002. This first statistically large data set of high-definition
digital images of antarctic ice crystals showed that these consisted of bullet
rosettes, budding rosettes, solid columns, and diamond dust. Rosettes accounted
for only about 25% of the number of ice particles, but comprised about 70% of
the particle mass, while diamond dust accounted for about 30% of the number of
particles, but only about 15% of the mass. As part of this project, the
continued ground-based collection of microphysical data at South Pole station
will be enhanced by long-duration (greater than 24 hour) vertical profiles of
cloud microphysical and radiation data with a new tethered balloon system that
lifts a cloud particle imager and other meteorological instrumentation to an
altitude of two kilometers. &lt;br/&gt;The tethered balloon data will provide
the first insights into the microphysics of clouds at South Pole and Ross
Island, since there have been virtually no previous in situ cloud microphysical
measurements at either location. A number of theoretical and experimental
studies at lower latitudes have demonstrated that particle size and shape
strongly affect the radiative effects of cloud particles, and specifically ice
crystals. The individual observations, as well as the collective statistics will
significantly add to several concurrent experiments concerning the emission
characteristics of snow, of ice crystals in the atmosphere, and of greenhouse
gases near the surface. This data, together with measurements of environmental
conditions such as cloud base altitude, temperature, and humidity structure,
will allow the development of a climatology of cloud and cloud particle
properties, and of new algorithms to substantially improve representations of
radiation processes in general circulation models.&lt;br/&gt;