* 0337258
* Pore-scale processes fundamentally influencing the transport of colloids in porous media
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Jan Miller, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/29/2008
* USD 399,997.00

0337258&lt;br/&gt;W. Johnson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
identify fundamental processes governing two phenomena that are ubiquitous in
colloid and microbial transport in porous media: 1) apparent decreases in
attachment rate with increased distance of transport; and 2) detachment in the
absence of macroscopic perturbations. Elucidation of the contributing processes
will lead to improved understanding of the transport of biological and non-
biological colloids, and improved models for decision making in a number of
societal contexts including: protection of water resources from pathogens;
bioaugmentation; filtration for the purpose of drinking water treatment; and
maintenance of well dispersed flow and reaction during heap leaching operations
despite confounding effects from colloid mobilization. &lt;br/&gt; Three direct-
observation technologies will be utilized in the proposed
investigation:&lt;br/&gt;1. X-ray microtomography (XRMT) will be used for exact
characterization of the pore domain. Flow in the pore domain will be simulated
using a Lattice-Boltzmann algorithm to obtain the three-dimensional fluid
velocity field. A 3-D particle tracking model will be developed to simulate the
colloid transport in the three-dimensional flow field. Neutrally-buoyant
microspheres visible to XRMT will be utilized to allow in-situ characterization
of microsphere deposition locations within the pore domain using
XRMT.&lt;br/&gt;2. A simple shear flow cell will be combined with a total
internal reflection fluorescence microscope (Flow-TIRFM) to allow direct
observation of colloid attachment-detachment dynamics. This system will allow
direct determination of the relevance of detachment mechanisms such as
hydrodynamic collision and erosion, as well as determination of the effects of
asperities and rear stagnation points on the surface coverage attained by
attached colloids. &lt;br/&gt;3. Colloid-surface interaction and adhesion forces
will be measured directly using AFM with total internal reflection fluorescence
microscopy (TIRFM-AFM) to relate contact area to adhesion force. These
measurements will greatly increase the accuracy of interaction and adhesion
force estimations, thereby improving estimation of the barrier to attachment and
the resisting moment for detachment.&lt;br/&gt; The proposed project will
provide support for two graduate students, as well as partial support for a
post-doctoral researcher, two research professors, and the P.I.s. Undergraduate
researchers will be involved in the proposed work, and supplemental funding will
be pursued to further facilitate their involvement. Mentoring responsibilities
will extend to all levels below the rank of an individual. Hence, mentoring of
undergraduates will involve all superceding levels, from graduate student to
P.I.s. Women will be active at all ranks within the research group (post-doc,
graduate, and undergraduate). &lt;br/&gt;