* 0337962
* SGER:  The Determinants of Foreign Direct Investment Policies
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Elizabeth Asiedu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/2004
* USD 39,999.00

Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) has come to play an increasingly important role
in an increasingly globalized world economy, especially in developing countries,
where FDI has now become the main source of development capital. While most
countries have been offering assorted incentives to attract FDI, many countries
continue to impose restrictions on FDI. It is therefore important to understand
the factors that determine FDI policies. While there are many studies on the
determinants of FDI flows, there are virtually no studies on the determinants of
FDI policies. Yet it is important to understand why nations pursue different FDI
policies in order to evaluate the effectiveness of the
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of research on FDI the determinants of
FDI policies may be partly explained by lack of appropriate data. There is
virtually no cross-country time-series data on FDI policies that is currently
available to researchers. While there are a few sources of information about FDI
policies of specific countries, the information is mostly in descriptive form
and there is no comparability across countries. More important, one does not
have consistent data categorized by country, industry and year cells to allow
for proper identification of FDI polices on FDI flows and economic
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory research will construct a panel
data FDI policies for about 60 countries disaggregated by industry. The
methodology used to construct the data is innovative and research project is
risky. The project advances research on FDI by constructing a unique database of
quantifiable measures of FDI policies disaggregated by type of policy and by
industry. Such a database is not currently available. The comprehensive dataset
on FDI policies will be posted on the World Wide Web and made readily available
to other researchers. In addition, graduate students will benefit from the
research project through the use of the data and research experience.&lt;br/&gt;