* 0337933
* Collaborative Research:     Investigating Atmospheric Chemistry and Dynamics through Oxygen and Sulfur Isotopes in Volcanic Sulfate from South Pole Ice Cores
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Jihong Cole-Dai, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 05/31/2006
* USD 140,689.00

This award supports a collaborative study between South Dakota State University
(SDSU) and University of California, San Diego (UCSD) to investigate the oxygen
and sulfur isotope composition of sulfates from a number of large volcanic
eruptions in the past 1000 years. The project aims to drill a number of shallow
ice cores at South Pole and return them to SDSU and UCSD lab for chemical and
isotope analysis. Preliminary results from measurements of isotopes in sulfate
samples from several volcanic eruptions in Antarctic snow and ice indicate that
isotopic composition of volcanic sulfate contains abundant valuable information
on atmospheric chemical and dynamic processes that have not been previously
investigated. One tentative conclusion is that mass-independently fractionated
sulfur isotopes reveal that atmospheric photolysis of sulfur compounds occurs at
longer UV wavelengths than those in the Archean atmosphere, possibly reflecting
the atmospheric ozone and/or oxygen concentration. This suggests that isotopic
composition of atmospheric sulfate may be used to understand the role of UV
radiation in sulfur dioxide conversion in the atmosphere and to track the
evolution (i.e., oxygenation) of the atmosphere and the origin of life on Earth.
Other major research objectives include understanding what impact massive
volcanic eruptions have on the oxidative capacity of the atmosphere, what
oxidants and mechanisms are involved in the oxidation or conversion of volcanic
sulfur dioxide to sulfate in the stratosphere and what isotopic criteria may be
used to differentiate ice core signals of stratospheric eruptions from those of
tropospheric eruptions. By providing educational and research opportunities to
graduate and undergraduate students at both SDSU and UCSD, the proposed project
will promote the integration of research and education and contribute to human
resource development in science and engineering. The project will contribute to
a proposed REU chemistry site program at SDSU. This collaboration will utilize
the complementary strengths of both labs and promote exchange between the two
institutions. International collaboration will enhance scientific cooperation
between France and US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;