* 0337712
* Modeling the Geomagnetic Field on Million Year Time Scales
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2008
* Catherine Johnson, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 11/30/2008
* USD 484,180.00

The investigators will study long term secular variations of the geomagnetic
field using paleomagnetic data from lava flows and marine sediments. Such
studies reveal can reveal structures in the time-averaged geomagnetic field and
in its variability, which may reflect thermal or compositional geographical
heterogeneities on the core-mantle boundary. These heterogeneities may
ultimately control the nature of the geodynamo and provide important insight
into our understanding of deep-earth processes. Work on this project involves
compilation and analysis of large paleomagnetic datasets as well as theoretical
developments that will aid in their analysis. The investigators will study the
persistence of features in the time-averaged field for the past million years.
In addition they will extend global statistical models for paleosecular
variations to include anisotropy observed in existing datasets and temporal
covariance of a kind that mimics that seen in the power spectrum of
paleomagnetic data. They will develop time varying geomagnetic field models for
the past million years, and construct a power spectrum for paleomagnetic
intensity variations for time periods ranging from hundreds to millions of
years. These analyses will allow studies of physical processes that might give
rise geomagnetic secular variations on a few kyr to 100 kyr time
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work proposed deals with aspects of geomagnetic
field behavior that are intimately linked to deep Earth processes (core-mantle
interactions, inner core evolution and structure) and, more speculatively, to
the influence of orbital and rotational dynamics on the geodynamo. The proposed
research will have long-term impact for the magnetics community because the
investigators propose systematic electronic archiving of data sets, tools, and
products in a community database (MagIC). These will be of use to other
researchers in geo/paleomagnetism, and the products that will be archived
(images, models, movies) will be of particular use for general research and
educational purposes. The research proposed here will provide graduate education
and form the core of two PhD theses, as well as providing research experience to
undergraduates. Education and outreach efforts will include the development of
products to help support future teacher workshops run through the SIO
visualization center. The investigators also plan to work in tandem with science
teachers at High Tech High school where they are developing a seminar series
highlighting local research.