* 0337102
* Mesozoic Paleomagnetism in Adria and Africa: Solving a Persistent Puzzle in Alpine Tectonics
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* James Channell, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2008
* USD 198,632.00

The proposal is addressing the role of Adria (the continental lithosphere
encircled by the peri-Adriatic mountain belts) in the evolution of Alpine-
Mediterranean tectonics, which has been a subject of debate for over 30 years.
The "Adria problem" involves the idea that the Adrian microplate has behaved as
a promontory of the African plate. This idea has since been supported by
previously obtained paleomagnetic data from Adria, although the issue is
complicated by the thrust sheet rotation of sedimentary cover on Adria and by
the lack of adequate paleomagnetic data from Africa and Adria. A "cusp" or
"hairpin" in the Jurassic and Cretaceous apparent polar wander path (APWP) for
Adria (Channell, 1996) appears to fit with the recently published 'synthetic'
African APWP (Besse and Courtillot, 2002). The two APWPs are, however, not
sufficiently well defined to establish coherency or document offsets that would
imply relative rotation between Adria and Africa.

To resolve these issues, this study is providing paleomagnetic poles for the
critical Late Jurassic-Early Creteceous interval from both Adria and Africa.
Sampling sites on Adria (Italy) will allow the shape of the Late Jurassic-Early
Cretaceous APWP to be resolved. Comparison of these APWPs with those from
Gargano (believed to be unaffected by thrust sheet rotation) with allow the
amount of thrust sheet rotation elsewhere on Adria to be ascertained. Our study
is providing an Early Cretaceous APWP for NW Africa that can be precisely linked
to a polarity stratigraphy and hence to the geologic timescale. These data will
augment the very sparse African data for this time interval and provide a means
of comparison with the data from Adria and with the 'synthetic' African APWP of
Besse and Courtillot (2002). Intercalated basalts and hyaloclastites at the base
of the pelagic section on Maio provide a means of linking the polarity
stratigraphy to absolute argon-argon isotopic ages for much-needed timescale
calibration.

Our research will establish whether the stable autochthonous core of Adria has
rotated relative to Africa since Early Mesozoic. The question is critical to
Alpine tectonics, and hence to understanding the evolution of the Alpine belt.
The project is integrated into the learning experience at the University of
Florida, and students will participate in fieldwork laboratory acquisition of
data, and analysis of results.