* 0337891
* Developing Dry Extraction of Ice Core Gases and Application to Millennial-Scale Variability in Atmospheric CO2
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Edward Brook, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 05/31/2008
* USD 444,125.00

This award supports the development of a new laboratory capability in the U.S.
to measure CO2 in ice cores and investigate millennial-scale changes in CO2
during the last glacial period using samples from the Byrd and Siple Dome ice
cores. Both cores have precise relative chronologies based on correlation of
methane and the isotopic composition of atmospheric oxygen with counterpart
records from Greenland ice cores. The proposed work will therefore allow
comparison of the timing of CO2 change, Antarctic temperature change, and
Greenland temperature change on common time scales. Such comparisons are vital
for evaluating models that explain changes in atmospheric CO2. The techniques
being developed will also be available for future projects, specifically the
proposed Inland WAIS ice core, for which a highly detailed CO2 record is a major
objective, and studies greenhouse and other atmospheric gases and their isotopic
composition for which dry extraction is necessary (stable isotopes in CO2, for
example). There are many broad impacts of the proposed work. Ice core greenhouse
gas records are central contributions of paleoclimatology to research and
policy-making concerning global change. The proposed work will enhance those
contributions by improving our understanding of the natural cycling of the most
important greenhouse gas. It will contribute to the training of a postdoctoral
researcher, who will be an integral part of an established research group and
benefit from the diverse paleoclimate and geochemistry community at OSU. The PI
teaches major and non-major undergraduate and graduate courses on climate and
global change. The proposed work will enrich those courses and the courses will
provide an opportunity for the postdoctoral researcher to participate in
teaching by giving guest lectures. The PI also participates in a summer climate
workshop for high school teachers at Washington State University and the
proposed work will enrich that contribution. The extraction device that is built
and the expertise gained in using it will be resources for the ice core
community and available for future projects. Data will be made available through
established national data center and the equipment designs will also be made
available to other researchers.

