* 0337703
* RUI/ROLE: Invigorating The Early Undergraduate Mathematics Experience: Understanding Linkages Between Social and Cognitive Aspects of Students&amp;#8217; Transition To Mathematical
* EHR,DRL
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2008
* Maria Blanton, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 11/30/2008
* USD 613,451.00

This project will investigate the development of students' understanding of
proof during the undergraduate experience. It will include first a broad
analysis of undergraduate students' conceptions of proof in diverse academic
settings followed by a design study to examine social and cognitive aspects of
undergraduate students' transition to mathematical proof during the early part
of their mathematics course sequence. The stages of internalization of
mathematical proof through which students progress, as well as the role of
symbolic, visual, and discursive psychological tools in this process will be
examined. As part of this work, a series of classroom-grounded case studies will
be developed to identify pedagogical and curricular strategies that can support
the learning of mathematical proof and that can be transported into other
mathematics programs in typical universities. Faculty resources will be drawn
upon to restructure content, pedagogy, and assessment practices in early
coursework so that opportunities for mathematical proof are integrated in ways
that are viable and instructive. The faculty professional development that
occurs through this collaboration will also be examined. Both qualitative and
quantitative methodologies will be used to trace student learning of
mathematical proof and the effect of the proposed innovations on faculty
practice. A national research collaborative will be developed to share and
expand on an emerging knowledge base about mathematical proof across grades
K-16. This collaborative will be used to identify and pursue further areas of
research needed to build a coherent and connected story of mathematical proof
across elementary, secondary, and tertiary grade levels. The proposed work will
open new avenues in the learning and teaching of mathematical proof in early
undergraduate mathematics, which resonate with overall progressive trends in the
mathematics and mathematics education community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;