* 0337853
* Measurement of Light Extinction and Scattering by Aerosols for Deriving the Wavelength and Humidity Dependence of Absorption and Single Scatter Albedo
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2007
* David Covert, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2007
* USD 534,662.00

The goal of this project is to make in situ measurements of the light absorption
coefficient for ambient aerosols as a function of relative humidity (RH) by
measuring the difference between the coefficients of light extinction and light
scattering. Measurements will be made at three wavelengths in the visible range
(ca. 450, 550 and 700 nm) and over a range of relative humidities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A three-wavelength optical extinction cell capable of
measuring the extinction coefficient of ambient aerosol particles for use in
integrated field experiments will be developed, based on an existing prototype.
An integrating nephelometer will provide the light scattering coefficient. A
humidity control system will be incorporated with a second optical extinction
cell and the nephelometer. A complete system consisting of extinction cells,
integrating nephelometers, filter-based absorption photometers and necessary
supporting equipment for RH control, data acquisition, etc. will be assembled
and tested. Subsequently, field measurements will be carried out at three field
sites selected to have significant light absorbing carbon concentration and
fraction in the aerosol. The sites tentatively selected are: Seattle, WA,
Bondville, IL, and a site in Thailand. At the latter two sites the investigators
will collaborate with larger, intensive field campaigns to take advantage of the
physical, chemical and optical aerosol measurements made by other research
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By gathering detailed in situ data on "black
carbon"-containing aerosols, this work will provide more accurate information on
the optical properties of these very important aerosols. These data are needed
for models of the radiation budget of the earth-atmosphere system. The research
will be integrated with teaching and outreach activities at the University of
Washington and the Joint Institute for the Study of the Atmosphere and Oceans. A
post- doctoral scientist will be supported through this project.