* 0337595
* Knowing Mathematics for Teaching Algebra
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Sharon Senk, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 05/31/2008
* USD 1,745,640.00

Concerns about the quality of the mathematics achievement of K-12 students in
the United States continue to dominate national dialogue in the academic and
popular press. Students' performance in algebra is particularly worrisome, and
this may be due in part to lack of appropriate teacher knowledge. The RAND
Mathematics Study Panel (2003) notes the need for: clarification of the
knowledge demands of teaching, tools for assessing mathematical knowledge for
teaching across grade levels and mathematical domains, and deeper understanding
of the ways in which prospective and practicing teachers have opportunities to
acquire this kind of knowledge; they also single out algebra as a key area.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Consequently, the proposed research project has three
main objectives: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1. Instrument Design: To develop items
and design reliable and valid instruments to measure knowledge in large scale
settings for teaching algebra among pre-service and in-service secondary school
mathematics teachers. &lt;br/&gt;2. Framework Validation: To produce an
empirically validated and comprehensive framework for knowledge for teaching
algebra. &lt;br/&gt;3. Status Study of Teacher Knowledge. To study the status
and variation of knowledge for teaching algebra among pre-service and in-service
teachers drawn from across the nation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;An
interdisciplinary MSU-based research team with collective expertise in
mathematics, mathematics education, research design, psychometric analysis, and
secondary school mathematics teaching and curriculum will lead the project, with
the support of research collaborators around the country, a national advisory
board, and item writers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit of the
proposed activity: The study will contribute an empirically validated and
comprehensive framework for knowledge for teaching algebra at the secondary
school level, together with items and assessment instruments to measure this
knowledge in large-scale settings. The result will be clarification and
description of teacher knowledge in a crucial and problematic area of the K-12
mathematics curriculum. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts resulting from
proposed activity: The items and assessment tools developed here will be of
value for teacher educators, mathematicians who prepare teachers, designers of
professional development, and evaluators interested in teacher learning in the
area of algebra. Ultimately this work could have substantial impact on the
improvement of secondary school algebra teaching and learning. &lt;br/&gt;