* 0337277
* Improved Estimation of Evapotranspiration and Recharge from a Dynamic SVAT Model through Assimilation of Microwave Brightness
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Wendy Graham, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 02/28/2010
* USD 401,000.00

0337277 &lt;br/&gt;Judge&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate knowledge of energy and
moisture fluxes at the land-atmosphere and at the vadose-saturated zone
interfaces is essential for realistic predictions of atmospheric, hydrologic,
and crop growth processes. These coupled processes are typically predicted using
Soil-Vegetation-Atmosphere-Transfer (SVAT) models. SVAT models have become
increasingly sophisticated over the past decade, with biophysically based
parameterizations of the land-surface processes. However, even if the biophysics
of the system is well-captured by these models, their flux estimates will
diverge from reality over time due to lack of proper initial conditions and
accumulation of parameterization and computational errors. Because moisture in
the root-zone is arguably the most important factor governing the fluxes, a
promising way to improve model performance is to assimilate remotely sensed
observations that are sensitive to soil moisture. Microwave brightness
observations at less than 10 GHz are sensitive to soil moisture in the upper 5
cm for vegetated surfaces with significant biomass. This surface soil moisture
is linked to the deeper vadose zone moisture through the SVAT model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose to improve evapotranspiration (ET) and
recharge estimates by assimilating microwave observations into a dynamic SVAT
model. Toward this, a coupled SVAT-Microwave Brightness (MB) model will be
developed for the full growing season of cotton grown in north-central Florida.
This dynamic SVAT-MB model will be calibrated/validated with observations from a
field experiment for one growing season. Microwave observations from a second
growing season will be assimilated in the model to improve ET and recharge
estimates.&lt;br/&gt;