* 0337697
* Collaborative Research:  Anisotropy and Mantle Flow beneath Japan from Seismological Observatioans and Geodynamical Modeling
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Bradford Hager, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2006
* USD 214,625.00

Proper characterization of elastic anisotropy can help understand the causes,
mechanisms, and consequences of tectonic deformation in the upper mantle and in
other regions of the Earth's deep interior and beneath regions of active
tectonics. Unfortunately, our understanding of seismic anisotropy is still
unsatisfactory and interpretation of seismological diagnostics of anisotropy
(such as shear wave birefringence) is often ambiguous. Gaining full
understanding of seismic anisotropy and flow beneath complex tectonic regions
has, therefore, remained an outstanding challenge of modern seismology and
geodynamics. In collaboration with colleagues in France, scientists from MIT and
Colorado School of Mines propose to meet this challenge through the explicit
integration of powerful data sets and forward and inverse modeling tools. In
particular, they aim to improve the understanding of 3-D seismic anisotropy and
tectonic deformation in the upper mantle near subduction zones, which are
tectonic regions that are of particular societal interest because of their
association with significant volcanic and seismic hazard. They will focus on
Japan, where geophysical instrumentation is dense because of the need for the
continuous monitoring of seismic and volcanic activity.

Data from these dense networks can be obtained through the internet, thanks to
scientists in Japan, and the MIT-CSM team has already assembled a large data set
from 64 broadband seismic stations. Through examination of ~12,000 individual
seismograms, they compiled a database of ~1330 high-quality shear wave splitting
measurements for S, SKS/SKKS, and ScS, and more will be added later. They
propose to improve the quantitative interpretation of the splitting maps by
combining two complementary approaches. First, they wish to extend their
numerical modeling of upper mantle flow from 2.5 to 3-D, incorporating
(evolving) velocity boundary conditions and realistic geometries and rheologies.
Second, they plan to develop a novel technique for tomographic inversion of the
observed shear wave polarizations and split times. The flow models will be used
to design the parameterization and regularization of the inversion, and, in
turn, the seismic imaging results will be used to update the flow models. Such
an explicitly cross-disciplinary approach will not only yield new insight into
the 3-D anisotropy and flow field beneath Japan. Indeed, the powerful new tools
and concepts for data analysis, modeling, and interpretation can also be applied
to data from such new initiatives as USArray/Earthscope.