* 0337549
* Collaborative Research:  High Sample-Rate GPS - A New Tool for Earthquake Studies/University of Colorado, University of Memphis, and Purdue University
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Jennifer Haase, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2006
* USD 64,388.00

Collaborative Research: High Sample-Rate GPS: A New Tool for Earthquake
Studies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding fault rupture during major
earthquakes, and the resulting ground motions, is limited by our observational
capabilities. Observations of very large amplitude seismic waves, especially
direct measurements of displacement, would make a significant improvement in
constraining the size of dynamic strains that trigger remote seismicity and in
revealing details of the source rupture process. For example, accelerometers
capture the details of strong ground shaking near the source, but it is
difficult to convert the acceleration measurements unambiguously to displacement
which is required for determining the source time history. Broad-band
seismometers are more sensitive, and have better resolution of ground motion,
but frequently clip, saturate, or become non-linear even at great distances from
a large earthquake. Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR)
observations can produce spatially rich images of some components of surface
displacement surrounding a rupture, but InSAR fails in many regions and has no
temporal resolution to resolve dynamic phenomena. Global Positioning System
(GPS) geodetic measurements have been important for resolving static offsets,
but are usually sampled at such a low rate that resolving details of the rupture
process was not frequently attempted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new technique has
been developed for using high-rate measurements from GPS to measure seismic
waves generated by large earthquakes. This project specifically exploits high-
rate GPS measurements to improve our understanding of the rupture process of the
Mw 7.9 Denali Fault earthquake of 3 November 2002. The first phase of this
project assesses the technical issues relating to the reliability and utility of
these new GPS observations. In the second phase, the resulting data are used to
complement existing seismic data: (1) to better understand the ground motions
from the Denali earthquake that triggered earthquakes remotely, and (2) to use
the surface waves at far-regional distances to validate rupture models of the
Denali Fault earthquake mainshock. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed
here has several potential societal benefits: (1) The increased understanding of
stress levels required to trigger earthquakes will contribute to earthquake
prediction efforts which has long term benefits to public safety; (2) GPS
constraints on strong motion displacements will have a significant impact in the
earthquake engineering community by increasing the amount of data available, and
addressing the very problematic aspect of recovering reliable displacement
records from accelerometers. This will have impacts on public safety through
better understanding of building response and building safety; (3) The high-rate
GPS methodology will benefit a larger community of GPS users by increasing the
accuracy and efficiency of high-rate GPS data analysis. The results will also
impact the infrastructure for research and education by influencing, for
example, the design and implementation of GPS monitoring within the Plate
Boundary Observatory component of the NSF Earthscope
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;