* 0337808
* An Educational Strategic Plan for the George E. Brown Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2003,06/30/2008
* Thalia Anagnos, NEES Consortium, Inc.
* Continuing grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2008
* USD 179,996.00

The award provides funding to the NEES Consortium, Inc., to develop a strategic
plan for education, outreach, training, and assessment activities for the George
E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES). NEES is an
NSF-funded Major Research Equipment and Facilities Construction (MREFC) project
under construction during FY 2000 - FY 2004. When completed by September 30,
2004, NEES will be national, networked simulation resource of 15 geographically-
distributed, shared use next-generation experimental research equipment sites,
with teleobservation and teleoperation capabilities, to advance earthquake
engineering research and education through collaborative and integrated
experimentation, computation, theory, databases, and model-based simulation and
to improve the seismic design and performance of U.S. civil and mechanical
infrastructure systems. NEES research equipment includes shake tables,
geotechnical centrifuges, a tsunami wave basin, large-scale laboratory
experimentation systems, and mobile and permanently installed field equipment,
networked together through the high performance Internet. The NEES network will
also provide a curated repository for experimental and analytical earthquake
engineering and related data, collaborative tools, and a simulation tools
repository. During FY 2005 - FY 2014, the NEES infrastructure will be operated
by the NEES Consortium, Inc. This project addresses a void in the current NEES
MREFC project. The NEES MREFC scope does not include the development of a
comprehensive plan for education and outreach to broaden the use of NEES when it
opens for ten-year operation for research and education starting in FY 2005. To
develop the NEES strategic education plan, this project will (1) finalize the
NEES mission and goals for education, outreach and training, (2) review the
education and outreach plans of other organizations, (3) review education,
outreach, and training ideas and plans already proposed in NEES Consortium
Development workshops, (4) review relevant literature on the effective uses of
technology in K-16 SMET education, (5) convene three workshops to address needs,
priorities, programs, and gaps in an evolving NEES educational plan for K-12,
undergraduate, graduate, and informal education, (6) identify technology and
tools to support educational products and dissemination, (7) develop an
assessment plan for NEES educational activities, and (8) finalize the strategic
education plan after input on the draft plan from the broad earthquake
engineering community. This project includes subawards to San Jose State
University, Louisiana State University, the University of Oklahoma, and IRIS.
Information about project activities, as well as the final strategic education
plan, will be available at www.nees.org.