* 0337376
* Dynamics of Slab Detachment
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Magali Billen, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2008
* USD 157,209.00

This project is the first to explore slab detachment using fully-dynamic,
numerical models of thermal convection, (in 2-D and 3-D spherical geometry),
capable of treating both the process of detachment and its geological
expression.Slab detachment (or break-off) may occur in subduction zones
following an event such as continent or ridge collision with the trench, which
prevents the existing slab from effectively pulling the unsubducted lithosphere
into the mantle. However, even the most basic aspects of deformation
&lt;br/&gt;accompanying slab detachment are not understood: for example, does
the location detachment&lt;br/&gt;initiates in the slab (top or bottom surface)
influence the resulting &lt;br/&gt;deformation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The slab
detachment process provides a unique opportunity to place constraints on the
upper mantle viscosity structure, one important aspect of understanding the
rheologic controls on mantle convection and plate tectonics. The main focus of
the project is to characterize the dependence of slab detachment dynamics on
the&lt;br/&gt;rheologic structure of the lithosphere, slab and upper mantle,
including the importance of lateral changes in lithospheric/slab structure due
to age, composition, subduction velocity and geometry. Broad 2-D modelling
&lt;br/&gt;will be followed by 3-D models designed to explore the Miocene slab
detachment event &lt;br/&gt;in southern Baja
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 3-D models focused on the Baja
California/western Mexico region are complementary to the current NARS-Baja
seismic experiment (funded through the MARGINS program), which will provide the
data for high resolution seismic tomographic images, possibly illuminating the
shallow Farallon slab, and anisotropy&lt;br/&gt;measurements providing
constraints on regional flow in the mantle. In addition, this award will provide
a graduate student with the experience and background necessary to participate
in multi-disciplinary research by teaching both geodynamic modelling methods and
the tectonic and geophysical implications of a variety of&lt;br/&gt;geological
observations.&lt;br/&gt;