* 0337338
* X-Ray Spectroscopic Studies of the Structure of Rare Earth Element Aqueous Ion Complexes under Hydrothermal Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Robert Mayanovic, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2006
* USD 116,881.00

A detailed understanding of the interaction of rare earth element (REE) ions
with ligands common in crustal fluids (H2O, Cl-, F-, OH- and others), covering a
range of pressures and temperatures representative of hydrothermal conditions,
is presently lacking. Such knowledge is critical for a full assessment of the
degree of association of ligands with REE cations and of the stability of the
resultant aqueous ion complexes, which play a direct role in the transport,
fractionation, and mineralization of REE in deposits of hydrothermal origin. Our
lack of understanding of such geologic processes is in large measure due to
insufficient experimental data on the structure and bonding properties of
aqueous REE complexes in hydrothermal solutions, covering a broad range of
temperatures and pressures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
experimental investigations of the structure properties of REE bearing aqueous
solutions under hydrothermal conditions using the synchrotron x-ray absorption
fine structure (XAFS) technique and the hydrothermal diamond anvil cell. The
structure and related properties of REE aquo ion and chloro complexes will be
determined from a detailed analysis of the XAFS spectra measured from REE
bearing hydrothermal solutions at temperatures up to 500 degrees C and pressures
up to 1 GPa. A systematic study of the effects of uniform trivalent charge,
decreasing ionic radius with increasing atomic number, and possibly of 4f
electron shell filling across a significant portion of the series on the
structure of REE aquo and chloro complexes will be accomplished. The results
will serve to test established thermodynamic calculations of the stability of
REE aqueous ion complexes and as a basis for future modeling of REE in
hydrothermal solutions. Because of similar chemistry, it is anticipated that the
results from this project will be used to address issues of fate and transport
of actinides in radioactive waste repositories. This project includes the
scientific training of students within synchrotron facilities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;