* 0337156
* Acquisition of a Combined Micro-Raman Spectroscopy and Laser Heating System for In Situ High Pressure and High Temperature Studies
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2006
* Sang-Heon Shim, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2006
* USD 185,244.00

EAR-0337156&lt;br/&gt;Shim&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partial support is requested to
install a dispersive-Raman spectroscopy and a laser heating system for in-situ
high pressure and temperature measurements using the diamond-anvil cells at MIT.
This is the first part of the PI's long term plan to build a spectroscopy system
which enables to measure Raman spectra of minerals at in-situ high pressure and
temperature. The system will enable to perform in situ determination of phase
diagrams and thermodynamic properties of materials in laboratory, which has been
only possible in third generation synchrotron sources. Major technical advances
in the system are in (1) reducing the detection of thermal radiations from the
sample at high temperature, (2) temperature measurements using the intensity and
frequency of the Stokes and anti-Stokes of phonon modes, and (3) reducing the
background from the fluorescence of the sample. This proposal is independent of
any COMPRES funded work and the primary purpose of this proposal is to allow the
PI, who is in his early career as a junior faculty, to set up a high pressure
lab at MIT in order to produce high-quality scientific results and train
students at MIT. The existing research groups at MIT will also benefit from this
micro-analysis and Raman-imaging technology. As the PI has been successfully
collaborating with different groups, the facility will be open to students and
researchers in the New England area where large user facilities are relatively
distant. Considering that MIT is located in the area where many undergraduate
institutes are densely populated and this facility will be only high-pressure
mineral physics lab in the New England area, the facility is expected to provide
research opportunities in experimental geophysics to many undergraduate students
in the area and this will be particularly important to attract next generation
researchers for mineral physics community. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;