* 0337775
* Kinematic Linkages Among Extrusion, Fold-thrust Shortening, and Foreland Basin Evolution During Early Continental Collision, Zagros Mountains, Iran
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Gary Axen, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 01/31/2009
* USD 387,621.00

The principal investigators of this study are conducting a three-year study of
the geologic history of the Zagros fold-thrust belt and adjacent High Zagros.
The goal is to determine the relative roles and interactions of (1) a
seismogenic, crustal-scale, dextral fault (the Main Recent Fault) and (2) the
thin-skinned fold-thrust belt during deformation related to the Arabian tectonic
plate converging with the Eurasian plate. Ongoing research suggests, contrary to
previous studies, that these two structural elements may form a kinematically
linked system and were active contemporaneously for a significant period of time
during the plate collision over the last approximately 10-20 million
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Eurasian-Arabian continental collision is the
world's youngest and provides opportunities to study early structural processes
that are strongly overprinted in older collisional mountain belts such as the
Alps, Himalaya, and Appalachians. A temporal record of fold-thrust deformation
resides within the extensive, superbly exposed foreland-basin deposits of the
Zagros, including crosscutting structures, overlapping strain markers, and
sediments deposited synchronously with faulting and folding. The project employs
stratigraphic and structural analysis, and includes significant new field data
collection, isotopic age dating to determine the low-temperature thermal history
of key rock units, and magnetic methods applied to dating sedimentary
strata.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research on the Zagros system of Iran is
improving understanding of tectonic processes in early continent-continent
collision by characterizing the sequence of deformational, depositional,
erosional, and magmatic episodes during early collision and providing strong
timing constraints on their rates of development. The study is also addressing
the general question of how the age of onset of continental collision is
determined from the geologic record of more evolved and more complex collisional
mountain belts. &lt;br/&gt;