* 0337747
* Collaborative Research: Deposition of Carbon on Newly-Formed Fracture Surfaces and Its Influence on Deformation and Electrical Properties of Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2006
* Andreas Kronenberg, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 11/30/2006
* USD 88,986.00

Crack surfaces in otherwise carbon-free crystalline rocks are usually coated
with thin films of carbonaceous material. Detailed studies have shown that these
films determine, at least in some instances, bulk rock electrical conductivity.
In addition, experiments indicate that as rocks fracture in the presence of
carbonaceous vapor, their electrical conductivity increases. During fracture
generation, an adsorbed layer, initially only monolayers thick, rapidly forms on
new surfaces. This layer presumably grows with time and may potentially alter
physical properties. These observations raise questions of how carbon films form
and under what conditions they grow, and influence mechanical and electrical
properties of rocks. These questions are particularly relevant to understanding
what happens as rocks dilate in the time leading up to catastrophic failure
along a fault, and thus to the possibility that changes in conductivity induced
by reactions of fluids and new fracture surfaces could lead to earthquake
precursory electrical phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;For this project, the investigators
are conducting an interdisciplinary study of the interaction between carbon-
bearing fluids and mineral surfaces under conditions relevant to earthquake
nucleation in the crust. The experiments are designed to answer the following
questions. (1) What is the nature and thickness of the carbonaceous layer
deposited on new mineral fracture surfaces formed during deformation in the
presence of carbonaceous gases under conditions of the shallow crust? (2) Does
the deposition of carbonaceous films affect deformation? (3) Does the deposition
influence time-dependent strength evolution? (4) Does the deposition affect
electrical conductivity? (5) Is there a fundamental difference in deposition and
how it influences rock physical properties for different fluid
compositions?&lt;br/&gt;The study consists of a progressive series of
experiments involving deformation of single crystals of quartz, plagioclase, and
hornblende in a variable strain rate, screw-driven, triaxial compression
apparatus. The experimental setup is substantially improved over those of
previous studies, including a specially designed cell to monitor electrical
resistivity during sample deformation. Samples are deformed in the presence of
several types of fluids such as (1) pure carbon-dioxide as well as graphite-
saturated mixtures of (2) carbon-dioxide and carbon-monoxide, and (3) carbon
dioxide and methane. Thus, the experiments identify the optimal conditions for
the formation and characterization of carbonaceous films on mineral fractures.
During experiments, samples that are subjected to constant axial loading rates
exhibit an initial phase of elastic deformation followed by yielding and
macroscopic failure. The correlation between deformation state and resistivity
is explored by curtailing experiments at various points along the macroscopic
failure curve. Further, the interplay between carbon deposition and the time-
dependent evolution of mechanical strength and resistivity is explored through
stress-relaxation experiments performed at stress levels lower than those that
lead to macroscopic failure.&lt;br/&gt;The microfracture distribution in the
experimental products are determined by electron microscopy and the carbonaceous
films characterized by electron microprobe and time-of-flight secondary ion mass
spectroscopy. Post-experiment samples are cut and polished in axial sections and
the distribution of carbonaceous phases on these surfaces are mapped by electron
probe. The time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy is used to analyze the
several upper monolayers of a surface to search for miniscule quantities of
carbon because. The carbon and microfracture maps are then correlated to the
resistivity and stress measurements obtained from the deformation experiments.