* 0338644
* Pathways to STEM Careers
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* C. Dianne Martin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 09/30/2005
* USD 300,027.00

Pathways to STEM Careers: Preparing the STEM Workforce of the 21st
Century&lt;br/&gt; Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support is requested to
organize and conduct an NSF-sponsored Workforce E-Forum followed by a two-day
workshop to explore the existing knowledge base on STEM workforce issues with
the goal of setting research priorities for the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project's intellectual merit lies
in its multimodal and inclusive approach of building on previous research to
gather information, promote interdisciplinary discussion, and set a strategic
research agenda. A major component of the workshop will be a discussion of
existing research findings and programs related to workforce issues. The
workshop seeks to identify topics for research on the STEM workforce that have
the potential to inform collaborations that address integrative approaches in
program design. A significant contribution will be in the identification of
critical research gaps on the workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
The project's broader impact will be realized through the establishment of a
national research agenda that will eventually result in a rich and diverse
technical workforce strengthened by broader participation of US citizens. The
workshop is expected to identify and propose strategies and funding mechanisms
that will propel more U.S. citizens and underrepresented group members (women,
persons with disabilities, African Americans, American Indians, and Hispanic
Americans) not only into the STEM workforce, but also into leadership positions,
thus contributing to achieving the broader goal of strengthening scientific,
technical and economic capabilities. This will enable the US economy to continue
to lead the world in innovation and to increase opportunities for all US
citizens to participate in economic prosperity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attendees
will include a diverse group of workforce leaders from the research community,
educational institutions, and a variety of employment sectors described in the
body of the proposal. Workshop outcomes are expected to include a summary report
that contains a set of recommendations to establish strategic research areas and
education funding priorities for the Workforce of the 21st Century program
announcement. In addition, the report will include recommendations for
evaluation methodologies and criteria as well as suggest metrics to measure the
success of future programs. Findings from the report will be disseminated
through a workshop website as well as through presentations at international
scientific conferences and meetings as well as at national workforce policy
summits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;