* 0338764
* Travel Time Route Reliability
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,04/30/2005
* Lily-Ageliki Elefteriadou, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 04/30/2005
* USD 150,000.00

The goal of this research is to develop models that provide travel time
reliability estimates for a given route as a function of the probability of
breakdown at each segment of the route. The final product will be models to
estimate the probability that the travel time between O and D will be between X
and Y seconds, as a function of the demands (assumed to be given) within the
route. The objectives of the project are to:&lt;br/&gt;a) Develop probability of
breakdown distributions for various freeway segment types (such as merge
junctions, diverge junctions, etc.)&lt;br/&gt;b) Obtain travel time
distributions for each segment as a function of the probability of breakdown at
that segment. &lt;br/&gt;c) Obtain travel time reliability models for the route,
as a function of the probability of breakdown at each of its segments,
considering the temporal and spatial interactions between segments. These
interactions will be modeled using stochastic processes techniques. Route choice
modeling is outside the scope of this project; demand is an input to the models
developed.&lt;br/&gt;d) Enhance the educational experience of students in the
two engineering departments represented in the research team: civil engineering
and industrial engineering. This will be accomplished by developing joint case
studies and projects based on the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will provide tools for improving the congestion management and highway
performance monitoring functions of transportation agencies. It will result in
better understanding the process of congestion occurrence on a route, and the
findings will assist transportation practitioners in reducing the probability of
breakdown (and congestion) and in improving traffic operations. The research and
educational activities of the project will provide opportunities for
interdisciplinary collaboration of both faculty and students in the areas of
operations research, reliability and transportation. The project will also
provide opportunities for interdisciplinary research and involvement with
practitioners from the Philadelphia Traffic Management Center (TMC), which will
provide data for this project. Increased interactions between the Philadelphia
TMC staff and the Penn State faculty and students will benefit both
organizations as they exchange knowledge in the state-of-the-practice and state-
of-the-art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology developed in this project can
ultimately be used in the planning and design of work-zones, operations during
special events (such as concerts, athletic events, etc.), and in developing
emergency evacuation plans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;