* 0338341
* Missouri Science Teaching and Education Partnerships (MO-STEP)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Bette Loiselle, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2008
* USD 1,666,972.00

Title of Project: Missouri Science Teaching and Education Partnerships (MO-STEP)
(Track1). &lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Missouri-St. Louis.
&lt;br/&gt;PI and Co-PIs: Patricia Parker (PI), Charles Granger, Bette Loiselle,
Patrick Osborne. &lt;br/&gt;Number of fellows per year: Ten graduate fellows,
five undergraduate fellows. &lt;br/&gt;School District Partners: Florissant-
Ferguson, Normandy, Maplewood-Richmond Heights, &lt;br/&gt;Pattonville,
Wellston. &lt;br/&gt;Target audience of the project: Grades 9-12.
&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Urban. &lt;br/&gt;NSF supported disciplines involved:
Biology, Science Education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Background: The Missouri Science
Teaching and Education Partnerships (MO-STEP) combines the academic strengths of
the Department of Biology, the International Center for Tropical Ecology and the
pedagogical background of the Science Education Program at UM-St. Louis in a
tightly-coupled collaboration with five urban high schools located near the
University and with conservation-focused organizations within St.
Louis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The intellectual merit of MO-
STEP lies in provision of current information and practical, cutting-edge
applications that link ecology, conservation biology and molecular genetics.
Through close ties with the Missouri Botanical Garden, Saint Louis Zoo, Forest
Park Forever and the St. Louis Aquacenter, MO-STEP facilitates opportunities for
field trips and summer internships that provide hands-on experience in
systematics, ecology and biodiversity conservation. MO-STEP is grounded in two
concepts: (1) good teaching requires a sound discipline knowledge base and (2)
good teaching strategies are critical to teaching and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: MO-STEP facilitates the
professional development of a collaborative team of university and high school
faculty working to improve science education at grades 9 though 16. Three
historic barriers to school-university partnerships are (1) unwillingness of
high school faculty to seek information from university faculty; (2) university
faculty's lack of understanding of the needs of high school science teachers;
and (3) low prestige of science education as career choice in science graduate
programs. MO-STEP replaces this culture with close professional associations
that encourage long-term partnerships. Strong support of high school science
instruction encourages high school faculty to continue the collaborative
relationship while expanding graduate career opportunities. The Biology Graduate
Program at the University of Missouri-St. Louis has successfully recruited
students from diverse cultural backgrounds and the program is well positioned to
increase participation of under-represented groups. The schools targeted for
participation include a high percentage of students from groups currently
underrepresented in STEM fields This project is receiving partial support from
the Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;