* 0338141
* Collaborative Research:  Chronology of Ice Fluctuations in the South Shetland Islands Since the Last Glacial Maximum
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* John Stone, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Julie Palais
* 05/31/2007
* USD 83,863.00

This award supports a study of the timing of climate changes in the Southern
Hemisphere with the goal of reconstructing former ice extent and fluctuations,
as well as paleoclimate, along the key latitudinal transect from temperate
Tierra del Fuego to the polar Antarctic Peninsula. Samples already in hand will
allow the dating of ice fluctuations in the South Shetland Islands (SSI), a
critical location where that transect crosses the Antarctic Convergence.
Surprisingly little concrete evidence exists concerning former ice extent in the
island chain. The results of this study will answer a number of basic questions
regarding ice extent and the timing of subsequent deglaciation in the Antarctic
Peninsula. A cosmogenic exposure-age chronology will be produced from samples
collected at carefully selected moraines on King George and Livingston Islands.
A preliminary age of 18,000 years for a large granodiorite boulder from the
outer moraine at Marian Cove suggests that the moraine may represent the Last
Glacial Maximum (LGM) ice position. These data point to the potential for
developing a ~20,000-yr record of ice fluctuations in the SSI, something that
has not been achieved previously. Such data could be used not only to settle the
long-standing debate over LGM ice extent in the SSI, but also would be valuable
in assessing the global synchrony of large climate changes. Both a graduate and
undergraduate student will be involved. This work builds on the recent success
in dating glacial deposits in the Antarctic as young as 300 years using
Beryllium-10 (10Be), as well as on an unexpected opportunity to map moraines and
collect exposure-age samples in the SSI in 2002/2003. This research will produce
a new understanding of the timing of ice fluctuations in the SSI, the extent and
thickness of former ice cover, and may allow the development of a glacial
chronology extending from the LGM to the late Holocene. This work will also
provide a basis for inter-hemispheric comparisons of climate change and fits
within the constraints of the Pole-Equator-Pole (PEP 1) transect to develop
high-resolution, well-dated paleoclimate records in the Americas and Antarctic
Peninsula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;