* 0338202
* Track 2, GK-12:  Project Fulcrum: Phase II
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2011
* Roger Kirby, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 06/30/2011
* USD 1,987,732.00

Title of Project: Track 2, GK-12: Project Fulcrum Phase 2&lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL)&lt;br/&gt;PIs/co-PIs: Diandra Leslie-
Pelecky , Gayle Buck, Barbara Jacobson, Roger Kirby, Suzanne
Kirby&lt;br/&gt;Number of Fellows/year: Graduate: 9 yr 1, 8 yr 2&amp;3, 5 yr 4
&amp;5; Undergraduate: 4&lt;br/&gt;School District Partner: Lincoln Public
Schools (LPS)&lt;br/&gt;Target Audience: Middle and Upper Elementary Level
(grades 4-8)&lt;br/&gt;Setting: Urban&lt;br/&gt;NSF supported disciplines:
biometry, chemistry, computer science, geosciences, mathematics/statistics,
materials science, and physics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Narrative Description:
Each Project Fulcrum (PF) Graduate Fellow partners with a Lead teacher who
facilitates the Fellow becoming a school-wide resource. Fellow activities
include modeling the scientific method, developing materials to increase inquiry
experiences for students, building links between the university, teachers and
schools, facilitating role-model activities and serving as content resources.
Undergraduates work with Graduate Fellows to develop after-school math and
science activities for at-risk students. A summer preparation program uses case
study and team-building exercises to establish and strengthen partnerships.
Continuing support consists of weekly group meetings of teachers and Fellows and
monthly All-Hands meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: A realistic
model for how research universities can support the participation of STEM
faculty in K-12 education is developed. Project Fulcrum activities are
institutionalized as part of a comprehensive infrastructure for science and math
education. Strategies for institutionalization include adapting Project Fulcrum
outcomes and materials to other education projects through the Center for Math,
Science and Computer Education, STEM departments supporting Fellows through
graduate teaching assistantships, continuing support and expansion of a web-
based resource database, UNL institutionalization of professional development
seminars for graduate students, and the development and institutionalization of
in-service workshops for LPS teachers. Evaluation uses a web database to collect
data from participants, including journals, observations, pre- and post-surveys
and activity logs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Phase II builds upon
Phase I improvements in the learning attitudes and efficacies of English
Language Learners, low socio-economic status students and underrepresented
minorities, and extends efforts to behavior- and learning- disabled students.
Strategies proven effective in classes with multiple at-risk groups are
disseminated through workshops and publications. The effects of Fellows on
student stereotypes of scientists are evaluated with an emphasis on students
from underrepresented groups. District-wide in-service workshops, informed by
these results, are developed to address student attitudes toward science and
math, and how to provide students with a diverse range of role
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of Track I: Fellows unanimously
indicate that they intend to continue involvement with K-12 education. There is
greatly increased demand from teachers to work with Fellows. The relationship
between the University and Lincoln Public Schools has been considerably
strengthened and new collaborations to enhance teacher professional development
activities are beginning. Teachers appreciate being part of a professional
community focusing on math and science teaching. A cadre of scientists,
including students, but also a significant number of STEM faculty, has become
part of a volunteer core working with the Fellows. This project is partially
supported by funds from the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;