* 0338749
* The Relation of Motivation to Self-Aspects, Openness, and Performance
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Holley Hodgins, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 04/30/2008
* USD 229,677.00

The project tests a model of motivation and openness to, versus defensiveness
against, ongoing events. The model examines three types of motivation that are
described by Self-Determination Theory -- autonomous, control-oriented, and
impersonal motivation. Autonomy motivation refers to the tendency to initiate
behavior out of choices that are based on an awareness of one's feelings and
values. It is accompanied by genuine self-esteem and a sense of self that is
"integrated" in the sense that self-aspects are consistent with each other and
with intrinsic needs. In contrast, control motivation describes the tendency to
experience events as pressures that determine behavior and feelings. It is
associated with self-esteem that is contingent on external outcomes, and a sense
of self that is "ego-invested" in that it is strongly based on external feedback
and image. Finally, impersonal motivation is the tendency to experience desired
outcomes as unattainable, display little sense of intentionality, lack either
type of self-esteem, and to have an incoherent sense of self that lacks
integration. The model to be tested holds that to the extent that individuals
are autonomously motivated, they can experience ongoing events as they are,
without using distortion or defenses such as biases and justifications. This
openness allows optimal responding in situations that are continually changing,
and facilitates performance. In contrast, under control motivation, individuals
must defend against events that do not support the ego-invested sense of self by
the use of distorting biases. This limits individuals' ability to respond to
changing events, and undermines performance. Finally, impersonal motivation
leads to defensiveness that is inconsistent and ineffective, high negative
affect, and the worst performance of all. Five studies will use multiple methods
to provide causal tests of the model. The supported model would call into
question the assumption underlying some previous social psychological research
that defense is advantageous for functioning, or at the very least, normative.
Rather, support for the hypotheses would suggest that the openness to experience
that is allowed by autonomy motivation facilitates performance. The results also
would provide further evidence that autonomy support by teachers, parents,
employers, and coaches is critical for the performance of students, children,
employees, and athletes. The project will contribute significantly to the
scientific training of undergraduates, and will expose socioeconomically
disadvantaged high school students to science.