* 0338086
* Integrated Assessment of the Influences of Emission Sources, Meteorology and Atmospheric Chemistry on Aerosol Loadings over South Asia: Implications for Regional Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* David Streets, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 12/31/2007
* USD 488,081.00

This research will use an integrated modeling approach to understand the
relative contributions of natural and anthropogenic aerosol sources as well as
the different source sectors in the South Asia region, to the observed aerosol
loadings in the remote Indian Ocean. The PIs will examine the influences of
meteorology, long-range transport, and atmospheric chemistry on these loadings.
The main scientific objectives are to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) characterize the
regional distribution of aerosol and gaseous species over the Indian
subcontinent, &lt;br/&gt;(2) understand the relative roles of assumed emission
factors and emissions estimates of carbonaceous aerosols on observed chemical
budgets by comparing model simulations with available measurements, and,
&lt;br/&gt;(3) investigate the impact of changing emission scenarios (e.g.,
alternative fuel strategies) on the loadings of gas-phase pollutants, scattering
and absorbing aerosol, and consequently the radiation budget.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The research will illuminate
the role of aerosols in perturbing climate variables most vital to the Asian
regional economic and environmental welfare. It will help train future
scientists through the use of graduate students at each participating
institution: the University of North Carolina, Argonne National Laboratory, and
the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay. It will also build capacity in a
developing country to use advanced modeling methods to address the adverse
impacts of anthropogenic activities on the environment.