* 0338159
* SGER:     An Investigation of Silicon Germanium Terahertz Sources
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* James Kolodzey, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

Layers of boron doped and gallium doped Si and SiGe will be grown by molecular
beam epitaxy on Si substrates. Device structures will be fabricated using
photolithography combined with reactive ion etching and metal evaporation. Their
electroluminescent properties will be determined as a function of dopant type
and concentration. Electrical and optical device modeling will be used to help
interpret the observations. Electroluminescence measurements will be made on
electrically contacted devices mounted in a cryostat in a Fourier Transform
Infrared Spectrometer that operates in the THz range. In particular, the
emission intensity and spectrum will be determined versus the applied current
and temperature. Based on the results, the possibility of designing a TeraHertz
laser based on dopant transitions will be assessed in terms of the radiative
gain and losses from doped cavity resonators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research should be considered exploratory and high risk because the excitation
mechanism of the dopant states and their radiative efficiency is not well
understood, and will be explored during this project. The potential impact of
this research concerns a TeraHertz emitting device with a simple structure that
is compatible with Si integrated circuitry for potential low cost and widespread
use. Compact TeraHertz emitters that are integrated with computer chips would
have applications in: chemical and biological sensing; medical diagnostics, and
high bandwidth communications. An SGER grant would be a suitable means of
supporting the work because the results would indicate whether additional
research is justified, and may be used to solicit additional
funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education and outreach activities will be carried
out in combination with these research activities. These will include the
participation in research of a graduate student, the incorporation of research
findings into teaching, and the continued development of a series of local
school outreach activities. An interactive web site
(http://www.ece.udel.edu/~kolodzey/terahertztools/terahertztools.htm) will be
designed suitable for senior high school or freshman college students, which
will illustrate the properties of the TeraHertz frequencies, and allow students
to explore terahertz absorption and reflectivity phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;