* 0338150
* Middle Atmosphere Dynamics by Sub-Millimeter Radiometry
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Christopher Martin, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 08/31/2008
* USD 60,419.00

This proposal requests funding for the analysis and distribution of middle
atmospheric data taken using the Antarctic Sub-millimeter Telescope / Remote
Observatory (AST/RO), a separately funded NSF OPP project. AST/RO is a 1.7 m
diameter, offset Gregorian telescope located at Amundsen-Scott South Pole
Station capable of observing at wavelengths between 200 microns and 1.3 mm. The
mesosphere lies at the boundary between the denser stratosphere and the tenuous
thermosphere, over 60 km above the Earth's surface. The mesosphere lies at the
bottom of the region in which the particles from the Sun deposit much of their
energy, while also being at the top end of planetary-scale atmospheric gravity
waves and tides. In this key position, the mesosphere plays an important part in
our planet's overall atmospheric balance. The project's objectives are the
following: (1) measure wind velocities in the polar mesosphere year-round, (2)
measure carbon monoxide mixing ratios and density in the polar mesosphere and
lower thermosphere, (3) combine data with other projects to develop a more
complete understanding of polar atmospheric dynamics, (4) create an automatic
data pipeline to allow results to be placed on the web within 24 hours of
observations, (5) provide an opportunity for involvement by undergraduates in
active and approachable science research, and (7) develop Web based activities
using near real time data to explain to the general public the properties of the
polar atmosphere. While it might be possible to construct a small instrument in
Antarctica to measure the properties of the mesosphere discussed in this
proposal, significant cost savings are possible by taking advantage of resources
already available on the continent. While AST/RO has primarily focused on
observations of astrophysical phenomena, the instrumentation is also well suited
to making observations of the Earth's atmosphere. In much the same way that
carbon monoxide (CO) is currently used as a tracer for astrophysical processes,
CO can also be used as a tracer for transport processes in the upper atmosphere.
By measuring the emission from rotational transitions of CO, the AST/RO data can
be used to determine the mesospheric wind velocity and CO mixing profile of the
atmosphere in the region 40 km to 130 km above the Earth's surface. This data
can then be used to study the dynamics of the polar mesosphere, especially when
combined with data from other research projects in Antarctica and in
space.&lt;br/&gt;