* 0338157
* Collaborative Research: Interactive Effects of Iron, Light and Carbon Dioxide on Phytoplankton Community Dynamics in the Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2005,01/31/2008
* Walker Smith, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 01/31/2008
* USD 395,835.00

The objectives of this proposal are to investigate the controls on the large-
scale distribution and production of the two major bloom-forming phytoplankton
taxa in the Southern Ocean, diatoms and Phaeocystis Antarctica. These two
groups, through their involvement in the biogeochemical cycles of carbon, sulfur
and nutrient elements, may have played important roles in the climate variations
of the late Quaternary, and they also may be key players in future environmental
change. A current paradigm is that irradiance and iron availability drive
phytoplankton dynamics in the Southern Ocean. Recent work, however, suggests
that carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations may also be important in structuring
algal assemblages, due to species-specific differences in the physiology. This
proposal examines the interactive effects of iron, light and CO2 on the
physiology, ecology and relative dominance of Phaeocystis and diatoms in the
Southern Ocean. The Ross Sea is an ideal system in which to investigate the
environmental factors that regulate the distribution and production of these two
algal groups, since it is characterized by seasonal blooms of both P. Antarctica
and diatoms that are typically separated in both space and time. This study will
take the form of an interdisciplinary investigation that includes a field survey
and statistical analysis of algal assemblage composition, iron, mixed layer
depth, and CO2 levels in the southern Ross Sea, coupled with shipboard
experiments to examine the response of diatom and P. Antarctica assemblages to
high and low levels of iron, light and CO2 during spring and summer.
&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide information on some of the major factors
controlling the production and distribution of the two major bloom forming
phytoplankton in the Southern Ocean and the related biogeochemical cycling of
carbon, sulfur and nutrient elements. The results may ultimately advance the
ability to predict how the Southern Ocean will be affected by and possibly
modulate future climate change. This project will also make significant
educational contributions at several levels, including the planned research
involvement of graduate and undergraduate students, postdoctoral associates, a
student teacher, and community outreach and educational activities. A number of
activities are planned to interface the project with K-12 education.
Presentations will be made at local schools to discuss the research and events
of the research cruise. During the cruise there will be daily interactive email
contact with elementary classrooms. Established websites will be used to allow
students to learn about the ongoing research, and to allow researchers to
communicate with students through text and downloaded
images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;