* 0338568
* Promoting the Interrelationship of Chemistry and Society with a Case Study Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Kerry Karukstis, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 12/31/2007
* USD 74,982.00

This proof-of-concept project incorporates a student-centered problem-based
learning technique in the General Chemistry curriculum to foster consideration
of the interrelationships among chemistry, technology, and society. Case studies
will be created for team-based analysis, discussion, and presentation in order
to engage students in a critical analysis of environmental and economic
implications of chemical decisions. This pedagogical approach places students in
a central position in the educational process and enables them to practice
decision making, exercise analytical thinking, assimilate different
perspectives, develop habits of self-reflection, and enhance their communication
skills. To extend the potential audience for the case studies, instructors
representing at least seven different institutions will test the case study
material. These instructors are involved in a broad range of introductory
chemistry courses for students with a diversity of backgrounds and career
aspirations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A compendium of case studies on current
topical chemistry applications that involve the concepts traditionally presented
in the general chemistry curriculum will be created. Materials to be developed
for each case study include background reading; a written assignment to be
completed prior to the exercise; a set of questions designed to guide a team of
students through the key chemical, environmental, and economic aspects of the
case study and assist them in approaching open-ended problems through
increasingly complex steps; and a follow-up written assignment. Materials for
enhancing faculty development in case study classroom management will also be
prepared. The case study material and faculty development resources will be
disseminated through publications and presentations to the chemical community
and a textbook ancillary distributed through a commercial publisher. Additional
pre- and post-case study exercises will be designed to establish an initial
baseline of student performance, determine benchmarks of student performance
throughout the course, and measure project outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will contribute to the knowledge base of activities that enhance student
learning and will ultimately benefit society through STEM education that fosters
consideration of responsible research and practice in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;