* 0338706
* SBIR Phase I:  Gamma Ray Detector for Geophysical Exploration
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Gerald Entine, Radiation Monitoring Devices Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to investigate
a new, high performance scintillation detector for eventual use in nuclear
borehole logging. Nuclear borehole logging is an important technique for both
geophysical research and commercial oil exploration. Well logging can be used to
perform remote characterization of subsurface geological properties such as
formation density, shale identification, and chemical composition. Well logging
is performed by inserting a tool incorporating a gamma ray detector into a
borehole drilled through the formation. Important requirements for the x-ray
detectors used in well logging application include high detection efficiency,
good energy resolution, high count-rate capability, and ruggedness. In addition,
the detector must be capable of operation at high temperatures encountered in
the borehole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project is unique because
it will provide better tools for geophysical research and lead to better
understanding of a promising scintillator that can be applied to numerous fields
beyond well logging. Teaching, training and learning can be gained by using this
scintillator in various settings such as physics experimentation and from the
materials science issues that are required to optimize its performance.
Agreements with numerous educational institutions will be utilized to facilitate
a teaching, and training. These sensors should offer high performance at low
cost, which could enable research activities at educational institutions. Useful
insights can be gained in particle physics, radiochemistry, and elemental
analysis experiments.