* 0338188
* Track 2, GK-12 The PRISM Project: Enhancing Science and Math Education
* EDU,DGE
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Michael Plantholt, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 08/31/2011
* USD 2,067,429.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title of Project: The PRISM Project:
Enhancing Science and Math Education&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Illinois State
University&lt;br/&gt;PI/Co-PI: Cynthia Moore/Jennifer Grogg/William
Hunter/Michael Plantholt&lt;br/&gt;Number of Fellows per year: 10 graduate, 4
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;School District Partners: Bloomington District 87,
McLean County Unit School District #5&lt;br/&gt;(City of Normal), Gridley CUSD
#10, Chenoa CUSD #9&lt;br/&gt;Target audience: Grades 6-12&lt;br/&gt;Setting:
Rural and suburban&lt;br/&gt;NSF supported disciplines: Biology, Chemistry,
Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Illinois State University PRISM
(Partnerships for Research in Science and Math&lt;br/&gt;Education) Project
trains and supports graduate students in science and mathematics
to&lt;br/&gt;provide resources for middle and high school students and teachers.
The project integrates research and teaching, and addresses issues of scientific
literacy, equity, and attitudes toward science and math among middle and high
school students. The goal is to increase the flow of science, math, and
technology education information, by creating a learning web connecting all
participants. Graduate Fellows and classroom teachers form school-based teams
that identify and address science, mathematics, and technology needs. New
elements introduced in this track 2 project include the addition of:
undergraduate Fellows, partnerships with local businesses and agencies to
provide scientific work experiences for teachers and Fellows, and emphasis on
the application of teacher-initiated action research to document the classroom
success of PRISM Project activities. Action research is the systematic study of
classroom practices as they relate to educational objectives. Additional
longitudinal research will examine the effects of the project on participants at
all levels. The project is being systematically shifted into a self-sustaining
entity at the university through institutional funding of Fellowships so that of
the five year total of 53 graduate Fellows, at least 22 will have been supported
by Illinois State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Both
Fellows and K-12 teachers participate in professional development activities
that ensure the presentation of up-to-date content information in classrooms and
promote long term partnerships. In addition to incorporating up-to-date science
and mathematics into middle and high school classroom activities, PRISM is
creating a new cohort of science and mathematics professionals (former Fellows)
who are educated about and sensitized to the needs of secondary science
education, and providing formal opportunities for these (and other) students to
explore the relationships between their specialized research fields and public
education and interests. The Fellows are developing a broader view of the
relevance of their work to both their disciplines and society at large. The
project also informs science and mathematics faculty about the processes of
science and mathematics education and provides mechanisms for them to contribute
effectively to K-12 education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The PRISM
Project is exploring and evaluating, and will disseminate, successful mechanisms
to create improved partnerships between universities and K-12 schools.
Successful models of effective partnerships between universities and K-12
schools are essential to improve general science and mathematics literacy, and
to help students make a smooth transition between high school and university
studies. Studies documenting the roles that graduate students can play in K-12
classrooms will be published in peer-reviewed journals. The project encourages
participation by underrepresented minorities, both in our expansion into the
Peoria schools, and in the diversity of selected
Fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from Track 1: There have been concrete
benefits to Fellows, teachers, and high school students. Participants are
involved in on-going school-based collaborations to develop and present
curriculum enhancement units, emphasizing inquiry-based activities. Continuous
formative evaluation of the project confirms that Fellows and teachers are
successfully working in teams at each school site. Fellows are taking lessons
from one classroom and successfully presenting them in additional schools on a
regular basis. There have been significant interactions among all participants
in the project. Fellows are highly enthusiastic about their experiences in
classrooms, and teachers find the interactions beneficial. Surveys administered
to students suggest that long term retention of information is enhanced by
hands-on activities. Professional growth of both Fellows and teachers is being
analyzed and incorporated into manuscripts for publication. The first of these,
An Exploration of the Content and Nature of Reflective Practices of Graduate
Teaching Fellows in a School-University Partnership Project., Mumba F.,
Chabalengula, V. M., Moore, C.J., Grogg, J., and Hunter, W. J. F., has been
accepted for publication in The Chemical Educator. This project is receiving
partial support from the Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;