* 0338226
* Physics and Mechanics of the Breakup of Warm Antarctic Sea Ice: In-Situ Experiments and Modeling
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* John Dempsey, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Milne
* 06/30/2010
* USD 720,924.00

This project is a study of how the antarctic sea ice cover responds to stresses
applied by wind and ocean waves, and how the temperature distribution within the
sea ice affects these responses. Experiments will be conducted on the
deformation and fracture of warm sea ice in McMurdo Sound in the austral Spring
by applying a series of controlled stresses and observing their effects. It is
known that large ice floes are affected by microstructural anisotropies, but do
not fracture in the same way as small ones do, therefore it is necessary to
carry out experiments on the scale of tens of meters in order to validly
extrapolate the fracture process to the larger scales that have applications to
engineering problems of breaking ice. Crucial elements for this study are the
obtaining of detailed information on the microstructure of the ice, such as
crystal structure, brine channels, and other flaws in the ice fabric, and having
a sound theoretical framework to guide the experimental work and subsequent
model development. These findings will give important insight into the
underlying mechanisms of ice breakup and will signi.cantly improve the
reliability of models of this process. This work will improve the understanding
of and ability to model the deformation and fracture of Antarctic sea ice at
scales applicable to the breakup of ice sheets.