* 0338255
* Track 2, GK-12: Northeastern University GK-12 PLUS: Partners Learning in Urban Settings
* EHR,DGE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Thomas Gilbert, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 01/31/2010
* USD 1,660,001.00

PROJECT SUMMARY Title of Project: Northeastern University GK-12-PLUS: Partners
Learning in Urban Settings Institution: Northeastern University, Boston, MA
PI/CoPI: David Blackman, PI, Director, Institute for STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering & Mathematics), Education; Jean Krasnow, Co-PI, Visiting Associate
Professor, Education. Number of Fellows per year (graduate): 12 School District
Partners: Boston Charter Schools: City on a Hill, Boston Renaissance, Health
Careers Academy; Boston Public Schools: Boston Latin Academy, Fenway High
School, John D. O'Bryant H.S., Quincy Upper School Target audience of the
project (K-12 band): middle and high school, grades 7-12 Setting: urban
Disciplines involved: Mathematics, Geology, Physics, Chemistry, and Biology

Narrative Summary: The NU GK-12-PLUS project will continue the Fellows program
at Northeastern, incorporate lessons learned from the first round, share the
knowledge gained from the program with the faculty concerned with improving
graduate and undergraduate education, and institutionalize the program within
the University. We will follow the participants over time to assess the impact
of the work in order to fmd out how students best acquire facts, content and
skills in a variety of learning situations. Innovative aspects of the program
include ( 1) maintaining a close working relationship with the Principals and
Headmasters of the Boston partner schools who will be Instrumental in matching
Fellows with teachers, monitoring the program in their schools, and lobbying for
a strong University-public school relationship and institutionalization of the
program; (2) an outcomes-based approach, with curriculum and teaching materials
produced each year and made available to others; and (3) an evaluation model
that will document longitudinally the activities of the Fellows and their
cooperating teachers, and track the achievement of students in STEM in the
partner schools.

Intellectual merit criteria: This project engages the University and 7 urban
schools in the question of how best to prepare students for future careers in
math and science. The models developed and the results of our assessments over
time will be made available to partner schools, to our departments of arts and
sciences, and to the programs in our School of Education for preparation of
mathematics and science teachers and integration of GK -12 activities into
graduate education.

Broader implications criteria: The project will benefit all partners: Fellows
will gain practical experience in the classroom; teachers will become better
STEM educators and help introduce and strengthen STEM curriculum in their
schools; the K-12 students will benefit from enhanced STEM instruction which
should lead to higher scores on exams, better preparation for higher education,
and eventual entrance into the technology- oriented workplace. Our model can be
replicated by other universities partnering with urban schools, particularly in
those with high proportions of underrepresented minority students.

