* 0338926
* SBIR Phase I:     An Ultra-High-Speed Cleaning Process for Electronic Device Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* David Boyers, Phifer Smith Corporation
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to develop a
new "green" ultra-high-speed single-wafer ozone-water-based resist and heavy
organic residue removal process for electronic device manufacturing. The drive
to smaller feature sizes and larger wafer sizes in next generation device
manufacturing has led to the growth in the use of single-wafer wet processing in
lieu of batch processing. Initial measurements show that this process can
achieve photoresist etch rates (removal rates) in excess of 20,000 Angstroms/
minute. Very high etch rate is critical to the achievement of practical
throughputs using single-wafer processing. Initial data and analytical modeling
indicates the potential of this process to increase etch rates to even higher
levels. Five goals of this project are: 1) measure resist etch rate as a
function of temperature; 2) measure the resist etch rate as a function of
process chemistry flow rate; 3) evaluate the influence of process chemistry on
resist removal; 4) demonstrate process performance using patterned test wafers;
and 5) prepare a preliminary design for a process for further evaluation in
Phase II.

The commercial application of this project will be in the manufacture of high
density semiconductor devices. The successful completion of this research
program will culminate in the development of the next generation of high density
semiconductor devices which will not only increase performance and decrease
costs, but will also provide significant environmental benefits through the use
of environmentally benign chemicals in lieu of acids and solvents. The market
for wafer wet processing equipment alone is projected to reach $3.1 billion by
2005. The ozone-water based process developed in the course of this research can
not only be used in semiconductor wafer manufacturing, but also for magnetic
disc manufacturing, optical disc manufacturing and flat panel manufacturing.

