* 0338337
* Antarctic and Southern Ocean Climate Instability during the Middle Eocene "Greenhouse" to "Icehouse" Transition
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2006
* James Zachos, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 05/31/2006
* USD 97,294.00

This project will document the temperature evolution of Southern Ocean waters in
the late middle Eocene through analyses of the Mg/Ca and oxygen isotope ratios
of foraminifera from various sediment cores collected by the Ocean Drilling
Program. The middle Eocene interval (~49 to 37 Ma) is possibly the most critical
period in Cenozoic climatic evolution. Deep-sea temperatures cooled by as much
as 7 degrees C, and small ice sheets appeared on Antarctica as early as ~42-40
Ma. Recent work on Southern Ocean sediment cores, however, suggests that this
long-term cooling trend was not monotonic. New high-resolution oxygen isotope
records reveal a pronounced warming event at 41.5 Ma, designated as the Middle
Eocene Climatic Optimum (MECO). This transient event (~600 k.y. in duration) is
hypothesized to represent an important climatic reversal (~4 degrees C warming)
in the midst of long-term cooling. This reversal is compelling in light of new
evidence of wide swings in pCO2 during the middle Eocene. As such, this event
provides a unique opportunity to characterize the sensitivity of high-latitude
climate to changes in boundary conditions. This project will document the
temperature evolution of Southern Ocean waters in the late middle Eocene through
development of high-resolution stable isotope and Mg/Ca datasets. Sites from all
three sectors of the Southern Ocean are included in order to address questions
of local vs. regional temperature variation and to confirm the presence of
regional signals and trends. One additional site in the low-latitude Pacific
will provide a comparative framework for the high-latitude sites. In conjunction
with a temperature history, these records should also enable the construction of
a seawater oxygen isotope and, by proxy, ice-volume curve for the late middle
Eocene. By providing a detailed paleoclimatic framework, the broader
significance of this study will ultimately lie in its contribution to
demonstrating a relationship between greenhouse-gas forcing and global climate
change. As details of Eocene pCO2 variability are established, and as climate
models become more sophisticated, high-resolution records of Southern Ocean
climate and Antarctic ice-sheet history will be essential for assessing the
impact of pCO2 variability on global climate. Given that the Eocene may have
been most the recent period in which atmospheric pCO2 fluctuated on the scale
projected to occur over the next few centuries, it provides a unique opportunity
to gauge climate sensitivity/insensitivity to this range of forcing. In terms of
broader impacts, this research is relevant to understanding the societal impacts
of global climate change. It will also support a graduate student's Ph.D.
research and involve undergraduates in hands-on research.

