* 0339181
* Enhancing Human Economic Performance
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Vernon Smith, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2007
* USD 90,000.00

Field observations have established the ubiquity of mutually beneficial,
reciprocity based economic behavior, and experimental research has demonstrated
that such behavior is robust to controlled laboratory environments.
Unfortunately, non-cooperative behavior founded in individual self-interest can
corrupt trust-based exchange. Consequently, humans continually face the problem
of finding credible procedures to commit to reciprocal, mutually beneficial
exchanges. An important question is what kinds of social institutions enhance
trust-based exchange.

The project examines the implications of trust relationships for market
performance in both personal and impersonal exchange settings. In these
experiments, two treatments are considered in each of two contracting
institutions. The first institution, bilateral bargaining, is relatively
personal. The second institution, a double auction, is more impersonal and
involves multilateral negotiation rules that allow buying and selling through a
publicly observed bid-ask spread. The two treatments are manual contract
execution, where a subject must choose to complete their contract, and automatic
execution, where contracts are executed immediately through the experimental
software. The goal is to investigate whether and how breakdowns in trust
relationships can lead to market failure, and whether this failure is related to
contracting institutions.

Over the last ten years laboratory experiments, informed by the work of game
theorists, experimental economists, economic historians, evolutionary
psychologists, and sociologists, have helped to develop theories that take
account of the ecological rationality of economic behavior; and particularly the
way incentives have changed as humans moved from small group personal exchange
to large group impersonal exchange. This proposal describes a number of new
experiments that examine how the way in which human performance in markets can
fail during a transition to impersonal exchange.

Understanding how human economic performance relies on trust relationships, and
finding procedures that help to facilitate and sustain this trust-based
performance, is increasingly important to society at large. One important reason
is that online markets are expected by many to be an engine of economic growth
over the next few decades, but as the research suggested herein will make clear,
these markets can potentially fail because of failures of trust. In particular,
buyers and sellers in online markets must transact with counterparts about whom
they know very little, and, for example, an untrustworthy buyer might not
deliver payment, or an untrustworthy seller might not deliver an expected
product. These possibilities are real: complaints relating to online markets
accounted for 78 percent of all Internet fraud complaints received by the
National Consumers League in 2000. Research presented in this proposal
represents a step towards better understanding the link between human
performance in markets and trust, and provides insights on how to design market
institutions that help to prevent market failures due to trust failures, and
that consequently act as catalysts for future economic growth.

