* 0339078
* EITM:  Political Institutions and Democratic Stability
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Carles Boix, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 04/30/2007
* USD 99,915.00

&lt;br/&gt;The project intends to examine the impact that different
constitutional structures have on the stability of democracies conditional on
the underlying economic and social characteristics of the country in which those
institutions operate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project bridges the two main
approaches (sociological and institutionalist) currently in place in empirical
democratic theory. According to the sociological approach, the successful
introduction of a democratic regime hinges on certain underlying societal
conditions such as a given level of economic development (and a correlated set
of cultural practices, educational values and/or economic structures) . By
contrast, neoinstitutionalists, mainly influenced by the recent formal
literature that stresses the equilibrium-inducing role of institutions, claim
that a 'well-written' constitution contributes in a substantial manner to
securing democratic stability. Upon reflection, both schools are incomplete for
the opposite reasons. The sociological strand of the literature sidesteps the
potential impact that different sorts of constitutional arrangements may have on
the process of democratic consolidation. In turn, the neoinstitutionalist
literature, which has been built precisely with the goal of determining the
impact of institutional arrangements, does without taking into account the
preexisting economic and social conditions in which institutions operate -- that
is, it looks at institutions as if they were operating in a social
vacuum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal, which builds upon previous work done
by the principal investigator, aims at developing and testing a fully specified
model that integrates both the economic and&lt;br/&gt;institutional factors that
determine the stability of democracies. This implies: 1. The derivation of a
formal model that, after characterizing political agents with varying economic
traits (i.e. level and types of wealth) and organizational strengths, examines
how their strategies (over the choice of political regime) are influenced by
different constitutional set-ups. 2. The creation of a complete data set
classifying countries by types of constitutions (electoral rules, structure of
executive, legislative, etc.) for the period from 1800 to 2000. 3. The
validation of the formal model employing the new data set.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of its intellectual merit, the proposal will
further our understanding of the effects of different institutions on the
viability and stability of democracies. It will also provide a more fine-grained
data base of the variation in constitutional structures in the contemporary
period. In terms of its broader impact, the project will reinforce the new
comparativist approach based on precise theoretical work and rigorous empirical
test. The project should have an impact on other disciplines (such as
constitutional law and legal economics) and among policy analysts engaged in
constitutional engineering.&lt;br/&gt;