* 0339519
* Collaborative Research: Concentrating Vorticity Near the Ground: Investigation of Supercell Rear-Flank Precipitation, Vorticity Generation, and Transport Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2007
* Matthew Gilmore, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 02/28/2007
* USD 95,340.00

Recent research has indicated the possibility of a critical role of the
supercell rear flank downdraft (RFD) in the tornadogenesis process. A multi-
sensor analysis of the Dimmitt tornadic storm observed during the Verification
of Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment (VORTEX) has revealed vorticity
patterns and evolution consistent with processes first described theoretically
by prior researchers. Further, the observed patterns were very similar to those
in most of the supercell case studies in the literature. In particular, the
prior research of the Principal Investigators supported the conceptual model
that vorticity is generated baroclinically as air passes through the RFD from
rear to front. This baroclinically generated quasi-horizontal vorticity develops
in rings about the buoyancy minimum present at the RFD owing to precipitation
loading and/or melting/evaporation of hydrometeors. As the rings pass forward
through the RFD, their leading sides are tilted upward in the gradient of
vertical velocity present just ahead of the RFD, giving them an arch-like
configuration. They are subsequently strongly stretched in the low-level
updraft, leading to an intensification of a counter-rotating vortex pair (shown,
but not elaborated upon, in most historical case studies). In the Dimmitt storm,
the cyclonic member of the counter-rotating vortex pair (connected by arches of
vortex lines) was augmented by intense low-level tilting of streamwise inflow
vorticity. This member subsequently intensified into a tornado through
stretching in the low-level updraft.

In this research, the Principal Investigators seek to advance the understanding
of supercell RFD processes. They will concentrate on the following topics:

How is the development of the near-ground, counter-rotating vortex pair governed
by downdraft strength, buoyancy, and the ambient shear profile? It is
hypothesized that certain shear profiles lead to augmentation of one or both
vortices, and/or partial or complete cancellation of one or both.

What factors allow for the development of neutral or positively-buoyant (near
the ground) RFDs? It is hypothesized that the rate of inflow of potentially cold
air aloft into the rear flank, and the distributions and types of hydrometeors,
play dominant roles.

What factors govern the likelihood of baroclinically generated RFD vorticity
being concentrated into a tornadic vortex?

Recently, it has been demonstrated that a measurable jump in tornado warning
skill by the National Weather Service can be attributed to new scientific
knowledge coming from the VORTEX experiment. Prior research findings of these
Principal Investigators have been cited in real-time forecast products. The
likely societal impact of this research is a continued measurable improvement in
tornado forecasts and warnings, leading to continued reductions in losses of
property, health, and lives. Further, the Principal Investigators will continue
to emphasize direct outreach to the public (web site, public lectures,
television documentaries, email queries) as well as to forecasters.