* 0339431
* SBIR Phase I:  MEMS Heat Dissipation Foundation for High Performance Microelectronic Cooling
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,09/30/2004
* John Mai, Microwave Bonding Instruments, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2004
* USD 99,908.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project involves the design,
fabrication and preliminary testing of a micro-machined, horizontal and vertical
heat pipe array to create a sealed, recirculating, "heat dissipation fountain"
(HDF) for low cost, high performance microelectronic cooling. Based on this
technique, localized, substrate bonding technology, a single-crystal (SC)
silicon end plates with micro-machined channels that will sandwich multiple
layers of interconnected, porous silicon substrates. The three technical
innovations are proposed for this project are (1) the development of a method to
assemble a 3-D meso-structure by bonding several substrates together (e.g. SC
silicon to porous silicon); (2) a meso-scale heat dissipation device from an
appropriately scaled, stacked substrate structure; and (3) in-situ, hermetic
sealing of a working fluid within the porous structure. These technical
innovations are driven by basic research into techniques to decrease the surface
temperature necessary for fluid superheat to initiate nucleate boiling and to
raise the critical heat flux value for the system. From an engineering aspect,
this will lead to an understanding of design parameters and tradeoffs associated
with micro-scale two-phase heat transfer
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercial IC-grade SC silicon can
cost less than $10 per wafer than commercial supplier of porous silicon. The
commercial motivation behind the development of this technology are (1) there is
an immediate need for low cost, lightweight, efficient, cooling of
microelectronic devices; (2) two-phased cooling allows for cooling of next
generation microprocessors with heat fluxes exceeding 100 W/cm2; and (3) stacked
bonding allows for scaling of the heat exchanger with changes in microprocessor
heat flux&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;