* 0339651
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Noise Scanning Thermal Microscopy for Defect Detection and Characterization of Semiconductor Materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Shamus McNamara, Kytaro Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,925.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I project addresses a
scanning thermal microscope (SThM) system, which can be used for measuring
thermal parameters such as temperature, thermal conductance, and heat capacity
in nanotechnology, semiconductor, and biological applications. The SThM system
consists of a micromachined scanning probe, an interface circuit, a scanning
stage, and instrumentation to synchronize and control the individual components.
This proposal addresses critical issues regarding its feasibility as a
commercial product by evaluating the manufacturability, robustness, accuracy,
repeatability, and ease of use of the SThM system as a whole and by extending
the potential applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tool is intended for use
not only by researchers, but also for pre-college education in nanotechnology
and microelectronics. It is also intended for use in process monitoring for
yield and reliability in manufacturing applications. Since the technology being
evaluated for commercialization originated in an educational institution and
will be licensed from it, this effort will indirectly serve to support higher
education if successful. This effort will also provide an avenue for
undergraduate student involvement in a variety of areas ranging from
microfabrication to circuit design to testing the scanning &lt;br/&gt;thermal
systems.