* 0339747
* SBIR Phase I:     Novel Wafer Fabrication Technology for Semiconductor Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,10/31/2004
* Rabi Bhattacharya, UES, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 10/31/2004
* USD 99,909.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is directed toward the
development of cadmium zinc telluride (CdZnTe) single crystal films by using an
ion beam layer separation process from bulk single crystals. The separated
layers will be transferred and bonded onto Si wafers for applications as
substrates for epitaxial growth of mercury cadmium telluride (HgCdTe) films.
HgCdTe films are of interest in infrared detectors. The ion beam layer
separation process will allow the fabrication of a large number of films from a
single bulk crystal, thus providing an economical wafer production technology
for infrared detector materials. High-energy (MeV) light ions will be used to
produce a buried damaged layer in the bulk crystal. Thermal shock induced by
rapid thermal annealing at elevated temperatures may generate lateral crack
enabling the layer separation. In Phase I, the feasibility will be demonstrated
by finding the conditions of layer separation and by analyzing the separated
layer in terms of crystalline quality.

The commercial application of this project is in IR photodetectors and focal
plane arrays for many industrial and scientific sensor applications including
environmental monitoring, chem-bio detection and medical and space sensors. CdTe
and (Cd,Zn)Te alloy crystals have been grown by various techniques including
zone refining, vertical gradient freeze (VGF), liquid encapsulated Czochralski
(LEC) methods, horizontal and vertical Bridgman techniques. Due to variable
yields, none of these methods have produced enough material with the quality
needed for today's infrared (IR) detector applications. The proposed technique
has the advantage of producing many good quality substrates from a single bulk
crystal by ion beam slicing, thus providing an economic way of producing
reliable and reproducible quality material. Also, large area CdZnTe substrate
for the growth of HgCdTe will be possible by stacking smaller slices in a floor
tile pattern on cheaper Si substrates. Bonding with Si substrate will also allow
the integration of IR detectors with electronics on a single chip.

