* 0339191
* EITM:  Developing the Tools to Understand Human Performance: An Empirical Infrastructure to Foster Research Collaboration
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* John Abowd, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/2008
* USD 337,455.00

Understanding of the workplace from the perspective of both employers and
employees is vital for understanding human performance. Understanding the
workplace can only occur if micro data on employers and employees are
integrated, linked longitudinally and made accessible to the research community.
Developing the data infrastructure for integrated data is a monumental task as
the traditional approach towards data development is to collect data on
households and businesses separately. Fortunately, such data collected
separately can be integrated via the rich administrative data sets that contain
information on both employers and employees that are available in the U.S.
federal statistical system. Developing an access system for such data is also a
monumental task because the underlying data on businesses and households are
protected by legal confidentiality restrictions. Within the federal statistical
system, integrated micro data can be created and the challenge is to make such
data accessible to the user community for approved statistical purposes while
protecting the confidentiality of the data. Existing access to such data is via
an NSF/Census Research Data Center network. While this system has been very
successful, there are a number of limitations so that, relative to the potential
use of the micro data in the federal statistical system, the current use is very
limited. This project outlines a multi-layered access structure that builds on
recent data infrastructure developments and the access modalities as they
currently exist. Key components of this multi-layered access structure are the
development of inference-valid public use synthetic micro data, access to richer
synthetic micro data at a virtual Research Data Center, and in turn limited
access to the gold standard micro data in the Census/NSF Research Data Center
network. The development of inference-valid synthetic data is a major
undertaking at the frontier of statistical theory and applications. The
development of the multi-layered access system is at the frontier of dealing
with the confidentiality protection issues that must be confronted. The micro
data on businesses and households (and especially the integrated data) are of
fundamental importance for the social sciences and must be accessible to the
research community but the confidentiality of these data must also be protected.
This grant supports a prototype synthetic data system for one Census data
product - the LEHD infrastructure files (individual, employer, job) to test the
feasibility and usefulness of constructing synthetic data.

Broader Impacts of the Proposed Activity The proposed activity has the potential
for dramatically increasing access to micro data for the social science research
community. This increased access will have broad impacts but even broader
impacts arise for all scientific disciplines from the methodologies and
protocols developed under this project. Rich integrated micro data on households
and businesses are required to address a wide range of issues in the social
sciences, health sciences, and environmental sciences. Developing such rich
data, inference-valid synthetic data, and a multi-layered access system are
issues confronting many different parts of the scientific community. Many social
scientists from a wide range of disciplines will access the data system
developed in this proposal