* 0339307
* A Distributed On-Line Database System for Transportation Managment Using Cooperating Roadside and In-Vehicle Communication Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2003,02/28/2006
* Michael McNally, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 02/28/2006
* USD 149,996.00

This research tackles the problem of collecting, storing, and using an
arbitrarily complete trip table for each vehicle in an urban traffic network,
which can be trusted by transportation system operators while simultaneously
ensuring traveler privacy. To achieve this goal, each vehicle stores its own
travel history, under the consent of the driver, by accepting authenticated
information from roadside controllers-persistent traffic cookies-using short-
range wireless communication. The authenticated data stored in each vehicle
forms a distributed database of historical travel patterns. The central
hypothesis of the project is that these historical travel patterns can be used
to predict the movement of vehicles currently in the system, which can, in turn,
be used for traffic management applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
consists of three overlapping research tasks. The first examines the design and
performance of the distributed travel database and prediction system using
simulation experiments. This task will develop and use a new modeling framework
that integrates a microscopic traffic model and a multi-agent, activity-based
travel demand model. The second task explores how such predictions can be
applied to improve the design, management, and operation of the transportation
system. For instance, local traffic controllers can move beyond turning
fractions, and instead predict whether and where a platoon will disperse as it
moves through the traffic network. Local intersection control schemes can
incorporate the global consequences of their control measures. Path flow
predictions made by the system can also serve as a direct input to existing
dynamic traffic assignment formulations. The third task administers a small
survey of traveler attitudes on privacy and utility issues involved in such a
system. The results will help ascertain the feasibility of the system and
balance the functional requirements with stakeholder and end-user interests in
security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research
include the following.&lt;br/&gt;1)In teaching, training and learning, the
project lends itself to small, discrete projects ideal for completion as
undergraduate or graduate class projects ranging from the study of wireless
technology to full scale travel simulation. &lt;br/&gt;2)To underrepresented
groups, as all travelers could benefit from the optimal use of network capacity
resulting from the use of the system.&lt;br/&gt;3)In developing infrastructure
for research and education, in that the simulation environment will become a
novel resource available to any future student research.&lt;br/&gt;4)From
disseminating the results to enhance scientific and technological understanding,
via publication of all findings in conference presentations and journal
articles, and through a project web site.&lt;br/&gt;5)To the society at large,
where the impacts are many and varied. The system hinges upon traveler
participation, which turns traffic control away from a command and control
paradigm towards one of shared responsibility. &lt;br/&gt;