* 0339457
* SBIR Phase I:      A Reversible, Colorimetric Hydrogen Safety Sensor Using Tailored Xerogels
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Kisholoy Goswami, InnoSense LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to demonstrate
the feasibility of an all-optical hydrogen sensor system. Safety remains a top
priority since leakage of hydrogen in air during production, storage, transfer,
or distribution creates an explosive atmosphere over a broad concentration
range. The hydrogen economy infrastructure is new and rapidly growing; public
acceptance of hydrogen fuel will require the integration of reliable hydrogen
safety sensors. Feasibility of the sensing approach will be demonstrated by
developing a sol-gel-titania-based sensor. Tasks have been designed to
characterize dynamic range, response time, reversibility, accuracy, resolution
and lack of interference from humidity. Four criteria have been established to
define Phase I success. They are : (1) sensitivity to 0.05% hydrogen; (2) return
of the signal to the same baseline upon cycling between 0% and 10% hydrogen 20
tomes; (3) the recovery time staying within 10% of the response time; and (4)
the sensor performance remaining unchanged in the presence of 100% relative
humidity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial application of the hydrogen sensor
developed in this project is as a safety device in the hydrogen fuel industry.
The hydrogen-related energy business is expected to exceed $15 billion by 2010.
This rapid growth includes fuel cells and liquid fuel tanks for rockets.
Hydrogen sensor sales are predicted to accelerate for automotive applications.
Other applications include power generation, aerospace, food production, and
industrial process control where hydrogen is used as a feedstock.