* 0339652
* SBIR Phase I:     A Dynamic Tactile Display for Visually Impaired Computer Users
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2004
* Philip Schaefer, Vortant Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,280.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop an innovative technology to revolutionize computer access for blind and
visually impaired individuals. The device provides a touchable display with
which the user can feel the windows, panels, buttons, menu items, etc., with
much the same rapidity and random access available to the sighted Windows user.
The new approach uses an effective but very low cost technique for interacting
with the touch receptors of the fingers, avoiding the high cost and complexity
associated with mechanical actuator arrays previously used to depict similar
tactile images. Thus, it promises to provide the benefits of global, random
access computer interface technology at dramatically reduced cost. In Phase I, a
prototype Dynamic Tactile Display device will be constructed and interfaced with
Windows-based accessibility software on the PC. Several alternatives for tactile
display characteristics will be explored, in collaboration with the Arizona
Center for the Blind and Visually Impaired (ACBVI). Volunteer blind participants
at ACBVI will be trained on the use of the device. Objective performance
criteria on their use of the device will be measured, and quantitative and
qualitative user feedback will be gathered to determine overall user
feasibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary societal benefit of the proposed
activity is to provide more universal access to computer and Internet technology
to the visually impaired community, often underrepresented in professional and
social groups using computers. In addition to the use of this low-cost tactile
interface as an assistive device, it may have many applications in control,
virtual reality, and communications. The technology may enable inroads for
haptic interfaces for a much wider range of applications than are currently
addressed. As advances in human/computer interactions, haptic interface
methodology, and user interface design occur, major opportunities for additional
spin-off products and research can be expected.&lt;br/&gt;