* 0339298
* SBIR Phase I:    Software Visualization of Parallel Programs with Virtual Reality Modeling Language (VRML)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Brian Brode, Crescent Bay Software Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,146.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will establish
the feasibility of a software visualization tool that extracts and transforms
data about the structure and behavior of parallel programs into Virtual Reality
Modeling Language (VRML) files. These files will provide a virtual world that a
programmer can browse and interact with to better understand the parallel
program's performance. The VRML representation provides a standard and portable
way of displaying an interactive three-dimensional environment that can include
large amounts of performance and program structure information in an intuitive
way. The research will investigate methods of using this powerful representation
method to best advantage for software performance analysis of large complex
parallel software systems. This tool will provide users with a new perspective
on parallel programs and their behavior.

The broader impact of this proposed activity will be the availability of a tool
that will be very useful to programmers of high-performance systems. Anyone who
is trying to understand and improve the performance of his or her large parallel
programs will benefit from this project. The tool will be of direct commercial
interest to all users of parallel systems. In addition, the effective use of a
virtual world data exploration paradigm for abstract data such as parallel
computer performance information may lead to other commercial applications to
help understand large database performance and web usage statistics, for
example.