* 0339259
* SGER Collaborative Research:  Support for Design of Evolving Information Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Carlo Zaniolo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

A perennial problem in designing information systems is enabling them to cope
with continuous evolution. This problem manifests itself in many settings,
including software management, configuration management and web-page evolution.
The problem is particularly important as information systems are being designed
(or re-designed) with a web-centered (typically XML-based) focus. The objective
of this project is to extend database technology to better support the design
and development of information systems that gracefully adapt to changes.
Therefore, database systems must be extended with the ability to (i) manage and
query efficiently temporal/historical information, (ii) support version control
for data sets and software artifacts, and (iii) unify management of data and
metadata and reduce the problem of configuration management to that of temporal
querying and version retrieval. The approach proposed to this challenging
problem exploits XML ability to unify data and metadata and support powerful
query languages. The evolution of information systems -- their data, metadata,
and software artifacts -- is thus unified and modeled by time-stamped XML
documents. The project will test the newly defined capabilities to be tested in
a pilot study, where an existing information system for resume management and
job placement are re-designed for evolution. Experiments based on past and
planned changes, are used to validate the effectiveness of the solutions
developed in the project. These will pave the way to designing information
systems for evolution and maintainability. Results will be disseminated via
publications, reports and demos available from the project web sites
(http://wis.cs.ucla.edu/nsf-projects/science-of-design,
http://www.cs.ucr.edu/~tsotras/design.html).



