* 0339042
* SBIR Phase I:  Customizable Question Answering System for Homeland Security and Commercial Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Barry Sheraw, Language Computer Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes a novel
Question Answering (QA) technology. The intellectual merits of the proposed
activity are three fold: (1) it provides automatic decomposition of high level
questions into logical, informative sets of fact-seeking questions, such that
very complex questions can be automatically answered. This novel QA approach
advances the state-of-the-art technology, which is currently limited to simple
factual questions, enabling the answering of complex questions that model
scenarios observed in actual customer environments. (2) It radically improves
the accuracy of current state-of-the-art QA by using a logic prover to extract
and justify answers. Language Computer Corporation (LLC) plans to develop an
inference mechanism for question answering that is capable of extracting answers
based on semantic inference chains, rather than on superficial keyword-based
metrics. (3) It introduces a novel approach that adapts open-domain QA
technology to domain-specific information using automatically acquired
ontologies, seamlessly integrated with the system's open-domain knowledge base.
This capability provides a rapid and efficient customization method for various
domains of interests, such as weapons of mass
destruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proffered technology
is as follows: (1) the proposed approach allows QA technology to expand its
capability, now restricted to synthetic evaluations based on simple, factual
questions, to actual commercial applications with complex questions and
scenarios. This places LLC in a position to target both government and
commercial markets, where the accuracy, coverage, reliability and usability of
the retrieved information are crucial. Ideal applications for this QA technology
include homeland defense, Customer Relationship Management (CRM), education,
medical, and legal. (2) The proposed model uses a logic proving mechanism that
associates every extracted answer with a logical, easily understandable
explanation of the answer correctness. Furthermore, LLC proposes the
introduction of an automatic procedure to quickly adapt an open-domain QA system
to domain-specific scenarios. This set of features makes this QA system an ideal
tool for the intelligence business, where the quality of the information
extracted is paramount, and where switching between completely different domains
of interest is frequent.&lt;br/&gt;