* 0339009
* SBIR Phase I:     High Performance Laser Deflector Using Stoichiometric Electro-Optic Materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Tony Roberts, ADVR, INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,959.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will use the
electro-optic (EO) effect, in which an electric field changes the index of
refraction of a nonlinear material, in a novel manner to create a beam deflector
with very favorable properties for laser beam scanning and steering. Large angle
deflections have been achieved through new multi-stage designs, and 10-GHz scan
rates have recently been demonstrated. These designs can now be executed in a
commercial product using recent advances in fabrication to improved nonlinear
materials. In addition to making commercial manufacturing possible, these new
stoichiometric materials should impart favorable properties to a laser
deflector, including improved power handling and increased infrared and UV
transparency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is expected to advance the state-
of-the-art with an electro-optic device that has so far not been commercially
available. Electro-optic deflectors are predicted to compete quite successfully
in the laser scanner market, offering superior performance in scan rate,
deflection range, deflection efficiency, and power handling in a very small
device. The fast scan rates and high power handling of the proposed EO deflector
will be useful in for beam scanning in remote sensing applications. The
deflector should be used to overcome existing limitations in free space
communications and variable optical attenuators.