* 0339850
* EITM: Collaborative Proposal: Empirical Analysis of Matching Models
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Daniel Ackerberg, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2007
* USD 93,277.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO: 0339850&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION:
University of California, Los Angeles&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ackerberg,
Daniel&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: EMPIRICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THEORETICAL
MODELS&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: COLLABORATIVE PROPOSAL: Empirical Analysis of Matching
Models&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research has derived estimable non-parametric
transferable utility models of the marriage market. One of the major goals of
the empirical analysis of matching models is to deal with endogeneity,
measurement, and other problems. Accounting for endogenous matching in the
empirical analysis of contracts helps explain the apparent clash between
theoretical predictions on contracts and empirical
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will extend the theoretical and
empirical literature on matching in three ways. First, it examines ways to
empirically characterize bilateral matching markets with heterogeneous
participants. Choo and Siow (2003) provide an empirical framework to estimate a
transferable utility model of the marriage market without observing the
equilibrium transfers. This research will use a unique dataset of about 2,700
marriage and dowry contracts for the city of Florence and the villages in her
countryside in the early fifteenth century to empirically test this model. The
research will also extend the CS model to allow for dynamic behavior in marriage
markets, thus making it possible to consider important decisions made by
prospective spouses, such as delaying marriage if expected prospects in the
future look better. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second extension is to use
traditional hedonic market models to study marriage markets. Recent work has
introduced econometric techniques for non-parametric identification of
preferences in hedonic markets. This non-parametric identification is important
since it ensures that empirical findings come from information in the data
rather than from arbitrary functional forms or distributional assumptions. The
research will apply these new techniques Italian dataset on marriage and dowry
contracts. In addition this research will extend the hedonic methodology by
allowing unobserved "traits", characteristics that not only affect an
individual's preferences over potential spouses, but also potential spouses'
preferences over the individual but not known to the econometrician, in the
econometric model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the PIs will study the
consequences of matching in marriage markets on fertility and sex ratios by
estimating a dynamic model of fertility. We will use data on the number and
gender of children born to the couples in the marriage contracts described
above. This approach allows the PIs to explain biased sex ratios without
appealing to infanticide or differential care for boys and girls. The results of
this research, together with the planned educational activities, are likely to
have a significant intellectual and broader impact on economic
science.&lt;br/&gt;Renaissance Tuscany.&lt;br/&gt;