* 0339823
* SBIR Phase I:     Monitoring Aid for Physical Security (MAPS) Using Computer Vision
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Rajeev Sharma, VideoMining Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I research project will develop a
tool for enhancing physical security operations at large facilities using a
novel map-centered interface for video surveillance. The interface will
incorporate "perceptual filtering" with automatic detection, tracking and
behavior analysis of people using computer vision along with user-specified
rules. This Monitoring Aid for Physical Security (MAPS) system will allow the
security operator to maintain a high degree of situational awareness and to add
capabilities for timely intervention. Phase I research will help in establishing
the feasibility of the MAPS concept with the help of a laboratory prototype. The
research results generated from this project will help in better coupling human
capabilities with those of automated computer vision analysis in order to
improve current video surveillance systems, impacting several types of public
places. Homeland security efforts include protecting the economic infrastructure
(for example, 95% of U.S. commerce goes through the nation's 360 ports) and
enabling a more effective crisis management response. Additional security
efforts are aimed at airports and public transportation terminals and theft
prevention in the retail industry. This monitoring tool will aid the retail
industry in reducing its over $25 billion annual loss to employee theft and
shoplifting. Other beneficiaries include schools and office building owners and
users.