* 0339650
* SBIR Phase I:     Advanced Planning and Scheduling Tools for Extended Enterprise Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Guining Li, LS OPTIMAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I research project is
intended to develop a high quality, flexible, and adaptive planning and
scheduling software prototype for extended enterprise manufacturing
environments. Planning and scheduling are some of the most important functions
within many production systems. In a competitive environment, effective planning
and scheduling have become a necessary condition for survival in the
marketplace. Failure to do so would not only mean a reduction in production
effectiveness and higher costs, but also a serious erosion of the
competitiveness of the entire supply chain. With recent advances in information
technologies and the rapid evolution of supply chain management techniques, the
need has arisen for more advanced planning and scheduling tools. These tools
must be able to communicate, collaborate, and integrate their planning and
scheduling functionalities to obtain optimal results throughout the enterprise.
This research project will bring state-of-the-art decision and optimization
methodologies to bear in meeting this need.

This research development is expected to produce a significant practical impact
in the area of Supply Chain Management. If successful, it will bring new
planning and scheduling tools to the e-commerce business environment. Moreover,
the development of the proposed prototype will be critical to the development
and commercialization of an advanced planning and scheduling software tool that
can be used for many industry sectors.

