* 0339149
* EHP:  Discrimination, Segregation and Wage Differentials in Imperfect Labor Markets
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Michael Manove, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2008
* USD 276,817.00

ABSTRACT

PROPOSAL NO: 0339149 INSTITUTION: Boston University NSF PROGRAM: ENHANCING HUMAN
PERFORMANCE PI: Lang, Kevin TITLE: Discrimination, Segregation and Wage
Differentials in Imperfect Labor Markets.

This research project explores the causes and consequences of labor-market
discrimination by profit-oriented firms. The research consists of two projects
The firs project starts with the puzzling fact that African Americans acquire
more education than do whites with the same measured cognitive ability. This
project theoretically and empirically explores two explanatory hypotheses: (1)
blacks attend lower quality schools. Blacks attempt to compensate for lower
quality education longer years of schooling. If measured cognitive ability is
influenced by education, poorer schools may be associated with smaller cognitive
gains. Preliminary empirical results do not support this hypothesis. (2) Given
imperfect information about worker productivity, blacks have greater incentives
than whites to use education to signal their desirability as workers. To test
this hypothesis, this project will explore differences in information structure
for blacks and whites (employers observe the productivity of whites more readily
than they do the productivity of blacks) and differences in the distribution of
productivity between the two groups. The models will be tested with NLSY data.

The second project addresses discrimination by profit-oriented firms that must
search for workers who in turn must search for jobs. It explores the relation
between segregation, wage discrimination and employment discrimination in the
context of directed-search models with different types of workers. This project
compares the consequences of discrimination based on skin color (a continuous
factor) with those based on race (discrete categories). It will broaden our
understanding of a class of search models in which profit-oriented employers
recognize that higher wages attract more applicants. The approach will cast
light on the effects of worker heterogeneity in such settings.

This research is potentially important for broader impacts on labor market
policies. Different explanations for higher levels of formal education among
blacks (given measured cognitive ability) imply different policies for enhancing
human performance. Employer-information hypothesis implies that blacks will
over-invest in observable credentials but under-invest in unobservable skills
and suggests that facilitating of information acquisition would be valuable. The
school-quality hypothesis suggests that policies that increase the uniformity of
school-quality standards would be more effective.

