* 0340358
* EITM: Neighborhood Choice and Neighborhood Change: Evaluating Dynamic Models of Residential Segregation
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Richard Berk, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/29/2008
* USD 269,135.00

This research will (1) construct models for explaining patterns of racial and
economic segregation in large American cities, and (2) develop innovative
methods for evaluating these models. The models connect the decisions of
individuals who belong to various race-ethnic and economic groups about where to
live to aggregate patterns of neighborhood change. The project is multi-
disciplinary and will be conducted by two teams of investigators. There are two
major components. The first part is to analyze the effects of neighborhood
characteristics - especially their race/ethnic and economic makeup - on
individuals' decisions about where to move. This research is based on unique
data from the Los Angeles Survey of Families and Neighborhoods on residential
mobility and neighborhood characteristics. It will examine the residential
mobility of individuals using statistical models for discrete choice. Using
realistic computational models, it will also examine the implications of
individual decisions for changes in patterns of racial and economic segregation.
The second part of the research will evaluate these models by adapting novel
statistical methods for the evaluation of computer models. These methods have
been applied to problems in engineering, atmospheric science, and
transportation, but have yet to be applied in the social sciences, will be used
to assess how well the proposed models explain and predict historical changes in
the distribution of populations across neighborhoods, as shown in data from the
Decennial Censuses.

This research will make a number of scientific contributions: (1) It will be a
major advance over past studies of residential segregation, which have tended to
rely on Census data, vignette data on survey respondents' stated preferences for
neighborhoods, or oversimplified artificial models of residential mobility. The
proposed research combines data with an explicit model of the relationship
between individual mobility and aggregate neighborhood change. (2) It will serve
as a demonstration of how to analyze the interdependence of micro level
phenomena (residential moves) and macro level phenomena (residential
segregation) at both the theoretical and empirical level. (3) It incorporates
state of the art methods of evaluation of computational models into social
science research for the first time. (4) It will serve as a prototype for
further contemporary and historical analyses of residential segregation
throughout the United States.

This research will also have an impact beyond its specific scientific
objectives: (1) In focusing on racial and economic residential segregation, it
confronts one of the most enduring social problems in the United States.
Segregation is a key source of persistent inequality, social disadvantage, and
conflict. Understanding the processes that maintain and change it is a vital
social issue. (2) The proposed research will serve as a paradigm for
interdisciplinary collaboration between statisticians, who have a deep
understanding of general methodological issues and the applications of
methodology in numerous disciplines, and social scientists, which have a deep
knowledge of subject matter in their own fields but limited familiarity with the
latest methodological developments. (3) It will develop methods of analysis and
empirical examples that can be used to bring rigorous simulation methods into
social science curricula. (4) It will serve as a model for the dissemination of
scientific results. In addition to the usual venues for the publication of
research results, it will provide a web site that makes publicly available all
documentation, intermediate data, software, and working papers.