* 0340614
* US-France Cooperative Research: Computational Investigation of the Mechanisms of Nanoparticles Generation in Laser Ablation
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Leonid Zhigilei, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 03/31/2007
* USD 15,000.00

0340614&lt;br/&gt;Zhigilei&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this three-year U.S.-France
cooperative research award, Leonid Zhigilei of the University of Virginia and
Tatiana Itina of the University of Aix-Marseille II will conduct computational
investigation of the mechanisms of nanoparticle generation in laser ablation.
Specifically, their goals are to (1) develop an advanced multiscale model of
processes leading to nanoparticle formation in laser ablation of organic
materials and metals and (2) perform comprehensive computational investigations
of the parameters that control the evolution of the velocity, size, and spatial
distributions of the ejected particles in the ablation plume. Understanding the
mechanisms of nanoparticle generation in laser ablation is important for
optimizing experimental conditions and for nano material fabrication or
deposition of metal particles for catalysis. The project takes advantage of
French experimental expertise in lasers and computational
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates research and education in
computational materials science and includes training of graduate students in
international multidisciplinary research. The investigators plan to integrate
their research results into a graduate course on modeling in materials science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) jointly support this project. NSF
will cover the costs of visits to France by the U.S. investigator and graduate
students. The CNRS will provide support to the French investigator for visits to
the United States. &lt;br/&gt;