* 0340181
* SBIR Phase I:  Portable SI-HPLC  Analyzer
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Garth Klein, FIAsolutions
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes the
development of a portable and fully automated chromatographic based analyzer.
This analyzer will integrate several proven technologies to produce an automated
instrument that is compact, robust and easily implemented for on-line, at-site,
or field-ready use, especially where complex HPLC (High Performance Liquid
Chromatography) analyses are needed. Based on Sequential Injection (SI) protocol
and HPLC instrumentation, this instrument will be full automated and provide an
integrated approach with respect to sample collection, pretreatment, chemical
modification, separation and detection of target analytes. This chemical
analyzer will exploit several novel technologies including sequential injection,
portable high-pressure syringe pumps and sol-gel HPLC columns in its development
of this hybrid analyzer referred to as Sequential Injection for High performance
Liquid Chromatography (SI-HPLC). Although HPLC is a fundamental fixture in many
laboratories; it remains largely a bench-top instrument due to its overall large
size, high power consumption and need for manual sample retreatment/preparation
prior to analysis. By integrating several evolving technologies, HPLC analysis
can be fully automated and conducted at much lower pressures, which will also
make this analyzer very compact and truly portable as well as energy efficient.
The proposed SI-HPLC instrument will find applications at on-line process
control, at-site environmental monitoring or as a multipurpose field-ready
analyzer for medical, law-enforcement or military use. The SI-HPLC instrument
will be a low cost, portable system that is highly adaptable to different
applications since it will rely on an open architecture made possible by
software programmability. Sequential Injection technologies make this analyzer
ideally suited for use by untrained personnel or for remote autonomous analysis
since sample handling and preparation can be completely automated. Examples for
SI-HPLC use will be for online process control (e.g. pharmaceuticals) to provide
real-time feedback for Quality Control or optimal product yield; at-site
monitoring of pesticide or leachate contamination of water sources; or as a
field-ready analyzer for mobile hospital units. The SI-HPLC instrument will have
broad application since it will employee widely accepted/desired HPLC
methodologies into a completely portable and cost-effective field analyzer.

