* 0340774
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Microbiological Survey and Inventory of Gregarines Parasitizing Aquatic and Riparian Insects of the Texas Big Thicket
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2008
* Richard Clopton, Peru State College
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 09/30/2008
* USD 207,500.00

Microbiological Survey And Inventory Of Gregarines Parasitizing Aquatic And
Riparian Insects Of The Texas Big Thicket: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental
questions of biology remain "What is it?"; and, "What does it do for a living?"
These questions are answered by studies of biodiversity that survey the
organisms of a region and try to understand how these organisms contribute to
the stability and diversity of the system. This project is a study of biological
diversity that targets an understudied group with profound scientific
implications: the most common parasites (gregarine protozoans) of the planet's
most common animals (insects). Although scientists estimate that over 5 million
species of gregarine parasites exist, less than 2,000 species are currently
known, thus the project will discover a large number of new parasitic species
that play an important ecological and evolutionary role in the stability and
diversity of aquatic and riparian (shoreline) habitats in the Big Thicket of
eastern Texas. The project focuses on the Big Thicket, sometimes called the
"Biological Crossroads of America" because plants and animals from 3 distinct
life zones all occur in the region, because no thorough survey of the insect
life in the Big Thicket exists. The Big Thicket is a permanently endangered
habitat whose biodiversity is preserved in a series of corridor parks forming
the Big Thicket National Preserve. The project will provide a robust estimate of
aquatic and riparian insect diversity in the Big Thicket predicated on a public
specimen base yielding both ecosystem and community data for theoretical studies
and management decisions in this fragile and broadly impacted federal preserve.
The project will produce host and parasite specimen collections, preserved
tissue specimens for future genetic analysis, and taxonomic descriptions and
identification documents in both electronic and printed form. Electronic
descriptions, digital images, and project databases are available through the
project's WWW site http://science.peru.edu/gregarina. This project will more
than double the existing gregarine specimen base, providing data to support
meta-analysis of gregarine diversity patterns and provides a skeleton for future
systematic revision of the Nearctic gregarines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is important in a larger societal context for both scientific and
infrastructural reasons. Scientifically, the project provides important
information no only about insects and their parasites, but about the factors
that create and maintain parasite diversity. Thus the scientific implications
extend from the theoretical ecology of emerging disease to the design and
evaluation of federal, state, and local biodiversity management strategies in
America's parks and reserves. Perhaps more importantly, the project places a
premium on undergraduate training through all phases of the research. These
training opportunities will increase diversity within science: historically over
50% of our undergraduate researchers are from underrepresented groups. The
project is designed to train a new generation of scientists to meet the needs of
American science in the new millennium while developing and providing new
Internet resources for public education and the public at large. Biological
indicator data is made available for download and use in formulating public
policy and resource management strategies.&lt;br/&gt;