* 0340544
* Polarimetric Radar Operation in Support of North American Monsoon Experiment (NAME)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Steven Rutledge, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 12/31/2007
* USD 519,417.00

The North American Monsoon Experiment (NAME) is a multi faceted research effort
that strives to improve predictability of warm season precipitation over North
America. Currently, the prediction of warm season precipitation on short- to
medium-range timescales in the region extending from southern Mexico into the
United States is hampered by a lack of understanding of precipitating systems
within the monsoon, and the inability to accurately parameterize these
precipitating systems in numerical weather prediction models. Several key
interrelated physical processes fundamental to understanding and predicting the
monsoon system remain poorly quantified, including: the bulk structure of the
monsoon; the structure, kinematics, morphology, and diurnal cycle of individual
precipitating systems (including mesoscale convective systems) within the
monsoon; and, the interaction of precipitating systems with the variable surface
properties in the region over the Sierra Madre Occidental (SMO), the Gulf of
California and the intervening coastal plain, as well as the influence of the
oceanic forcing on nearby continental precipitation (and vice versa), land
surface memory processes, surface fluxes, and evapotransporation.

To study these processes in detail, a comprehensive NAME Enhanced Observing
Period (EOP) is planned for the Summer of 2004. Central to the goals of the NAME
EOP is the continuous operation of the a research polarimetric Doppler radar,
which will complement ongoing, long term observations and coincident EOP
observations such as enhanced radiosonde, pibal, and profiler networks. Specific
NAME EOP objectives key to the campaign that will be addressed under this
research include:

o documentation of the horizontal distribution of rainfall amount and intensity
partitioned by convective and stratiform components, as a function of storm
type, location, and environmental forcing;

o measurement of the diurnal cycle of rainfall, convective intensity, storm
morphology, and microphysics that will be crucial in diagnosing the physical
processes behind precipitation in the region and thus links to predictability in
the region;

o identification of 2-D airflow within precipitating features, as well as other
boundary layer flows including breeze fronts, gulf surges, and their role in
convective initiation;

o hydrometeor identification allowing evaluation of microphysical
parameterizations in cloud resolving models and convective parameterizations in
numerical weather prediction models.

The Doppler and polarimetric data from NAME will be carefully analyzed using
several existing methods. The polarimetric data will be used to identify
dominant precipitation particle types in the convection and surrounding
stratiform precipitation. The intellectual merit of this research consists of
exploring the physical and dynamical characteristics of tropical convection in
the immediate vicinity of significant topography. New results on the nature of
tropical precipitation are expected to be gained from NAME. The Doppler data
will provide for broader impact on the overall science by acquiring data to
validate numerical models of the monsoon precipitation, and in particular,
improving the ability to model the moisture transport into the southwest U.S.
that drives the late summer rainfall in those regions. Hence better forecasts of
heavy monsoonal rainfall in the southwest U.S. are expected as an outcome of
NAME.