* 0340438
* SBIR Phase I:     High Throughput Screening of High Efficiency Spin Injection Materials in the Transparent Room Temperature Ferromagnetic Doped Indium Oxides
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Young Yoo, Intematix Corporation
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,988.00

0340438

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will address the high
efficiency spin injection materials. One of the major technical barriers to
realize the practical implementation of spin-controlled devices is the
development of spin injection contact materials that will effectively inject
spin polarized electrons into semiconductors. One approach is the development of
room temperature, soft ferromagnetic semiconductors. Based on Intematix's
proprietary combinatorial technology of materials research, transition metal
doped In2O3, well-known wide bandgap semiconductor, was found to have impurity-
free, room temperature ferromagnetism with high solubility of dopants. With many
emerging new diluted magnetic semiconductor materials troubled by magnetic
impurities, the impurity-free magnetism in doped In2O3 raises a significant
possibility of spin polarization in this wide bandgap semiconductor. The goal is
to realize a thin film device to confirm its spin injection efficiency, thus
paving the way for a wide range of practical device applications in Phase II.

The discovery and confirmation of efficient spin injection materials in thin
film device setting is the key to the spintronics semiconductor industry, and
its potential benefits to the U.S. economy and environment is enormous. It will
set off the industry of spin-enabled semiconductor devices from sensors to spin-
current amplifying transistors. Once realized, the spintronic devices will
quadruple the capacity and speed of conventional semiconductor devices. This
will eventually lead to create quantum computers that encode information in four
different spin states -- up, down or two mixtures of both -- instead of
representing data in binary digits, as is the case at present. Eventually it
will create the spintronics industry whose market is projected to be bigger than
the current semiconductor industry.