* 0340145
* SBIR Phase I:     High-Resolution Absolute Linear Encoder Based on a Spintronic Sensing Array
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Gurpreet Singh, MICRO MAGNETICS INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

0340145&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will explore the feasibility of &lt;br/&gt;developing an absolute, high-
resolution linear encoder leveraging the evolving &lt;br/&gt;technology of
spintronics. An array of magnetic tunnel junction sensors will sense
&lt;br/&gt;spatially varying magnetic fields generated by lithographically
defined micron-scale &lt;br/&gt;current carrying conductors with known
geometries. Absolute spatial encoding will be &lt;br/&gt;achieved by a unique
mapping of sensor outputs to linear displacement. The proposed device will be
&lt;br/&gt;an absolute encoder, which will dramatically reduce power
consumption. In the Phase I &lt;br/&gt;work, this idea of a magnetic encoder
based on tunnel junction technology will be &lt;br/&gt;brought from a purely
theoretical idea to the prototyping stage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
product will be low-cost, low power, robust, and extremely sensitive compared to
existing techniques and thus may create brand new markets for encoder
technology. The potential impact of the proposed work will thus be felt in every
field requiring precise measurement of displacement, such as personal
electronics, robotics, machine tools, wafer handling equipment, scientific and
medical imaging, micromanipulation, and motion control systems. The development
of an array of magnetic tunnel junctions with submicron resolution will be of
great utility in many fields of basic and applied research, particularly in the
emerging fields of nanotechnology, biomagnetism, and spintronics.