* 0340712
* Advance Fellows Award:  The WTO and Food Aid:Preserving Humanitarian and Developmental Benefits
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Linda Young, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 01/31/2009
* USD 379,380.00

The World Trade Organization is conducting negotiations to reduce barriers and
subsidies for&lt;br/&gt;agricultural trade. A key proposal has emerged that
could eliminate the ability of donors,&lt;br/&gt;particularly the United States,
to give non-emergency food aid in-kind to less developed
and&lt;br/&gt;developing countries. Currently, one-third of project food aid is
sold on recipient country markets&lt;br/&gt;and the funds raised are used to
finance a wide variety of development projects, including but
not&lt;br/&gt;limited to projects designed to increase food security. However,
the food aid sold can have a&lt;br/&gt;detrimental impact on local commodity
prices, and the resulting price depression and instability&lt;br/&gt;can be a
disincentive for agricultural production. Many recipient countries are trying to
increase&lt;br/&gt;their agricultural production with the goal of enhancing
their food security and increasing their&lt;br/&gt;export earnings. This
research will evaluate (1) the impact of monetized food aid
on&lt;br/&gt;developing country markets and possible disincentives to
agricultural production and (2) the&lt;br/&gt;benefits from the projects
sponsored by the funds raised from the monetized food aid. The PI
will&lt;br/&gt;develop relevant models, collect price and market data in
selected countries, and estimate the&lt;br/&gt;impact of monetization on case
study markets and agricultural sectors. This analysis will
be&lt;br/&gt;presented to decision makers in a tradeoffs framework, a highly
intuitive graphical analysis. This&lt;br/&gt;will enable them to value the
social benefits of the market impacts and the development projects&lt;br/&gt;and
make corresponding choices. This analysis will be a critical input to the
development of WTO rules that preserve the humanitarian and developmental
benefits valued by affected countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
extend the PI's empirical evaluation of food aid in the 1990s.
The&lt;br/&gt;models of food aid the PI developed and empirically tested analyze
the relationship between food&lt;br/&gt;aid donations and need. Separate models
portray the relationship between food aid and (1) need&lt;br/&gt;due to
production shortfalls and (2) need as embodied in chronic hunger due to lack of
access to&lt;br/&gt;food. The PI's research focus is on issues inherent in
economic integration. The PI's research&lt;br/&gt;program explores the tension
between the realization of domestic policy goals and
trade&lt;br/&gt;liberalization and has investigated the impact of policies and
institutions on markets and the&lt;br/&gt;resulting welfare consequences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's goal with this ADVANCE Fellow Award is to obtain
a tenure track position at Montana State University. In this position, she can
more effectively participate in the teaching and research mission of the
University and engage in the public debate and policy discussion focused on
issues due to economic integration. She has developed and taught a pilot class
on "Issues of Economic Globalization" and proposes to further develop a web-
based platform for this course. This curriculum is one of the broader impacts,
as it will provide a basis for the PI to outreach to the many government and
non-government entities seeking an enhanced understanding of these issues. The
research results will be presented to both academic audiences and to researchers
and decision makers in multilateral institutions. Working in developing
countries will enhance the PI's ability to form research collaborations with
colleagues in these countries. It will also increase her ability to contribute
to international research efforts at MSU, many of which involve multiple
disciplines. A tenure track position is vital for the PI to be influential in
her discipline's leading research forum and to mentor female graduate students
and academics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;