* 0340759
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Biosensors of Protease Activity and Endomembrane Traffic in Plants
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Susannah Gal, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2007
* USD 16,759.00

0340759&lt;br/&gt;Gal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tools to probe enzyme activities and
the movement of proteins through the endomembrane system in a living plant can
advance understanding of many biological processes. The goal of this three-year
U.S.-France cooperative research award, funded by the Office of International
Science and Engineering and the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, is
to develop a biosensor, which is based on a fluorescent hybrid system, to
monitor protease activity and endomembrane protein movement in living plants.
With these tools in place, a wide variety of experiments can be developed to
probe changes in protease activity and endomembrane movement in response to
plant stress, pathogen attack and development. Protease activities in the
endomembrane system of tobacco and Arabidopsis will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. and French investigators, Susannah
Gal as the State University of New York in Binghamton and Nadine Paris at the
University of Rouen, have complementary expertise. Dr. Gal is expert in protease
biology, whereas, Dr. Paris' main interest is in membrane protein trafficking.
Graduate students will be trained in different molecular biology, biochemistry
and cell biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation (NSF) and
the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) support this joint
project. NSF provides funding for visits to France by the U.S. investigator and
graduate students. The CNRS covers the cost of travel to the United States by
the French investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;