* 0340195
* EITM:  Electoral and Party Systemic Institutions, Structure, and Strategic Context: Empirical Implications of Theoretical Models of Effective Democratic Representation.
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Robert Franzese, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 04/30/2010
* USD 200,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Political-economy theories note that policymakers have two goals: (a)
to obtain and retain power (office seeking) and (b) to enact policies and foster
outcomes they favor (policy and outcome seeking). In stable polities (i.e.,
excluding coercion), policymakers have four broad classes of policy they can
direct toward these goals: public-good provision, broadly targeted
redistribution, narrowly targeted distribution, and rent extraction. In
democracies, finally, policymaking representatives use these tools to pursue
these goals in the strategic context of partisan electoral
competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Substantively, this project will leverage and
advance theories of comparative democracy and of comparative and international
political economy to build powerful, estimable, and interpretable empirical
models that directly, but manageably, reflect the multifarious and complex
interactions of electoral institutions, of party and party-systemic structure,
and of the strategic shape of particular partisan-electoral contests in
determining the relative weight of these four classes of policy in policymaking
output. Party- and electoral-system institutions, structure, and strategic
context interact in quite complex ways to shape the effective representation of
societal interests in the ultimate policies, but, as this project seeks to
demonstrate, in ways that a nonlinear empirical-modeling strategy can encompass
effectively. One venue where the effects of such complex contextual interactions
in shaping effective representation should be more-observable is in the
composition of policymaking activity, particularly in the redistributive
(broadly targeted) versus distributive (narrowly targeted) share of budgetary
activity. Institutional, structural, and strategic contexts that induce more
partisan, interest-based representation foster greater redistributive emphasis,
and those that induce more particularistic, geographically-based representation
favor distribution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I have begun to outline such a
comparative democratic political economy of budgeteering more fully elsewhere,
arguing: (i) that the degree to which parties are able to act as strategic units
(strategic party-unity) should determine the capacity of democratic policymakers
to budgeteer, i.e., to manipulate the budget for political (i.e., electoral and
partisan) purposes, (ii) that national and district-level electoral
competitiveness should determine the magnitude of their incentives to budgeteer,
and (iii) party-system polarization, electoral-system and district magnitude,
and the degree to which parties receive their electoral support as units
(representational party-unity) should determine the nature of the budgeteering
that serves policymakers goals of gaining and retaining power and of producing
their desired policies and outcomes. The combination of capacity and incentive
size and nature, therefore, should determine the degree and character of the
budgeteering I have also begun to outline an estimable nonlinear empirical model
that could shed light on the multiple, complex interactions among these many
causal factors in shaping fiscal policies. In this theoretical description of a
substantive situation, (i) strategic capacity, c, times (ii) incentive
magnitude, m, determines the amount of budgeteering we expect, while (iii) the
nature, n, of the budgeteering that we expect in pursuing these goals depends on
several party, party-system, and electoral-system factors that shape whether
effective representation has more partisan-interest or particularistic-
geographic basis and so whether policy has more redistributive or distributive
nature. Thus, taking (for now) the ratio of redistributive to distributive
budgetary activity, R, as the dependent variable, theory predicts that
R=-+c(Xc)m(Xm)n(Xn)+-, and empirical models should reflect that proposition
(EITM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous work, I showed how nonlinear empirical
modeling can gain powerful yet interpretable leverage on the multiple, complex
interactions implied by such specifications to the degrees that theory enables
specification of the functions and their arguments, c(Xc), m(Xm), and n(Xn), and
that these functions and/or arguments differ empirically in the empirical
sample. I have so far begun to specify c(Xc), m(Xm), and n(Xn) in this new
context as (i)-(iii) of the previous paragraph sketch, and I have demonstrated
preliminary empirical plausibility and found some hope for empirical success by
showing a role of partisan strategic capacity in shaping the relative
(re)distributiveness of postwar US fiscal policy that supports the theory and
showing a pattern of coefficients on partisan- and geographic-representation
independent variables in explaining the&lt;br/&gt;policy mix in subsamples of
developed democracies divided according to my own qualitative evaluation of
conditions (i)-(iii) in those countries. This proposal would fund continuance of
this project: (a) specifying further and in tighter connection to comparative-
politics and comparative political-economy theories, c(Xc), m(Xm), and n(Xn),
(b) gathering, operationalizing appropriately, and disseminating the data
components of R, Xc, Xm, and Xn, (c) writing and disseminating the necessary
software algorithms to estimate such models, and (d) estimating such models, and
disseminating the theoretical, substantive, and methodological advances produced
thereby.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit lies both in advancing and
demonstrating an inEITMlr modeling technique for bringing theory that previously
evaded empirical evaluation due to its interactive complexity under direct
empirical scrutiny and in whatever substantively and theoretically new light is
thus shed. Given that complex multiple interaction is inherent in most classical
and modern political economy and, indeed, political theory, empirical techniques
that offer powerful, estimable, and interpretable leverage on such complexity
are crucial. This particular approach should offer much promise for usefulness
across the social sciences, where such complexly interactive causality is rife.
The research project will also involve the next generation in these advances
directly through RA-ships It also seeks to broaden their use in this and
subsequent generations through the public provision of transparent software
tools to implement such nonlinear modeling.&lt;br/&gt;