* 0340648
* ADVANCE Fellows Award: Cosmology with Sunyaev-Zeldovich Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Elena Pierpaoli, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert Scott Fisher
* 10/31/2006
* USD 527,204.00

ADVANCE Fellows Awards: Cosmology with Sunyaev-Zeldovich
Clusters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AST 0340648
Pierpaoli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Elena Pierpaoli, at the California Institute
of Technology, will undertake a program to develop theoretical methods to
extract physical and cosmological information from upcoming Sunyaev-Zeldovich
(SZ) observations. Galaxy clusters are the most massive, gravitationally bound
objects in our Universe, and their study has been pursued for several decades
with the double aim of constraining cosmology and understanding structure
formation. In the past these studies have mainly relied on optical and X-ray
information. In the near future, new results are expected from wider and deeper
optical surveys, high-resolution X-ray images, lensing studies and the analysis
of the radio (and near-infrared) maps where clusters appear through the SZ
effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will produce broad impacts in several
areas, including a code optimized for cluster detection, and the public release
of the Planck pre-launch catalog. A by product of the research will be the
production of SZ observed maps from the simulations. These will be used to
complete movies of cluster formation already developed for public outreach. An
addition of this research is the training of new scientists by involving them in
modern research. Part of this activity will involve scientists in applied
mathematics, rendering it interdisciplinary and potentially useful for
application in other fields of science. The international character of the
collaborations will provide an opportunity for the young scientists involved to
travel aborad, further strengthening their professional development and
integration into the international scientific community.