* 0340130
* SBIR Phase I:     Quantum Confined Atom Based Nanophosphors for Future Efficient Lighting
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,11/30/2004
* Rameshwar Bhargava, NANOCRYSTALS TECHNOLOGY LIMITED PARTNERSHIP
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 11/30/2004
* USD 99,800.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves the
confinement of activator ions in nanocrystalline quantum dots to enhance the
brightness and efficiency of LED-white lamps. These quantum confined atom
(QCA)-nanophosphors involve a single activator ion confined within a 2-7 nm
nanocrystal host (quantum dot) of semiconductor and insulator. The project
objective involves the fabrication of the nanophosphors and characterization of
their optical and thermal properties. The project will demonstrate that the
enhanced luminescent and thermal properties of the phosphors can be applied to
high brightness white LEDs and conventional lighting products. The improvements
in lamp efficiency should be in the 15-50 percent range depending on the
specific lamp. The project will also study the dependency of light generation on
temperature. This would be of importance not only for the high-flux and high
temperature operation of LEDs and arc lamps but would help in a basic
understanding of the thermal properties of nanophosphors.

The commercial application of this technology is in the replacement of
incandescent lamp lighting with solid state LEDs. The cost of producing
electricity is $60 billion annually in the US and lighting accounts for 20
percent of the consumption. Replacing incandescent lamps with efficient solid
state LED lamps could result in huge savings and a significant reduction in
electric consumption.