* 0340439
* SBIR Phase I:     Accessible Electronic Mathematical Content
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Neil Soiffer, Design Science, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/2004
* USD 95,922.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project explores the
feasibility of making MathML in a web browser and mathematical expressions in
Word seamlessly accessible to people with print disabilities. Print disabilities
include blindness, low vision, dyslexia and other learning disabilities. While
others have explored aspects of accessibility in stand-alone applications,
nobody has integrated access to mathematical content for those with print
disabilities into users' existing screen readers or other assistive technology.
This proposal brings together work on various aspects of making mathematical
content accessible and pushes forward the state-of-the-art in audio rendering of
mathematical expressions, navigation of mathematical expressions with audio
feedback, and synchronizing audio rendering with highlighting the corresponding
subexpression. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accessibility of electronic content is a
requirement of the Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1998, Section 508.
Increasingly, states are adopting similar requirements for state-funded
entities. Accessibility laws apply to all forms of content, not just textual
content. These laws enforce the need to make all forms of electronic content
accessible, including mathematical content. The results of this work will be
incorporated into MathPlayer (a free software add-on for Internet Explorer (IE)
that enables IE to display MathML in web pages) and MathType (a software
application for authoring and displaying mathematics within word processors).
Between these two applications, all MathML in web pages and mathematics in
documents can be accessible to people with print disabilities. Many states have
laws requiring textbooks to be accessible. The results of this project will
present a fast and inexpensive route for publishers of textbooks with
mathematical content to satisfy these laws. More importantly, the availability
of these books and other documents coupled with accessible authoring of
mathematical content has the potential to dramatically enhance the way students
with print disabilities are taught and learn mathematics, science, engineering
and other technical fields. &lt;br/&gt;