* 0340715
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:  Modeling the Survival and Potential Proliferation of Microbial Agents in Drinking Water Distribution Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2005
* Anne Camper, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2005
* USD 5,100.00

0340715&lt;br/&gt;Camper&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Anne Camper and a student
from the Montana State University in a collaboration with Woldfgang Uhl of the
Department of Water Technology at the University of Duisburg, Germany. The goal
of this collaborative international project is to enhance and expand
understanding of the transport, fate, and persistence of microbes in drinking
water distribution systems. In particular, it will lead to an understanding of
the partitioning and persistence of microbes into biofilms and other deposits
found on the surfaces of all drinking water pipes. The goal is to understand the
behavior of indicator organisms or potentially pathogenic bacteria in
distribution systems that are present due to passage through treatment,
deliberate acts of bioterrorism, or from less sinister breaches in the
distribution system. This will be accomplished by refining and validating
existing mathematical models present both at the Center for Biofilm Engineering
at Montana State University and within the University of Duisburg. The research
will involve a transfer of personnel between the two institutions, which will
substantially benefit the two students involved, giving them international
perspectives on the research. The cultural exchange between faculty and students
has impacts that reach beyond the scientific expertise that will be gained from
the collaboration. The models proposed here are important in being able to
determine the vulnerability of our water supplies to deliberate or natural
contamination events, as well as to determine the long-term impact of these
events on water safety.&lt;br/&gt;