* 0340761
* Teaching Genomics to Undergraduate Computer Science and Biology Majors: A model involving infusion and strategic linking
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Mark LeBlanc, Wheaton College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 04/30/2007
* USD 76,839.00

The emerging field of genomics (analysis of DNA sequences) requires
interdisciplinary collaborations between computer scientists and biologists.
Whereas most colleges and universities do not have full programs in
bioinformatics/genomics, new models of teaching and course materials are needed
if we are to provide undergraduate science majors with experiences in the art of
cooperation necessary to solve tomorrow's problems in genomics. A crucial
element is the design and implementation of original software by
interdisciplinary teams of students -- a focus of this teaching model. This
proof-of-concept project is infusing new content into computer science and
biology courses and highlighting the natural fit between core areas in the
computer science curriculum and challenges in genomics. Furthermore, this is a
linked teaching model by which pre-existing courses in computer science are
flexibly paired with biology courses to facilitate real-life interdisciplinary
collaborations in genomics. Course materials include specifications for guest
lectures, shared labs, cooperative programming assignments, and administrative
help for final project teams. Expected outcomes include: (1) teaching materials
transferable to academic departments (computer science, math, biology,
chemistry) of almost any size with little or no changes in staffing or funding,
(2) a model for interdisciplinary research, (3) an evaluation of students'
knowledge of genomics, appreciation for challenges of undergraduate
interdisciplinary research, and the extent of different majors reached, and (4)
a range of faculty from other institutions who are exposed to and experiment
with the infusion of genomics in their curricula using some or all of our model.