* 0340813
* ADVANCE Fellows Award: Caches As Filters Benchmark Characterization and Demonstration
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Dee Weikle, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 07/31/2007
* USD 266,626.00

CNS-0340813&lt;br/&gt;Dee Weikle&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Virginia&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Caches as Filters Benchmark
Characterization and Demonstration&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ADVANCE Fellows
award provides support to for a project to use the caches-as-filters framework
to characterize benchmark suites, specifically for the purpose of cache design,
and to demonstrate the use of the framework on the design of a small-scale
caching system. The caches-as-filters framework addresses difficulties in using
a benchmark methodology for memory hierarchy design. The demonstration of this
framework could encourage the architecture community to use design methodologies
that include more analysis resulting in a deeper understanding of design
issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in the
opportunity to provide a theoretic basis for a systematic approach to cache
design. The characterizations of the benchmarks provide useful insight into the
kinds of memory systems behavior found in real-world program and thus may
contribute to the current understanding in the field of computer memory
management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include development of new
tools that can be used by computer architecture research groups. This may
include development of new ways in which researchers will frame problems and
communicate about them as well as convey their ideas to students. The project
includes both graduate and undergraduate students within a supportive
environment. There is a strong commitment to dissemination, through a graduate
course, web site and publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;