* 0340445
* SBIR Phase I: The Delivery of Content-Rich Traffic Information to Improve Driver Decision Making
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Randall Cayford, IntelliOne Technologies Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,970.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project is an
investigation of the data reduction processes and human/computer interfaces
necessary to deliver content-rich traffic information to travelers en route.
Large volumes of traffic data, of many types and over large areas, is being
gathered by public and private agencies. To be useful to a driver while
traveling, this data must be reduced to small amounts of information and
delivered in a way that allows easy comprehension with minimal distraction. This
research proposes to analyze drivers' needs for traffic information to determine
a set of task- and goal-oriented behaviors that can be improved by high-quality
traffic information. The set of tasks and goals will determine information-
filtering contexts that will allow the specification and bandwidth-efficient
transmission of very focused traffic information to in-vehicle personal
computing devices. Interface designs will be developed that present the context-
specific information using available technologies.

The results of this research have potentially broad impacts on society. They
will drive the development of better traffic information services that truly
support the decisions drivers make as they travel. Applications based on these
interfaces can improve individual routing behavior, delivery fleet operations
and congestion management. Traffic congestion is a growing problem in most U.S.
cities. In some areas, it has become a limiting factor on economic growth.
Emphasis has shifted in recent years from providing additional capacity to
better utilization of the existing infrastructure. Broad dissemination of
traffic information in a form suitable for making optimal routing and trip
decisions allows efficiency improvements based on the decentralized decisions of
many drivers. Trip modifications based on real-time traffic data can save
individual drivers an estimated $3.9 billion in lost time, 225 million hours of
travel time, and 340 million gallons of fuel, per year. Similar savings are
possible for commercial travel, as well, through improvements in delivery
routing, on-time delivery and more efficient dispatching. Many congestion
management strategies used by public agencies could benefit from better
interfaces between the traffic data collected and the individual drivers on the
roads.

