* 0340709
* ADVANCE Fellows Award - NMR Microscopy of Structure-Function Relationships and Microfluidics in Biofilms and Cellular suspensions
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Sarah Codd, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina L. Bloebaum
* 02/29/2008
* USD 387,498.00

This ADVANCE Fellows award is to support the academic career development of the
awardee in engineering. The overall mission of the ADVANCE Program is to
increase the participation of women in the scientific and engineering workforce
through the increased representation and advancement of women in academic
science and engineering careers. It is anticipated that the ADVANCE award will
not only advance the PI's career as an engineering researcher, but also allow
her to serve as a role model and mentor to women students who are pursuing
careers in engineering, or related fields. &lt;br/&gt;This research will extend
NMR microscopy to study the structure-function and micro-fluidics surrounding
growth and decay of biofilms in capillaries and porous media and investigate
cell transport through microchannels. Biofilms are microbial colonies that grow
on surfaces. While much is known about the growth state of free bacteria, little
is known about the structure-function relationships when cells are in the
biofilm state and it is known that biofilms play a significant role in the
resistance of bacteria to antibiotic treatment. The use of novel NMR microscopy
contrast agents that are "turned on" with function, as well as the use of iron-
tagged cells will allow some of the vital questions surrounding biofilm function
to be answered. It is expected that this research, which is relevant to numerous
micro-fluidic applications such as biosensors and "lab on a chip" systems, will
have significant broader impacts in the analysis of the transport of viruses and
microbes in filtration separations. NMR microscopy methods will allow
noninvasive measurement of time and length scale dependent displacements within
opaque systems such as cell suspensions and porous media and will provide unique
data for testing of conceptual and numerical models of transport in these
systems. The collaboration between chemical and bioengineering, with physics and
chemistry, will enhance the breadth of understanding of micro-fluidics. The
awardee intends to advance diversity in her department by encouraging women
graduate and undergraduate students to work with her on this highly relevant
biofilm research. This ADVANCE Fellows award will be managed by two divisions,
BES and CTS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;