* 0340008
* SBIR Phase I:     IBARS - An Image Barcode Acquisition and Recognition System for Mobile Commerce
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,09/30/2004
* Huiping Li, Applied Media Analysis, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 09/30/2004
* USD 99,953.00

This Small Business Innovation Research(SBIR) Phase I research project seeks to
leverage the convergence of processing and sensor technologies in widely
available camera-equipped cellular telephones to develop e-commerce applications
centered on the acquisition and recognition of barcode images. Modern handheld
devices present a convergence of many technologies in a handy package, including
networking, voice, cameras, processing, location- sensing and displays. However,
small-size and long battery-life requirements lead to limited processing power,
limited-resolution cameras, and varying available network bandwidth on such
handheld devices. To make the concept feasible, improvements are needed in the
algorithms performing computer-vision, image processing, and pattern-
recognition, so that they are both computationally efficient and small enough to
fit in the memory of consumer devices. Challenges to overcome include being able
to unwarp images to account for distortions due to perspective imaging, warping
of the substrate, or non-flat surfaces. The image needs to be processed to
account for imaging artifacts such as non-uniform lighting, blurring, and
highlights. The recognition algorithms in the system must be able to recognize
many symbologies, make use of extra information available in images to tackle
degradations, and be efficient and small. This Phase I research will tackle
these issues to demonstrate feasibility.

The proposed downloadable component for barcode and signs recognition will
enable many applications including sales, order-fulfillment, information-
delivery and others. Merchants, advertisers, information providers and other
service providers are likely partners and customers for the proposed technology
besides service-providers and OEMs. Medical care delivery, military
applications, sign recognition for the visually challenged are also potential
users of this technology.