* 0340006
* SBIR Phase I:     Multi-Frequency Patch Antennas on Biased Ferrite Substrates for High-Accuracy GPS [7223-680]
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2004,06/30/2004
* Francesca Scire-Scappuzzo, Physical Sciences Incorporated (PSI)
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,838.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on the design
of a new antenna for high accuracy Global Positioning system (GPS) to be used
for geodesy, geophysics, meteorology, and transient motion for earthquake
studies. A new design is proposed for GPS user antennas that reduces multi-path
error and allows multi-frequency operation by using a micro-strip patch antenna
on biased ferrite substrates. The desirable properties of biased ferrite will
enable a smaller patch, improved antenna pattern, and frequency tunability.
Therefore the proposed antenna will be smaller, cheaper, and lighter than
existing high-accuracy GPS geodetic antennas, besides enhancing the quality of
the GPS measurements thanks to its improved electrical
performances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the increasing number of applications
of GPS in scientific research studies that require high accuracy positioning,
introducing in the market a new multi-frequency low-multi-path smaller and
lighter GPS user antenna would give new impulse to the US market of GPS for
geodetic equipment. Moreover, the proposed antenna will enable new science
applications that depend on dynamic GPS positioning at the millimeter-level.
Ferrite Substrate GPS antennas would be widely used in national and
international high accuracy GPS measurement campaigns. &lt;br/&gt;