* 0340613
* Virtual Synthesis of 3D Nanoheterostructure Units with Pre-Designed Charge Transport Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Liudmila Pozhar, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 10/31/2006
* USD 414,088.00

This project will develop a fundamental, theory-based computational
nanofabrication methodology for the virtual synthesis of three-dimensional (3D)
nanoheterostructure units - devices with dimensions less than 10 nanometers. In
effect, these structures are "artificial molecules" with pre-designed electronic
properties. These properties are determined by the parameters of the fabrication
process, the structure and composition of the fundamental building blocks, and
the structure and composition of the final device. The opportunity to manipulate
the properties of nanosystems at the atomic level will allow the virtual
fabrication of super dense, multifunctional 3D nanoscale integrated circuits and
devices. The project will (1) evaluate fundamental physical and chemical
constraints on the nanoscale building blocks, (2) develop a unified quantum
statistical mechanical approach to non-equilibrium phenomena in nanosystems, and
(3) work to understand the relations between the structure, chemistry, and
composition of the nanoscale building blocks and the electronic properties of
the synthesized 3D nanoheterostructures. The fundamental theoretical
descriptions will be simplified to develop simulation models for the simplest 3D
nanoheterostructures, such as a quantum dot consisting of a nanoscale crystal in
a pore or a quantum dot formed by fabricating nanoscale layers surrounding a
pore. These models will be used to fabricate virtual prototypes with pre-
designed properties, and the predicted performance will be compared with
experimental results.

The properties of devices with nanometer dimensions (a nanometer is
approximately 10 times the diameter of a hydrogen atom) differ from both the
properties of bulk materials and those of individual atoms. To calculate the
electronic properties of a macroscopic device such as a transistor in an
integrated circuit one can make use of the bulk properties of materials.
Conversely, to calculate the properties of a single atom or molecule it is
necessary to use quantum theory. However, a calculation of the electronic
properties of a nanoscale device requires bridging between these two length
scales and dealing with perhaps thousands or millions of potentially different
individual atoms, potentially in non-equilibrium states. To accomplish this
requires a considerable development of theory and subsequently the development
of appropriate computational models. This project will endeavor to address this
challenging intermediate scale of theory and apply it to modeling the virtual
fabrication of a few simple nanoscale devices. The results will be checked by
comparing the model results with experimental work.

