* 0340606
* US-Germany Cooperative Research:  Development of Methods for Early Detection of Degradation of Civil Infrastructure Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Masoud Ghandehari, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 12/31/2006
* USD 24,000.00

0340606 Ghandehari This award supports Masoud Ghandehari and students from the
Polytechnic University of New York in a collaboration with Karim Hariri of the
Institute for Building Materials, Large Structures, and Fire Protection at the
Technical University of Braunschweig, Germany. The collaboration will establish
a formal joint fiber-optic sensor research program for civil infrastructure
through exchange of students from two institutions in the U.S. and Germany. Most
deterioration in civil infrastructure is detected when it has progressed to a
point of severe physical damage. This occurs in transportation structures such
as roadways and bridges, in utilities such as pipelines and power delivery grids
as well as sanitation and fuel storage facilities. As with human cells, most
aging mechanisms in the infrastructure materials involve chemical reactions that
are rate-controlled by ionic transport. A sensing system that provides early
warning of this aging process would enable the implementation of timely
prevention and remedial action and a greater service life for the physical
facilities and ultimately results in substantial cost savings in infrastructure
maintenance. There are companies with subsidiaries in both countries that are
interested in product development following the preliminary research conducted
by the US and German groups. Furthermore, based on our surveys with
transportation and infrastructure maintenance officials in both countries, the
expected outcome of this research will have direct impact on the quality and
timing of decisions made in the facilities management practice in both
countries. Broader impacts of the award include application in long-term
environmental monitoring for soil, air, and water.