* 0341838
* Scoping and Developing a Circum-Arctic Environmental Observatories Network (CEON)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2004
* Patrick Webber, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Stephenson
* 07/31/2004
* USD 161,110.00

Te Circum-Arctic Environmental Observatory Network (CEON) is an international
research effort that has emerged as a primary need for advancing understanding
of the variability and long-term change within the terrestrial Arctic. CEON has
been in development since 2000 as an independent and multilaterally-derived
realization amongst nations, disciplines and established networks. This proposal
supports US participation in the international planning effort to develop and
implement CEON. This proposal aims to: scope, develop and initiate a science
implementation strategy for CEON; represent CEON and solicit input about CEON at
a selection of key meetings, conferences and workshops representing multiple
disciplines, existing networks, countries, organizations and interest groups;
convene an international workshop of prominent Arctic researchers hosted by the
Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences; and create an interim science steering
committee to help direct and facilitate these efforts by building on discussions
at the workshop to draft a science implementation strategy. The science
implementation strategy will be circulated for peer before being delivered to
the Forum of Arctic Research Operators (FARO; parent organization of CEON) at
Arctic Science Summit Week (ASSW) 2004. A CEON website will advertise
developments within CEON, which will also be published in widely distributed
arctic environmental research newsletters and electronic list-servers. It is
foreseen that these products will provide the scientific basis for various
international CEON stakeholders to sequester autonomous funding to support their
participation in CEON. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this project include the
implementation of international, terrestrial observation platforms in the
proposed multi-agency program, the Study of Environmental Arctic Change
(SEARCH), increased international collaborative opportunities for US Arctic
researchers and education of postdoctoral and undergraduate personnel affiliated
with science management of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;