* 0341349
* Magnetic Studies of Cores from Lakes in Taylor Valley, Antarctica
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,12/31/2004
* Kenneth Verosub, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Thomas P. Wagner
* 12/31/2004
* USD 34,966.00

This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs, provides support for a
project to conduct magnetic investigations of sediments from ice covered lakes
in the McMurdo Dry Valleys in concert with other paleoenvironmental work on the
sediment cores.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT This award facilitates an extraordinary opportunity to
conduct paleomagnetic and environmental studies on a suite of cores from the Dry
Valleys. The cores were collected in November 2002 by Dr. Peter Doran and his
colleagues as part of the NSF-funded project: "Paleoclimate Inferred from Lake
Sediment Cores in Taylor Valley, Antarctica". The magnetic studies will improve
the correlation between cores from a given lake, will provide new information
about past behavior of the McMurdo-Dry Valley ecosystem, and will contribute to
the development of a robust chronology for the cores. The research will
significantly augment and enhance planned research on the sedimentology,
geochemistry, mineralogy, and biostratigraphy of the cores. Funding under the
Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) program is appropriate for this
project because practical considerations dictate that sampling of the cores take
place at the beginning of August, 2003, and because both research and logistical
considerations require that the magnetic sampling be done before other samples
are collected.

BROADER IMPACTS The proposed research will contribute to a better understanding
of the McMurdo-Dry Valley ecosystem, which is the focus of a Long-Term
Ecological Research project. The proposed project will also advance the field of
environmental magnetism by demonstrating how magnetic parameters can be used to
identify different sources of sediment in a lake core. It will also provide new
insights about the behavior of the geomagnetic field at high latitudes, which in
turn will lead to development of a master curve of secular variation that can be
used for dating Holocene sedimentary sequences in Antarctica. And the project
will provide an opportunity for undergraduates to participate in research
involving Antarctic materials.

