* 0341987
* Detrital Zircon Geochronology of Colorado Plateau Mesozoic Strata: Implications for Continental Paleogeography and Paleotectonics
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* William Dickinson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 04/30/2008
* USD 219,024.00

Detrital Zircon Geochronology of Colorado Plateau Mesozoic Strata:
&lt;br/&gt;Implications for Continental Paleogeography and
Paleotectonics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;W.R. Dickinson, G.E. Gehrels, P.G. Decelles
(University of Arizona)&lt;br/&gt;EAR-
0341987&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to obtain
radiometric ages for individual sand grains of the mineral zircon by determining
isotopic ratios of uranium and lead contained within the zircon now makes it
possible to establish the ages of the eroded bedrock sources that contributed
sand grains to sedimentary strata. By applying this technique systematically for
the first time to strata of the Colorado Plateau, which exposes the most
complete Mesozoic succession in North America, we expect to advance our
understanding of the Mesozoic paleogeography of the continent to a level not
previously attainable. By coupling knowledge of the ages of potential bedrock
sources in different parts of North America with the new information on the ages
of zircon grains in strata of the Colorado Plateau, we can infer the patterns of
Mesozoic paleorivers that transported sand across the ancient continental
surface, and of paleowind systems responsible for deposition of vast paleodune
fields that are among the largest in the global geologic record. Knowing the
directions of transcontinental sediment transport through Mesozoic time will
shed light in turn on evolution of the Appalachian (eastern) and Cordilleran
(western) mountain chains of the continental margins because paleodrainages head
in highlands, and change configuration as highlands are uplifted by tectonic
activity or subdued by erosion. The design of the project involves participation
by undergraduate students in all phases of the research as junior colleagues of
the faculty investigators.&lt;br/&gt;