* 0341162
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Design and Evaluation of Protocols for Wireless Multi-Hop Ad Hoc Networks
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2007
* Katia Obraczka, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 01/31/2007
* USD 12,000.00

0341162&lt;br/&gt;Obraczka&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year award supports a
cooperative research project between Katia Obraczka and Alexandre Brandwajn of
the University of California at Santa Cruz and Serge Fdida's&lt;br/&gt;Network
and Performance Group at the University Pierre and Marie Curie in Paris, France.
The objective is to initiate an international research partnership on the design
and evaluation of protocols for wireless multi-hop ad hoc networks
(MANETs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. Fdida's and Obraczka's expertise is in
design and experimental performance evaluation of network protocols. They have
both expanded their research efforts to investigate MANETs. This is complemented
by Prof. Brandwajn's expertise in systems modeling and analytical performance
evaluation. Together, they will validate the protocols by using a combination of
simulation and analytical modeling evaluation
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, they will focus on the following topics:
integrated routing protocols for MANETs; reliable multicast for MANETs;
efficient data collection protocols for sensor networks; and energy-efficient
channel access for sensor networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique (CNRS). NSF will cover the costs of visits to France by
the U.S. investigators. The CNRS provides funding for visits to the United
States. &lt;br/&gt;