* 0341784
* SGER:     Automated Synthesis of Quantum Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2003,07/31/2004
* Igor Markov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2004
* USD 98,812.00

Quantum computation is often viewed as the next frontier in computing and
communication. Consider the following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Some quantum
algorithms run asymptotically faster than their classical counterparts. The most
striking example is Shor's number-factoring algorithm. This algorithm, in
theory, can break the widely used RSA cryptosystem (used in "Internet codes") in
polynomial time. Significant challenges remain to physically implement Shor's
algorithm for factoring large numbers, and it is currently unclear which
technology is most promising.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Quantum cryptography
provides fundamentally more secure communications. Quantum key distribution
(QKD) has been demonstrated at distances over one mile in free space and over
100 miles in fiber. The Swiss company IdQuantique is selling QKD hardware and
the U.S. company MagiQ Technologies has recently announced related
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Quantum computation can, in principle, be done
at a much smaller scale than contemporary semiconductor devices. One molecule in
liquid NMR technologies or one photon in optical implementations can perform
quantum computation or store quantum information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4.
Classical computation is commonly used to model numerous aspects of the physical
world - from sending mail and reproducing paintings to simulating natural
disasters and armed conflicts. Yet, classical computation is fundamentally
limited in its ability to simulate quantum-mechanical effects, such as
photosynthesis, radioactive decay and nuclear fusion. Quantum computers may
offer more efficient simulation in this context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum
circuits currently constitute a dominant model for quantum computation, and our
proposed work addresses automatic synthesis of quantum circuits. This work
applies to any quantum implementation technology, but it also can take into
account specific constraints and optimizations entailed by popular technologies.
In particular, practical implementations of known quantum algorithms may require
minimizing the use of gates that are expensive, slow or especially faulty in
particular technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum computations can be
described by unitary matrices. In order to effect a quantum computation on a
quantum computer, one must decompose such a matrix into a quantum circuit, which
consists of elementary quantum gates connected by Kronecker (tensor) and matrix
products. Those connections are often represented using quantum circuit
schematics. The matrix and graph-based notations for quantum circuits are
analogous to how classical logic circuits are modelled by Boolean polynomials,
e.g., during logic synthesis. Classical logic synthesis uses algorithms for
factoring polynomials, and we therefore guess that quantum synthesis algorithms
will benefit from matrix factorizations. Our preliminary research shows that
this is, indeed, the case. Motivated by our findings, we propose to take a
deeper look at the algebraic theory behind matrix factorizations (SVD, QR, polar
and others) and possible applications to quantum circuit
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;