* 0341972
* Bedout: An End-Permian Impact Site Off-Shore Northwestern Australia
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,10/31/2005
* Luann Becker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 10/31/2005
* USD 30,000.00

0341972 Becker

The cause of the catastrophic mass extinction at the end of the Permian has
been the focus of considerable debate. The PIs and others have presented
evidence that a major extraterrestrial impact likely triggered a sequence of
events leading to the destruction of >90% of marine taxa. The debate regarding
the existence and possible effect of a large end-Permian impact strongly
resembles the debate associated with the Cretaceous-Tertiary (K/T) impact prior
to the identification, confirmation, and recognition of the Chicxulub impact
site off the Yucatan Peninsula. Acceptance of a K/T impact increased
dramatically with the discovery of the Chicxulub crater.

The PIs believe they have preliminary evidence that core taken from the Bedout
High, a large subcircular structure located offshore northwestern Australia is,
in fact, an impact breccia as it contains shocked minerals, glasses, and
geochemical signatures unlike typical terrestrial volcanism. The preliminary age
of the core material is ~253 Ma. In addition, other geochemical and petrological
evidence genetically links the breccia found in the Bedout structure to other
end-Permian impact deposits worldwide.

This award will support a workshop in Australia to provide an international
forum to present the available geologic and geophysical data about the offshore
Bedout structure, the geochemical and petrologic characteristics of its core,
and to discuss possible collaborative studies needed to confirm the properties
and characteristics of this possible end-Permian crater structure. The workshop
will involve both Australian and American scientists and students, as well as
others who are familiar with and can critically evaluate the available data.
This workshop will provide the framework for a Bedout Working Group whose
purpose will be to initiate, foster, and coordinate multi-disciplinary,
international studies of the Bedout structure and its possible relationship to
the end-Permian mass extinction event.