* 0341171
* Proof of a Concept: Enriching and Promoting Undergraduate Research by Creating a Research Option in a Technical Communication Course
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2007
* Michael Alley, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 06/30/2007
* USD 54,000.00

Engineering-NEC (59) The Boyer Commission Report has urged universities to "make
research-based learning the standard" for the education of undergraduates.
Although many institutions such as the National Science Foundation, the American
Association for the Advancement of Science, and the National Research Council
have called for more undergraduate research, incorporating significant research
experiences into undergraduate engineering curricula has proven to be
challenging. To address this problem, this proof of a concept project is
creating a technical communication course for undergraduates who are pursuing a
summer research experience. The main modification for this option is to break
the course into two segments: a spring segment to prepare the undergraduates for
a summer research experience and a fall segment to allow the students to
document that research. This course culminates in an undergraduate research
symposium, which provides an opportunity to demonstrate the benefits of
obtaining a research experience and recruit other undergraduates to become part
of a research program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, the investigators
are assessing the effect of the course not only on enriching and promoting
research experiences for undergraduates, but also on the development of the
communication skills of the participants. Writings of students in this modified
course are being compared to writings of similar students in traditional
technical communication courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In essence, the modified
course has been designed so that the student participants can maximize the
benefits from their summer research experiences. The undergraduates, many of
whom are from underrepresented groups in engineering, will be pursuing research
experiences not only on-campus, but also off-campus at national laboratories.
&lt;br/&gt;