* 0341127
* Rigorous Research in Engineering Education: Creating a Community of Practice
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2008
* Frank Huband, American Society For Engineering Education
* Continuing Grant
* Russell L. Pimmel
* 04/30/2008
* USD 809,339.00

This project is establishing the structure and mechanism for training faculty to
conduct rigorous engineering education research through a collaboration of
engineering educators, learning scientists, and faculty developers. The
engineering educators are involved through the American Society for Engineering
Education. Learning scientists are involved through the Education in the
Professions Division of the American Educational Research Association. Faculty
developers in higher education are involved through the Professional and
Organizational (POD) Network in Higher Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
structure for training faculty is being established by creating and presenting
workshops for engineering faculty on conducting rigorous research in engineering
education. Five-day workshops are being offered for engineering faculty on
conducting rigorous educational research. One workshop is being held each summer
between 2004 and 2006. The development of this project is sustained through
establishment of a community of practice. The impact of the workshops and the
effectiveness of the community of practice are being assessed as part of a well
developed plan by an external evaluator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
expanding the boundaries of engineering education research by disseminating
information from the learning sciences and faculty development into engineering
education. This is allowing powerful partnerships to be formed as information
about how students learn and teaching methods that support students' learning
are being coupled with the content knowledge of practicing engineering
educators. The community of practice is enabling the effective dissemination at
a national level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;