* 0341311
* Application of Artificial Intelligence To Enhance Student Learning of Metallography
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Alan Anderson, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Don Millard
* 03/31/2007
* USD 75,000.00

This project is creating a learning environment for teaching metallography and
is developing techniques for automated microstructure recognition. In the first
phase of this project, it is developing a database of micrographs. This database
provides a gallery of micrographs and all of the required information to produce
the micrograph. In addition, it provides a description of the microstructure and
instructions for identifying the significant features and is being used as a
learning tool for students and scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second phase
of this project is leveraging the information collected from
the&lt;br/&gt;micrograph database to develop methods for automatic
characterization of micrographs through the use of image analysis and
processing, texture analysis, neural networks, and artificial intelligence
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is also leading to improved
pedagogical activities for teaching faculty in both Materials Science and
Computer Science. The work is fostering interdisciplinary cooperation and
providing student mentoring to both graduate and undergraduate students. The
modules developed are being disseminated to similar institutions to help foster
learning of metallography skills that are required in
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;