* 0341892
* OR 2020 Workshop:  Operating Room of the Future, April 16-17, 2004, Ellicott City, Maryland
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2005
* Michael Pentecost, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 01/31/2005
* USD 50,000.00

0341892&lt;br/&gt;Cleary&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this workshop is to identify
the integrated systems and general character of the operating room of the
future, with the year 2020 as a target timeframe. The workshop will include
discussion of clinical scenarios, technology requirements, training needs of
health care professionals, and technology integration issues. A report on the
"Integrated Operating Room of the Year 2020" will be the workshop deliverable
and will be made available over the Internet and in printed form. The workshop
will be small, highly interactive, focused, carefully structured, and with ample
time to promote discussion. All of the participants will stay at the workshop
site and group meals will be provided to encourage interaction and a free
exchange of ideas. Through breakout sessions, needs will be identified and an
action plan for their adaptation and development will be produced. The
summaries, needs assessments, and action plan will be made available in a format
that can be distributed to researchers holding potential solutions through new
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will lay the groundwork for
the integrated operating room of the future and will produce a prioritized list
of research areas. The workshop report will serve as a blueprint to catalyze
future research in this area, which could ultimately lead to improved patient
care. The results will be disseminated broadly through the workshop report and
publication on the Internet. The workshop will also promote collaborative
research by bringing together engineers, scientists, and clinicians from
different universities and medical centers.&lt;br/&gt;