* 0341227
* Development of a Prototype Multidisciplinary Fuel Cell Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Ali Zilouchian, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Sheryl A. Sorby
* 06/30/2008
* USD 74,991.00

This proof-of-concept project is developing a prototype interdisciplinary
undergraduate fuel cell (FC) laboratory. The development plan is being carried
out through an effective implementation of innovative techniques in fuel cell
technology to substantially improve the instructional capability of
undergraduate education. The goals of the project are being achieved through
collaboration with several leading fuel cell manufacturers with extensive
experiences in both stationary and mobile FC applications. Students from various
engineering disciplines are benefiting from opportunities the laboratory
provides in design, simulation, test and control of fuel cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is addressing simple and effective approaches
for implementation of fuel cell technology and its applications through
innovative industrial design techniques, which incorporate real-time sensory
interfaces and control. The prototype fuel cell test station consists of three
microcomputers, three data acquisition boards, several sensors and actuators and
associate hardware with eight experimental setups. New courses are being offered
in engineering curriculum to take advantage of this laboratory. Multi-
disciplinary student groups from the senior design classes are also utilizing
these resources for design projects and to interact and experience a real-world
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is directly impacting the
undergraduate education by creating a focal point for interdisciplinary
learning, a balance between theoretical and hands-on experience in undergraduate
teaching, and application of these educational tools in a vibrant technology
sector. An objective evaluation plan is being utilized to assess the
implementation of the proposed modules and determine the level of achievement
for each stated outcome objective. The results of the project will be published
in relevant journals and presented at appropriate conferences. Information will
also be made available for possible users via a website hosted by the
institution.&lt;br/&gt;