* 0341927
* Interregional Interaction in Middle Horizon Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Justin Jennings, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2006
* USD 146,621.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Justin Jennings and an
international team of colleagues will conduct three field seasons of
archaeological research in the Cotahuasi Valley of highland Peru. The project
will investigate the nature of the Wari state (A.D. 600-1000 AD) by extensively
excavating the site of Collota, a Wari-influenced site near the river bottom.
Unlike the better-known Inca Empire, there are no written accounts of Wari. We
know that Wari's architecture and ceramic styles spread across Peru, but the
political, economic, and social relationships that the state maintained with
peripheral regions remains poorly understood. To better comprehend these
relationships, the excavations are designed to uncover data on ceramic
assemblages, diet, mortuary remains, and architecture from Collota and an
associated cemetery. These data will then be compared with the material remains
collected from excavations in both the Wari heartland and in Wari influenced
sites from other regions. For example, we will use neutron activation analysis
to trace where the clay was from that was used to make Wari-style ceramic
vessels. These data can tell us if the valley produced its fine ware locally or
if the people received it from the capital or a provincial center. In another
example, we will use carbon isotope analysis to trace changes in diet during the
period of Wari influence. Incorporation into the state often led to shifts in
what men, women, children, the rich, and the poor ate, and this isotopic data,
along with botanical remains, will help us identify these shifts. These, and the
other data sets that we will recover through our excavations, will help us in
understanding the relationship between the people of Cotahuasi and the Wari
state.

The emergence of the Wari state radically transformed the evolutionary
trajectory of societies in the Andes. Our research will help clarify this
pivotal period in history, and moreover address important theoretical debates
regarding the complex nuances of culture contact and the difficulties of
distinguishing between a broad range of interregional interactions based solely
on the archaeological record. The results of this research, therefore, have
intellectual merit not only because it helps to clarify the nature of an
important period in Peruvian prehistory, but also because it will contribute
theoretically and methodologically to the study of early state expansion and
political economy. This research has broader impacts as well because it will
provide a cultural exchange between United State university students, Peruvian
university students, and Cotahuasi villagers. In this exchange, all participants
will enhance their training in archaeology and further their understanding of
the past. Further, some of the equipment from this project will be donated to a
Peruvian University and the results of this research will be used in our
continuing efforts to develop sustainable archaeological tourism in the
Cotahuasi Valley in concert with local authorities and adventure guides. The
results of this project will be disseminated widely to both scholars and the
general public.

