* 0341783
* IAI Small Grant Program 2 (SGP II)
* GEO,GEO
* 09/01/2003,02/28/2006
* Gerhard Breulmann, Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 02/28/2006
* USD 640,000.00

0341783&lt;br/&gt;Breulmann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Inter-American Institute
for Global Change Research (IAI) is carrying out an award program to encourage
collaborative activities in global change research among scientists and
institutions of the IAI member countries. The Small Grants Program - 2 (SGP-II)
is the foundation of a second phase of IAI programmatic development, leading to
the establishment of new long term research networks that will succeed the
current Collaborative Research Network, supported in part by a separate NSF
grant. High priority is given in selection to high-quality science addressing
the Institute's current Scientific Agenda and the participation of new
scientists and institutions from IAI member
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Requiring the involvement of scientists
representing institutions from at least three IAI member countries, the SGP-II
program facilitates and enhances regional and international cooperation. It
strongly encourages the participation of early career scientists, promotes
linkages and interactions with other regional or international projects or
programs like Diversitas, IGBP, IHDP, WCRP and START, as well as increasing the
involvement of policy- and decision-makers in the design of scientifically
rigorous proposals. The SGP-II program provides support for research and
capacity building efforts including mainly graduate/post doctoral support,
travel and meeting costs, communications, publications and disseminations costs,
computers and software, and only very modest support for salaries of
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SGP-II encourages research beyond the scope
of national programs by advancing comparative and focused studies based on
scientific issues important to the American region as a whole. In this way each
member country that participates benefits from the enhancement of regional
relationships, the establishment of new institutional arrangements, open
exchange of scientific data, and information generated by the Institute's
research programs. All SGP-II results will be available on the IAI website and
through the IAI Data and Information System.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;SGP II is
encouraging research beyond the scope of national programs by advancing
comparative and focused studies based on scientific issues important to the
American region as a whole. In this way each member country will participate in
the IAI benefits from the enhancement of regional relationships, the
establishment of new institutional arrangements, open exchange of scientific
data, and information generated by the Institute's research programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Member countries of the IAI are: Argentina, Bolivia,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Guatemala, Jamaica, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela,
and the USA.