* 0342530
* Atmospheric Trace Constituents and Global Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Wei-Chyung Wang, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 01/31/2008
* USD 421,478.00

The main objective of this research project is improved understanding of ozone-
climate and aerosol-climate processes and interactions. The PI and his group
will develop and apply climate models in combination with observations to study
these processes and interactions and for evaluating the direct and indirect
effects of aerosol forcing. The research is collaborative with Ivar
Isaksen/University of Oslo on both the chemical aspects of radiatively-
chemically active constituents, and the development of the SUNYA global climate-
chemistry model (GCCM). The GCCM is based completely on the Community Climate
System Model (CCSM).

The PIs will incorporate modules for stratospheric chemistry and sulfur
chemistry into the GCCM, as well as the develop parameterizations for aerosol-
cloud microphysics. The model will then be used to study: (1) the role of
stratospheric and tropospheric O3 in affecting the present and future climate
and the effect of future climate changes on atmospheric chemistry and O3
distribution, and (2) the direct and indirect effects of sulfate aerosols.

Broader Impacts: This research has the potential to improve a community-use
climate model. It also should improve understanding and the ability to project
future climate changes based on chemistry - atmospheric dynamics interactions, a
benefit to environmental managers and policy makers. It provides post-doctoral
training opportunities.