* 0342750
* Environmental Gradients and Variation in the Strength of Bird Predation on Oak Herbivores
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Robert Cooper, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 02/29/2008
* USD 350,556.00

Most ecologists now agree that predators and resources interact with the abiotic
environment to influence the ecology of most herbivores. Recent interest lies in
determining the relative effects of these two factors on herbivores, and how
these factors vary in space and time. This study compares three competing
theories to explain why predation pressure on herbivore communities varies in
space. We propose that A) foliage quality, not plant productivity, determines
the productivity of herbivores on plants, and B) herbivores vary in their
vulnerability to predators. Consequently, C) predation pressure on herbivores
increases with increasing foliar quality, and prey that are less vulnerable to
predation will accumulate on high-quality plants. We plan to test these
predictions by exploring variation in the strength of bird predation on
arthropods of red oak along a gradient in elevation at the Coweeta Long-term
Ecological Research site. Recent work has shown that some herbivores increase in
density with elevation, while others decline. At the same time, foliar quality
increases with elevation, while plant productivity does not. Together with
results from bird predation experiments, these results suggest that the impact
of birds on free-living herbivores increases with elevation at Coweeta, leading
to the accumulation of less vulnerable prey (leaf miners) on high-quality
plants. The goals of this study are: 1) to validate apparent changes in
herbivore with elevation that have been observed at Coweeta; 2) to assess the
relative impact of bird predation on arthropod communities along the gradient in
elevation; and 3) to assess the effects of changes in foliar chemistry on oak
herbivores over this elevational gradient. These goals will be addressed using a
combination of field sampling, exclusion experiments, and laboratory feeding
trials. Our study will provide fundamental information on how changes in
predation pressure at the landscape level influence populations and communities
of herbivores. The study will contribute to the training of undergraduate and
graduate students. Outreach activities at Coweeta will ensure that research
activities are available to K-16 students and to the general public. All data
collected will be available to the public and the scientific community via the
Coweeta web page. Arthropods collected during the study will form part of the
Coweeta collections, hosted by the State Museum of Georgia, and open to the
general public. In addition, the data collected will contribute to an
understanding of the role of insectivorous birds in forests and the potential
impacts of avian declines on ecological processes in forests.