* 0342285
* Alan T. Waterman Award
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2008
* Angelika Amon, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Elizabeth S. Sztul
* 07/31/2008
* USD 500,000.00

Dr. Angelika Amon is a young cell biologist who explores how chromosomes are
duplicated and partitioned prior to cell division. She has been selected as the
2003 recipient of the National Science Foundation's Alan T. Waterman Award. This
award is the National Science Foundation's highest honor for young scientists
and engineers and is named for the first director of the Foundation. The Alan T.
Waterman awardee receives a medal and a grant of a $500,000 over three years to
pursue her scientific interests. Dr. Amon is the fourth woman to receive the
Waterman Award and the third recipient from MIT. Though Dr. Amon's findings are
based on fundamental studies in yeast, they could lead to a better understanding
of cellular malfunctions resulting in tumors, birth defects and miscarriages.

Dr. Amon is a faculty member of the Center for Cancer Research at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT) and an investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute (HHMI). Her papers have been characterized as "classics," and her
studies have been said to have "completely reoriented the cell-cycle field."

Dr. Amon examines the intricate mechanisms of two key processes in cell
reproduction: mitosis and meiosis. For a cell to replicate exactly, and then
exactly again after that, its genetic information must be duplicated and a copy
must go into each daughter cell before the daughter cells go their separate
ways. When a cell prepares to divide, the DNA encoding all its genetic
information is packaged into structures called chromosomes. Most of the cells of
higher organisms contain a double set of genetic information, which, prior to
cell division, is packaged into a double set of chromosomes. In mitosis, a
"mother" cell, with its double set of chromosomes, divides into two "daughter"
cells, each with a double set of chromosomes containing the same genetic
information as its "mother." In meiosis, the double set of chromosomes from the
"mother" cell is sorted so that each resulting cell receives a single set of
chromosomes. The cells resulting from the process of meiosis are called
"gametes" and are specialized for sexual reproduction; male gametes are sperm,
and female gametes are eggs. The sorting of chromosomes into daughter cells by
mitosis or into "gametes" by meiosis requires a precisely choreographed
biochemical ballet as various molecules bind to, activate, inhibit, and
ultimately regulate the movements and sorting of chromosomes.

Dr. Amon has discovered that these processes involve regulators that are
themselves regulated by a mechanism called "spindle position checkpoint." In the
successful partitioning of chromosomes to new cells, timing is everything.
Daughter cells do not do well if they make their "mitotic exit" without first
receiving an exactly complete complement of chromosomes. Dr. Amon's long-term
goals are to test whether the mechanisms she has discovered in yeast also
operate in mammalian cells and to determine what role they play in tumor
formation or in aneuploidy, the condition of missing or extra chromosomes.