* 0342157
* Condensed Matter Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2007
* Steven Girvin, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2007
* USD 540,000.00

This award supports theoretical research in condensed matter physics. The
research includes investigations of the quantum and statistical mechanics of
diverse important quantum phases of matter including such topics as: quantum
magnets, quantum coherence in mesoscopic devices, novel correlated states of
atoms in condensates and optical lattices, two-dimensional electron gases and
bilayer systems. Analytical as well as quantum and classical Monte Carlo and
other numerical techniques will be applied to the study of these phenomena. New
numerical techniques with wide applicability will be sought, developed and
investigated. This work will advance our knowledge on these broad fronts and
will make close contact with experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has
an interdisciplinary component which brings together ideas and methods used in
the condensed matter and atomic physics communities and will help foster
communication between these two groups. Postdoctoral fellows, graduate students
and undergraduates will all be trained in these areas. Results will be
disseminated widely including through the Boulder Summer
School.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research in
condensed matter physics. The research includes investigations of the quantum
and statistical mechanics of diverse important quantum phases of matter
including such topics as: quantum magnets, quantum coherence in mesoscopic
devices, novel correlated states of atoms in condensates and optical lattices,
two-dimensional electron gases and bilayer systems. Analytical as well as
quantum and classical Monte Carlo and other numerical techniques will be applied
to the study of these phenomena. New numerical techniques with wide
applicability will be sought, developed and investigated. This work will advance
our knowledge on these broad fronts and will make close contact with
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has an interdisciplinary component
which brings together ideas and methods used in the condensed matter and atomic
physics communities and will help foster communication between these two groups.
Postdoctoral fellows, graduate students and undergraduates will all be trained
in these areas. Results will be disseminated widely including through the
Boulder Summer School.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;