* 0342658
* The Creation of Mounded Landscapes by Hunter-Gatherers: An Integrated Approach to the Prehistoric Shell Mounds of the San Francisco Bay Area
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Kent Lightfoot, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Donald Grayson
* 02/28/2007
* USD 170,167.00

The National Science Foundation will support archaeological research on the
impressive prehistoric shell mounds that once ringed the greater San Francisco
Bay Area in northern California. Created by hunter-gatherer peoples beginning
about 5000-4000 years ago, the largest mounds, once rising about 9 meters in
height and extending more than a football field in size, contained thousands of
human burials, diverse kinds of artifacts, and literally tons of food remains.
Directed by Dr. Kent Lightfoot and Dr. Edward Luby, a collaborative team of
scholars from the University of California at Berkeley, San Francisco State
University, and a cultural resource management firm will address questions about
the function, ecology, and chronology of these archaeological sites. The project
will 1) synthesize existing information on recorded archaeological remains
(i.e., shell mounds, non-mounded sites, rock art sites) from the region, 2)
complete the analysis of a museum collection from the Ellis Landing Site
(CCO-295), a large mound excavated in 1906-1908 by an important figure in the
history of archaeology, Nels Nelson, and 3) undertake a detailed comparison of
Ellis Landing with a significant and recently excavated non-mounded cemetery
(ALA-343). The researchers will address how the mounds were constructed, whether
they were used as specialized cemeteries, mounded villages or simply as refuse
dumps, and how the mound builders may have influenced the ecosystems of the San
Francisco Bay Area.

The intellectual merits of the project are twofold. First, the study of the
shell mounds highlights a broader research issue in archaeology -- the
construction of mounded landscapes by native peoples across many areas of North
America. The project's integrated approach has significant potential for better
understanding the sociopolitical structures, community organizations, symbolic
systems, mortuary observances, and cultural practices of Native Americans who
constructed mounded spaces. The ultimate goal is to compare and contrast the
California shell mounds with other hunter-gatherer mounded landscapes in North
America. Only by taking such a comparative perspective can we address why
peoples created extensive mounded structures with human burials on the Pacific
Coast, the American Southeast, and elsewhere beginning about 5000-3000 years
ago. Second, the project highlights the utility of using "old" museum
collections in a prudent and carefully considered manner in contemporary
archaeological research. The project presents a model for studying a nearly 100
year-old collection by bringing together private sector and academic
archaeologists, Native American scholars, museum specialists, and environmental
scientists. They will address a suite of research questions through an
integrated approach of zooarchaeological, archaeobotanical, sediment, and
artifactual analyses, isotopic investigations of shellfish, and radiocarbon
dating of stratigraphic units and features.

The broader impacts of the project involve graduate student training, outreach
with local Native American groups, and public education. The project fosters
inter-disciplinary research by supporting graduate students in Anthropology;
Earth and Planetary Science; Environmental Science, Policy and Management;
Geography; and Museum Studies. The project will facilitate communication between
the archaeological community and local native peoples by fostering the scholarly
work of Native American members of the research team and outreach with their
tribes (Ohlone, Coast Miwok). The public educational component of the project
will involve the dissemination of findings through publications, a public
conference, and museum exhibits at both UC Berkeley and San Francisco State
University.