* 0342779
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Carbon Monoxide as a Substrate for Microbial Maintenance
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Gary King, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Richard H. Nader
* 02/29/2008
* USD 18,965.00

0342779 King

Bacteria play an important role in the global budget of carbon monoxide (CO).
Largely unknown bacterial populations in soils and the water column of aquatic
systems oxidize hundreds of teragrams per year, or about 10%-20% of the
estimated annual flux to the atmosphere. In spite of their biogeochemical
significance, relatively little is known about the identity of CO-oxidizing
populations active in situ, their phylogenic and physiological diversity or the
importance of CO as substrate for their basic metabolic needs. of CO oxidizers.
It is clear that CO at high concentrations (> 1000 ppm) can serve as a sole
source of cell carbon and energy for laboratory-grown cultures, but ambient CO
concentrations seldom reach or exceed a few ppm. Bacteria readily use such
concentrations, but are they sufficient to contribute significantly to cellular
metabolic needs? This award supports Professor Gary M. King and one of his
graduate students at the University of Maine to collaborate in research on this
question with Dr. Y. M. Kim and his research group from Yonsei University in
Korea. They will evaluate the significance of low, ecologically realistic CO
concentrations for growth and survival of two common soil isolates,
Mycobacterium smegmatis and Bradyrhizobium japonicum. This collaborative project
will include both molecular and physiological analyses of the ability of CO at
low concentrations to promote the survival and viability of CO oxidizers under
conditions relevant to their natural dynamics in soils. Dr. Kim has extensive
experience with the molecular biology, physiology and growth of CO-oxidizing
bacteria, including mycobacteria, and characterization of the genetics and
biochemistry of CO dehydrogenase, while Dr. King has extensive experience in
studying the ecophysiology and biogeochemistry of microbial trace gas
utilization, analytical techniques and instrumentation for near-ambient CO
analyses, and expertise in the design of microcosms and gas flow systems for
research.

Broader significance

Results of the study will significantly improve our understanding of the
ecophysiology of microbial CO metabolism, particularly at real-world levels.
This information is an important factor in predicting potential responses to
long-term, regional-scale disturbances in climate, land use and eutrophication
of aquatic systems. The work will involve exchanges of both U.S. and Korean
graduate students, who will benefit from learning new research techniques and
from the cultural experience. The international research experience is likely to
expand the future research opportunities of the US students in Dr. King's group.
The exchange of techniques and methods in this research partnership will enhance
the capabilities of both labs to address topical issues in the ecophysiology of
microbial groups that affect atmospheric composition.

