* 0342363
* Numerical Studies of the Landfalling Characteristics and Dynamics of Hurricanes
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Da-Lin Zhang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 12/31/2007
* USD 463,018.00

Accurate forecasts of the track and intensity of hurricanes at landfall can save
lives and reduce economic losses. Current forecast accuracy suffers from poor
representation of numerical model initial conditions, coarse grid resolution,
and inadequate model physics. In addition, understanding of the external and
internal processes controlling the track and intensity of these storms is rather
limited. The main objectives of this research are, through numerical simulations
of recent landfalling hurricanes, to (a) demonstrate that the tracks, extreme
winds and precipitation structures of these storms can be reasonably predicted
if high grid resolution, realistic model initial conditions and physics are
incorporated; and (b) study the underlying physical and dynamical processes
prior to, during and after landfall. These objectives are complementary to the
goals of the U.S. Weather Research Program Hurricane Landfall research
thrust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the above objectives, 5-day cloud-
resolving simulations of two typical landfalling hurricanes will be performed,
with the incorporation of more realistic initial conditions and improved physics
schemes. The simulation results will be analyzed to address the following
questions: Given the state-of-art model, to what extent can the observed tracks,
intensity and the rates of intensity change, and precipitation be realistically
reproduced? What are the landfalling characteristics of hurricanes as they move
from sea to land? What are the roles of large-scale flows, cloud microphysics,
boundary-layer processes, and surface conditions in determining the landfalling
characteristics of hurricanes? What is the relative significance of vortex-
Rossby and gravity-inertial waves in the development of spiral rainbands and
eyewall convection? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this research
will help support the training of a postdoctoral researcher and a graduate
student. It will also provide a better understanding of the landfalling
characteristics of hurricanes, including the inner-core structural changes and
their underlying dynamical and physical processes. This research will contribute
to the improved prediction of hurricanes at landfall and their associated
extreme winds and flooding rainfall events that have devastating effects on the
society and environment of the U.S. coastal regions.