* 0342784
* The Chemical Educator
* EHR,DUE
* 06/24/2003,06/30/2007
* Clifford LeMaster, Chemical Education Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 06/30/2007
* USD 242,396.00

This project undertakes steps to allow The Chemical Educator, now in its seventh
volume, to transition from a commercially based chemical education journal to a
nonprofit journal. New efforts are being undertaken to increase awareness of The
Chemical Educator and its benefits to those in the educational community. These
efforts include consistent promotion of the journal through advertising, direct
mailings, and presentations at educationally oriented meetings and symposiums.
In addition, efforts are being made to continue to increase the number of
submissions and the published page counts. For example, articles are being
solicited for a new emphasis on research in teaching and learning and for a new
laboratory section. With increased exposure and with increased submissions, we
expect to increase the number of subscribers to make The Chemical Educator self-
supporting. The Chemical Educator is a needed alternative journal for the timely
dissemination of chemical-education-oriented articles. Focusing on rapid
publication, quality articles, and assistance to authors, as well as features
only available using the Internet, The Chemical Educator provides unique
publishing opportunities. The Chemical Educator, published since 1996, was the
first chemical education journal to utilize the Internet for delivery of
articles and was one of the first electronic journals to be abstracted by the
American Chemical Society's Chemical Abstract Service. The journal uses all
available technology to provide educators with the necessary information needed
to disseminate improvements and ensure continual improvement of chemical
education methodologies. Working to complement other journal offerings in the
field of chemical education, The Chemical Educator continues to serve the
chemical education community as a quality forum for the dissemination of
chemical education materials.