* 0342011
* Pedagogical Reform and Performance Assessment as Frameworks for Improving Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Craig Scott, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 100,000.00

In proposing this project, the Morgan State University overarching goal is to
improve the pedagogy and evaluation in undergraduate engineering programs,
through collaborations among engineering, education and mathematics faculty, and
resulting in an improvement in the quality of student learning improving the
quality student learning of learning. The far-reaching objectives are to 1)
engage engineering students in the educative process; 2) increase student
retention; 3) improve student learning and student performance; and 4) develop
faculty who apply best practices in pedagogy and assessment. Over the one-year
period designated for the planning grant, the short-term goal of this project is
to conduct a comprehensive "content" need analysis" of mathematics courses
required for engineering programs, in particular calculus II, calculus III and
differential equations. The content need analysis applies to curricular as well
as pedagogical content. Thus, the near-term objectives are to 1) examine and
modify current pedagogy and instructional processes; 2) examine and modify
course evaluation and assessment strategies; and 3) align mathematics and
engineering content. Group dynamic strategies will be employed to facilitate the
collaboration effort. And interdisciplinary collaboration; curriculum, pedagogy,
and assessment modification; use of technology; faculty development and
training; and undergraduate facilitation are the broad activities to be
undertaken.