* 0342392
* BIOCOMPLEXITY:  Wormnet: Reconstructing The Early Evolution Of Segmented Annelid Worms
* GEO,EAR
* 06/04/2003,09/30/2007
* Kenneth Halanych, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,095,513.00

WormNet: Reconstructing the early evolution of segmented annelid worms
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;K. M. Halanych, M. Martindale, E. Seaver, D. McHugh, and
the Joint Genome Institute (J. Boore, D.
Rokhsar)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0120646&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
metazoan phylogeny has been confounded by interpretations of the degree and
nature of segmentation in body plans. In particular, the Annelida, commonly
called segmented worms, has been central to debates on the role of segmentation
in animal evolution. Recent evidence suggests that several non-segmented or
partially segmented worm taxa, that were previously regarded as separate phyla,
are within the annelid radiation. These recent results conflict with the only
comprehensive phylogenetic analyses to date on the annelids, the morphological
analyses of Rouse and Fauchald (1997). Furthermore, because annelids are one of
the most evolutionarily successful "phyla" and because they diversified in the
late PreCambrian to early Cambrian, understanding their early evolutionary
history is paramount to understanding the evolution of animal life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed work has two goals: 1) Genomic approaches
will be used to reconstruct the early phylogenetic events of the "Annelida",
which includes several previously recognized phyla, and 2) Functional genomic
techniques will be used to characterize the developmental mechanisms employed in
segmentation in several key lineages. Interpreting the segmentation, a hallmark
of annelids, in the context of the phylogeny will allow novel insights on the
role and plasticity of segmentation during animal evolution. This project has
been called "WormNet" because it represents an interdisciplinary network of
researchers, at four institutions, focusing on these goals in a manner that
enhances education and outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Additionally,
this program is designed to jumpstart other areas of research in the major
metazoan clade Lophotrochozoa (annelids, mollusks, lophophorates, and their
allies). Publicly available cDNA and genomic BAC libraries will be produced, and
data from approximately 130 completely sequenced mitochondrial genomes will
provide needed markers for population genetic and systematic studies. Given that
annelids are the most abundant and ubiquitous animal "phlyum" in the deep sea
(which covers 70% of the planet), serve as bioindicators, have a role in
bioremediation, and include up-and-coming model organisms, the importance of
understanding their evolution cannot be understated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;