* 0342931
* SGER:  An Exploratory Study of Surface Wave Dispersion in the Indian Ocean, Indian Subcontinent and Western China
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Francis Wu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2005
* USD 26,428.00

Two of the world's first order geophysical features are found in India and its
surrounding areas. First, the Himalaya and the Tibetan plateau are by far the
most outstanding topography of the Earth; based on all available evidence it is
known that the northward motion of the Indian subcontinent is the root cause
that led to its formation. But what were the geological processes in the
interior of the Earth in this area as the subcontinent plowed northward?
Furthermore, in the geoidal map of the world, the Indian Ocean basin and
southern India area is marked by the largest low anomaly. This geoidal low
implies that there is a relative mass deficiency under the area, but at what
depth and how much? Why did it form? The mechanisms that led to their formation
most probably left traces in the crust and mantle under this area. A detailed
mapping of the crust and upper mantle is therefore the first step toward
understanding the processes. Only recently data from high quality portable
seismic stations and a permanent network came into existence and data from these
networks have accumulated to a degree when significant analyses can be
preformed. The proposed work here will be performed in cooperation with Dr. S.S.
Rai of National Geophysical Research Institute (NGRI), Hyderabad, India. We plan
in the short term to use surface waves to image the lateral variations as well
as resolution of upper mantle (down to ~300 km) structures. Our longer-range
plan is to conduct a comprehensive surface wave tomographic study of the area.

