* 0342527
* Requirements for intercellular and vascular transport of Potato virus X
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Jeanmarie Verchot, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2007
* USD 434,346.00

PVX represents a group of viruses that utilize a unique mechanism for
plasmodesmata transport. Members of the virus genera, Hordeivirus, Carlavirus,
Benyvirus, and Potexvirus, all contain a highly conserved genetic module of
three overlapping open reading frames, termed the triple gene block. The TGB
proteins are named TGBp1, TGBp2, and TGBp3 and all are required for virus
movement from the initially infected cell into adjacent cells. Thus, research in
this proposal will be crucial for developing a model explaining the mechanism
for plasmodesmata transport of these four virus genera. While most plant RNA
viruses require one or two viral encoded movement proteins to mediate their own
plasmodesmata transport, PVX represents a group of viruses that require four
viral proteins: triple gene block proteins (TGBp1, TGBp2, and TGBp3) plus coat
protein (CP). Research will be conducted to identify functions of the TGB
proteins, to explore PVX protein-protein interactions, to determine the nature
of the "movement complex", and to study the role of cellular components in
mediating PVX cell-to-cell transport. In the long term, experiments will be
conducted to identify the viral and host components that contribute to each step
of the movement process.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal has four major
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;1. Determine if TGBp1, TGBp2, TGBp3 and/or CP colocalize
in plant cells, suggesting that these proteins might form a complex necessary
for virus movement. &lt;br/&gt;2. Determine if TGBp1, TGBp2, TGBp3 and/or CP
interact using in vitro techniques. &lt;br/&gt;3. Determine if TGBp2 interacts
with TGBp1 using mutational analysis and cell biology techniques. Determine if
the PVX triple gene block and CP proteins can enter and/or exit the vasculature
in support of virus vascular movement . &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of
this research will provide new information about RNA and protein trafficking as
well as intercellular communication mechanisms in plants. Cell-to-cell and
systemic spread of plant pathogens follows a path that has been named the "RNA
highway". The "RNA highway" refers to the systemic transport of molecules from
cell to cell, entry and exit from the vasculature, and general spread throughout
the plant via plasmodesmata connections that occur between adjacent cells. Plant
viruses (including PVX) have been crucial for defining the RNA highway, for
defining mechanisms for local and systemic gene silencing and defense, and for
studying functions of plasmodesmata. &lt;br/&gt;In addition, PVX is
agronomically important and there have been few studies characterizing the
mechanism for PVX replication and systemic spread. These types of studies are
important for developing novel control measures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;