* 0342538
* Phylogeny and Dispersal in the Grass-Feeding Delphacid Planthoppers (Insecta: Hemiptera: Delphacidae)
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2004,07/31/2007
* Charles Bartlett, The University of the State of New York
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 198,810.00

The insect family Delphacidae, commonly called planthoppers, is a relatively
large and widely distributed group of plant-feeding insects. The economic
importance of planthoppers is well documented. The family includes at least 55
species that feed on economic plants and includes major pests of five of the top
ten major world food crops, such as rice, sugarcane, maize, taro, and cereals.
The importance of planthoppers as pests, particularly on rice, has driven
research on their control. Plant damage results both from direct feeding and
transmission of various plant diseases capable of causing millions of dollars of
damage annually to the worldwide agricultural industry. Some planthopper groups
tend to be specialist grass feeders (including cereal crop grasses), whereas
other groups feed on sedges, rushes, and dicots. Based on environmental cues,
nymphs of grass-feeding planthopper species develop into either short-winged or
long-winged forms. Short-winged forms produce more offspring under favorable
conditions, while long-winged forms are able to disperse into new environments
when conditions are unfavorable. Despite the well-established scientific and
economic importance of planthoppers, evolutionary relationships among
planthopper groups are essentially unknown, effectively limiting biological
studies on these insects. The purpose of this research is to reconstruct, using
a combination of evidence taken from anatomical comparison and DNA analysis, the
evolutionary relationships within the planthopper family Delphacidae based on a
worldwide sample of these insects. By determining and interpreting planthopper
evolutionary history in the contexts of geographic distribution and host plant
association, the researchers will test their hypothesis that host plant shifts
to grasses are responsible for the evolutionary success (i.e., greater diversity
and range) of advanced planthoppers.

The understanding of planthopper evolution generated by this research will be of
particular importance to the control of known planthopper crop pests, as well as
for the control of future outbreaks of novel planthopper pests. This work will
also provide a framework for integrating the considerable number of scientific
studies that have been conducted on individual planthopper species. The
researchers will also develop Internet accessible keys to aid in the
identification of planthopper species; these keys will be of considerable value
to both scientists studying these insects, as well as workers in agriculture
environments affected by these insects. Additionally, the cutting-edge
evolutionary analyses carried out through this research will serve as a model
for similar studies on other plant and animal groups.