* 0342703
* Undergraduate Co-op Based Concentration Curriculum in MEMs and Nanotechnology
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Lynn Fuller, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 99,115.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Microelectronic Engineering Department of
Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) proposes to undertake a one-year
planning project to define and develop new undergraduate MEMs and nanotechnology
concentration programs. The programs will be available to students as an option
(concentration) or as a minor within the existing baccalaureate programs. A
multidisciplinary planning team will be constituted that will collect
information and conduct surveys, using industry leaders, employers and research
institutions for important guidance. With the existing BS program in
Microelectronic Engineering as a foundation, the team will seek to assemble a
multidisciplinary curriculum that best fits the educational needs of students
and the requirements of U.S. employers in the emerging field of MEMs and
nanotechnology. This is an opportunity for a department level reform in the
curriculum to equip the students with a knowledge and experience in MEMs and
nanotechnology and to expand opportunities for its graduates beyond traditional
microelectronics and in technologies requiring integration with microelectronics
such as data storage and Microsystems technologies. It is proposed to develop:
(1) 'minor' programs in MEMs and nanotechnology consisting of at least four
courses for undergraduate students of Microelectronic Engineering; (2) a
nanofabrication course for students of other science and engineering
disciplines; (3) creation of nanotechnology/MEMs based multidisciplinary design
experience for undergraduates; (4) building of cooperative experience in MEMs
and nanotechnology; (5) using co-op evaluations as a means for outcome
evaluation and technological advancement of the program; (6) develop outreach
activities for minority student recruitment and K-12 education. The curriculum
will emphasize hands-on student access to equipment for laboratory experiments;
cross-discipline mentored undergraduate research projects, and will use a
combination of existing and newly developed courses from several institute
departments or colleges. Built into the program will be means for evaluating
outcomes so that the curriculum, once established, can be updated or adjusted
according to the needs of the rapidly emerging field of MEMs and nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;