* 0342041
* Sustainability of best practices for minority STEM student retention and success
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2007
* Roberto Osegueda, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2007
* USD 2,500,000.00

This grant funds Phase III of the Model Institution for Excellence (MIE) program
at the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) minority-serving institutions to be
designated, nationwide, as a Model Institution for Excellence (MIE). The NSF MIE
Program has the overarching goal of increasing the number of under represented
minorities that pursue and earn degrees in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM). At UTEP, this goal has been translated into an effort to
increase the retention and graduation rates of low-income Mexican-American
students who pursue STEM careers. The UTEP MIE Project has evolved into
activities that support best practices focused on student success: &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; The Academic Center for Engineers and Scientists (ACES) &lt;br/&gt;
The Center for Effective Teaching and Learning (CETaL) &lt;br/&gt; The Circles
of Learning for Entering Students (CircLES) &lt;br/&gt;The UTEP Curriculum,
Course, and Laboratory Improvement Project (CCLI) &lt;br/&gt;The UTEP Research
Experiences for Undergraduates Project (REU) &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With Phase
III funds, UTEP will implement a sustainability plan that guarantees the long-
term funding of such best practices for the benefit of it's historically
underserved Hispanic-majority &lt;br/&gt;student body. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The NSF MIE Program is an ongoing experiment to create national
models for higher education that will promote participation and achievement of
underrepresented minorities in STEM, consistently and effectively. At UTEP, MIE
was envisioned as an eleven-year effort to develop, implement and test an theory
that views the college experience as an organic system that affects student
persistence and attrition. The theory is based on a longitudinal model of
individual departure that can be analyzed in terms of a student's pre-entry
attributes, intentions, goals and commitments, institutional experiences, and
integration to academic and campus social life. MIE activities developed at UTEP
reflect the main components of this longitudinal model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;