* 0342582
* Predictors of Colobus Abundance: How Populations Respond to Stress
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2006
* Louis Guillette, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Richard Kay
* 12/31/2006
* USD 179,830.00

A fundamental issue in ecology is determining factors that regulate the density
of animal populations. The importance of understanding determinants of animal
abundance has increased with the need to develop informed management plans for
endangered or threatened species. With respect to primates, these issues are
critical because tropical forests occupied by primates are undergoing rapid
anthropogenic transformation. However, understanding and predicting factors that
determine primate abundance has proven extremely difficult. Numerous studies of
forest primates have revealed a high degree of inter-site variation in density,
but there are few direct tests of general hypotheses proposed to account for
this variation. Notable exceptions are studies of folivorous primates, where the
protein/fiber ratio of available leaves has been used to predict folivorous
primate biomass. In a previous NSF, Colin Chapman showed that this relationship
applied to small spatial scales, and he was able to predict the biomass of
neighboring populations of colobine monkeys inside Kibale National Park, Uganda.
He also demonstrated diet selection for foods with high protein to fiber ratios
and tested two alternative hypotheses (colobines are energy limited or
restricted by the availability of particular minerals). However, finding single
factor explanations for complex biological phenomena, like determinants of
colobine abundance, is unlikely. Rather, recent long-term studies have
highlighted the importance of multifactoral explanations. As a result, this
current project will explore the possibility that nutrition and parasitism
operate synergistically to influence colobus population dynamics. Two approaches
will be taken. First, in a system of forest fragments monitored since 1995, this
project will test if the size of population change is a function of changes in
the availability of quality foods and the level of parasitic infections. To
partially evaluate assumptions made when taking the second approach, levels of
stress hormones, isolated from fecal samples, will be relate to the magnitude of
population change. Secondly, using long-term observation of a stable population,
the degree to which periods of stress, as indexed by levels of cortisol
metabolites in fecal material, correspond to periods of food scarcity and/or
increased parasite infections will be assessed. The broader impacts of this
study are many. For example, this information will be useful in construction of
informed management plans for folivorous primates around the world. Funding will
also facilitate long-term monitoring in Kibale, building the infrastructure of
Makerere University Biological Field Station, promoting Ugandan student training
and conservation (2 students have been identified), graduate and undergraduate
training at the University of Florida, and dissemination of this information to
the public by assisting the development of nature films (particularly with the
BBC).

