* 0342801
* Sufficient Evidence?  Building Certifiably Dependable Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2003,02/29/2008
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 02/29/2008
* USD 311,057.00

Blumenthal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems on which the safety or
security of individuals may depend are frequently subject to certification: a
formal assurance that the system has met relevant technical standards designed
to assure it will not unduly endanger the public. Today, certification of the
dependability of a computer-based system frequently relies at least as heavily
on assessments of the process used to develop it or of the qualifications of
those who produced it, as it does on the system's observable properties. While
these assessments can be useful, few would dispute that direct observation of
the artifact ought to provide a stronger kind of assurance than the credentials
of its production methods or producers could hope to do. Yet the complexity of
software systems, as well as their discrete nature, renders them extremely
difficult to analyze unless great care has been taken with their structure and
maintenance. Indeed, where extremely high assurance of specific functions is
required, simple but inflexible hardware components are sometimes used to limit
the damage that essential, but less predictable, software may
cause.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is to identify the kinds of
system properties for which certification is desired, how that certification is
obtained today, and, most important, what design and development methods,
including methods for establishing evidence of trustworthiness, could lead to
future systems structures that are more easily certified. Where these methods
cannot be identified, the study would identify a research agenda that would lead
to their discovery. Issues relating to system development processes, product
qualities, and testing, evaluation, and certification practice will be
addressed. Building on inputs and committee deliberations, a report with
findings and conclusions will be produced, subject to NRC review processes, and
disseminated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concept arose from discussions
with members of the High Confidence Software and Systems program component area
of the Interagency Working Group on Networking and Information Technology
R&amp;D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;