* 0342269
* RCN:  Geothermal Biology and Geochemistry in Yellowstone National Park
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2004,11/30/2010
* Mark Young, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2010
* USD 499,993.00

The extent and diversity of geothermal features in Yellowstone National Park
(YNP) represent a fascinating array of high temperature geochemical environments
that host a corresponding number of unique and potentially novel organisms in
all of the three recognized domains of life: Bacteria, Archaea and Eukarya. The
geothermal features of YNP have long been the subject of scientific inquiry,
especially in the fields of microbiology, geochemistry, geothermal hydrology,
microbial ecology, and population biology. The primary goal of the Research
Coordination Network is to develop a more unified effort among scientists and
resource agencies to characterize, describe, understand and inventory the
diverse biota associated with geothermal habitats in YNP. Participants of the
RCN will coordinate research and outreach activities including the development
of database systems and virtual libraries, and the application of advanced
geochemical and molecular methods to characterizing geothermal systems. The
Research Coordination Network (RCN) was developed with participation from the
following Core Group Members: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;S. Boomer, Western Oregon
College; J. Henson, Montana State Univ.; W. Inskeep, Montana State Univ.; T.
McDermott, Montana State Univ.; D. Mogk, Montana State Univ.; D. Kirk Nordstrom,
U.S. Geol. Survey; A-L. Reysenbach, Portland St. Univ.; F.F. Roberto, INEEL,
Dept. of Energy; J. Spear, Univ. Colorado, Boulder; C. Takacs-Vesbach, Univ. of
New Mexico; A. Rodman, YNP-National Park Service; M. Young, Montana State
Univ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participation of all researchers working on
geothermal biology of microorganisms at YNP will be encouraged. Regarding
broader scientific impacts, the Research Coordination Network will result in
improved collaboration among research scientists focused on advancing the
forefront of scientific inquiry in geomicrobiology, microbial speciation,
microbial physiology, microbial ecology, molecular phylogenetics, and functional
genomics. Furthermore, the targeted outcomes of the RCN will have broader
impacts to several different audiences including (i) scientific collaborators
advancing fundamental understanding of life in extreme environments, (ii) agency
personnel responsible for inventory and management of geothermal resources in
YNP, and (iii) educators focused on YNP visitors, K-12 students, undergraduate
students, and graduate students representing disciplines of geology,
geochemistry, microbiology, and ecology.&lt;br/&gt;