* 0343616
* Niche Diversification and Coexistence of Insect Herbivores along the Food Quality Axis:  Do Grasshoppers Ride the Rails?
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2004,11/30/2004
* Anthony Joern, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Mike Bowers
* 11/30/2004
* USD 373,675.00

Based on new advances in functional nutritional ecology, this study addresses
the central question: How important is food quality and availability for
determining the number, composition and relative abundances of coexisting insect
herbivore species? Primary nutritional quality (protein and carbohydrate levels)
important to insect herbivore performance varies greatly in naturally occurring
food plants, and species responses to variable food availability differ. Using
controlled feeding studies, exact predictions about nutritional conditions that
favor some species over others will be devised to predict coexistence and
relative abundances of species. Research focuses on grasshoppers, which are
abundant, diverse, functionally significant, and economically important insect
herbivores found in most grassland. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nutritional intake
targets supporting optimal performance ("balanced diets"), performance on
suboptimal diets, and capacities of common grasshopper species to regulate
nutritional intake to achieve balanced diets will be determined for food that
varies in the ratio of protein:carbohydrate. Because leaf quality of naturally
occurring food plants is not typically optimal to grasshoppers, the resulting
analytical framework will predict how grasshoppers can respond to changing
environments with suboptimal food - the typical situation. The ability of
nutrition-based theory to predict patterns of species abundance and coexistence
in grasshopper communities will be tested under naturally varying
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;