* 0343395
* Workshop on Perceptive Animated Interfaces and Virtual Humans
* CSE,IIS
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2005
* Javier Movellan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 10/31/2005
* USD 40,000.00

Perceptive Animated Interfaces represent a new generation of human computer
interaction, in which people interact with machines much like people interact
with each other in specific task domains. These interfaces incorporate virtual
humans-lifelike three dimensional animated computer characters that exhibit
expert intelligence and behaviors in specific task domains, such as learning and
training. Virtual humans orient to the user, provide real time feedback as the
user is speaking (e.g., head nods, smiles, puzzled looks), interpret the user's
auditory and visual behaviors to infer his or her intentions and cognitive
state, and communicate with the user sensitively and effectively to achieve the
goals of the task through natural face-to-face dialogues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Workshop on Perceptive Animated Interfaces
and Virtual Humans is to bring together interested researchers from scientific
disciplines to help conceptualize the challenges involved in developing
perceptive animated interfaces incorporating virtual humans, to consider
possible research agendas and the steps required to form a community that will
work together to stimulate progress toward shared research goals. Participants
include scientists from areas of human communication, human interface design,
human language technology, computer vision, computer animation, cognitive
science and other relevant fields of study. Workshop activities include
assessing current theories and practice in relevant disciplines, defining
research goals and objectives, evaluating system architectures, identifying task
domains for which prototype systems can be developed as test beds for research,
and identifying critical infrastructure necessary to conduct proposed work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of perceptive animated interfaces is
expected to revolutionize human computer interaction by providing more natural
and effective communication experiences, and to improve dramatically
opportunities for learning and training, and access to networked information.
The workshop report will recommend concrete steps toward research and
development of perceptive animated interfaces and virtual
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;