* 0343187
* Defining a Curriculum for Service Sector Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Leonard Bohmann, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 99,976.00

This is a planning grant for department level reform for the Department of
Industrial Engineering at Michigan Technological University. In this project, a
team of faculty will conduct a Delphi Study to reach consensus on the curricular
requirements for a new discipline-Service Sector Engineering. The Delphi
technique was first developed in the business world as a forecasting and
consensus-building method and has been subsequently adapted to several
curriculum development projects.

Results from this Delphi Study will be presented at future annual conferences of
the American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) and ASME. Results will
also be used to develop a full-scale implementation proposal to a future
Department-Level Reform of Undergraduate Engineering Education solicitation.

Through this project to design an engineering curriculum that will serve the
current needs of the U.S. economy more effectively than many of the traditional
disciplines. This new curriculum will likely be broadly interdisciplinary,
incorporating subject matter from several fields both inside and outside of
engineering.

Several studies have shown that groups traditionally underrepresented in
engineering, particularly women, are attracted to careers which have an emphasis
on serving society. For this reason, the development of a Service Sector
Engineering discipline will likely improve our ability to attract a diverse
group of learners to engineering studies.