* 0343968
* Collaborative Research: Gas, Cloudwate, and Rain Hydrogen Peroxide and Methylhydroperoxide Measurements in RICO (Rain in Cumulus Over the Ocean)
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Daniel O'Sullivan, United States Naval Academy
* Interagency Agreement
* Bradley F. Smull
* 02/28/2007
* USD 92,761.00

The investigators will contribute to the "Rain in Cumulus over the Ocean" (RICO)
experiment by measuring the concentration of hydrogen peroxide and
methylhydroperoxide inside and in the vicinity of clouds studied by a research
aircraft, the C-130, during flights near Antigua. In combination with other
measurements, the measured concentrations will indicate cloud age and the amount
of environmental air entrained into the clouds. The broader RICO experiment
seeks to study the mechanisms of warm-rain formation, so indications of cloud
age can make substantial contributions to the broader experimental objectives by
indicating the time available for formation of rain. The study will also
characterize the oxidization that occurs in cloud droplets and investigate if
substantial production of soluble material occurs as a consequence, causing the
residue left upon evaporation of a droplet to be substantially more active as a
cloud condensation nucleus than was the original nucleus on which the droplet
formed. Furthermore, the two peroxide species are distributed differently in the
vertical as a result of precipitation, so their ratio can identify parcels that
have been affected by precipitation. These studies will all contribute to better
understanding of precipitation processes and the characteristics of trade wind
Cumulus clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will also make important
contributions to the training of graduate and undergraduate students and so help
develop future capabilities for research in atmospheric chemistry. The
techniques to be developed, if shown to be successful, could become important
components of future cloud studies. By improving understanding of how oxidation
contributes to the growth and modification of cloud condensation nuclei, the
project has the potential to help develop a better understanding of the chemical
processes that control the microstructure of clouds and hence the interactions
of clouds with the climate system.