* 0343432
* Conference:  Thrombospondins and other Modulatory Adhension  Molecules in Tissue Organization and Homeostasis to be held June 5-10, 2004 in Pine Mountain, Georgia.
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2004,06/30/2005
* Josephine Adams, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/2005
* USD 7,000.00

This is a FASEB conference entitled "Thrombospondins and
other&lt;br/&gt;Modulatory Adhesion Molecules in Tissue Organization and
Homeostasis", to be held at&lt;br/&gt;Callaway Gardens, Pine Mountain, Georgia,
June 5-10, 2004. Modulatory adhesion molecules are components of the
extracellular matrix (ECM) that are specifically produced by cells during
organogenesis or in adult tissues. These proteins regulate cell behavior, cell
interactions, and ECM assembly. However, understanding their cellular and
molecular mechanisms of action poses special challenges because of their
diversity and tissue-specific functions. The conference will have intellectual
merit: 1) in bringing together reseachers studying distinct functions of
modulatory adhesion molecules, with different methodologies, in order to
stimulate new interdisciplinary approaches and to develop a full mechanistic
understanding of their properties; 2), in communicating recent advances in
understanding the structural and functional processes by which modulatory
adhesion molecules regulate cell motility, cell-signaling and cell interactions
in development and in adult tissues; their roles in complex circuitries of ECM
assembly and ECM turnover by extracellular proteolysis, with special reference
to cardiovascular and connective tissues. The meeting will include formal talks,
discussions and poster sessions and provide excellent opportunities for informal
interactions. Attendees will include principal investigators, postdoctoral
researchers and graduate students. 31% of the invited speakers and 33% of the
session chairs are women; 55% of the speakers are new to the meeting. In
highlighting the functions of modulatory adhesion molecules in different
biological systems and providing a rare opportunity for an up-to-date and
integrated perspective on the breadth and depth of reseach in this rapidly-
growing area, this conference will have broad impact on research activities and
thinking in the fields of ECM biology, cell interactions and tissue assembly and
will stimulate communication, collaboration and synergy, and new directions for
future research.&lt;br/&gt;