* 0343283
* Establishing a Cross-Disciplinary Bioengineering Program with a Technical Entrepreneurship Focus
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2007
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 09/30/2007
* USD 1,403,902.00

This project will undertake department level reform at Lehigh University to
establish a cross-disciplinary bioengineering program with an entrepreneurship
focus.

This program will provide students with a balance of science, humanity,
technical and business foundation through an integrated experiential learning
curriculum that includes traditional classroom lectures, research, industry,
clinical and business internships, co-ops and projects. Built on Lehigh's
tradition in undergraduate engineering education, the close relationships with
existing departments, as well as, expand partnerships with regional hospitals,
medical schools and biotechnology industry.

The project will develop 1) a rigorous curriculum that emphasizes hands-on
experiential learning, entrepreneurial and business aspects, 2) advanced
laboratories for undergraduate teaching and research, 3)o cultivate industrial
partnerships to mentor students and provide real- world problems through
entrepreneurial projects. A very detailed method for implementation has been
prepared involving developing a recruiting, admission, and advising plan that
will be integrated throughout Lehigh. Internal and external evaluation of the
project will document results and add to the body of knowledge on how students
learn bioengineering.

The program will have a local, regional and national economic impact through the
placement of our students in successful start-ups and national and globally
recognized biotechnology firms. The success of implementing this bioengineering
program at Lehigh will serve as a national model for universities and colleges
that are strong in science, engineering, design and business but are without a
medical school.