* 0343447
* RUI:Biodiversity and Ecology of Tree Canopy Biota in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Harold Keller, University of Central Missouri
* Standard Grant
* Richard M. McCourt
* 05/31/2008
* USD 124,547.00

The objectives of this proposed research project are to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1-
complete the first comprehensive survey and inventory of tree&lt;br/&gt;canopy
biodiversity from three meters to the upper canopy for
biota&lt;br/&gt;represented by myxomycetes, other mycetozoan groups
(protostelids and&lt;br/&gt;dictyostelids), fungi, mosses, liverworts, lichens,
ferns, selected&lt;br/&gt;insect groups, and molluscs in the Great Smoky
Mountains National&lt;br/&gt;Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2- assemble a
multidisciplinary research team of experts who will&lt;br/&gt;collect, identify,
and curate this diverse group of organisms and&lt;br/&gt;serve as mentors who
will give special lectures, slide shows, hands on&lt;br/&gt;identification of
specimens, and field demonstrations to aid students&lt;br/&gt;in the recognition
of specimens and collection of samples;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3-compare the
assemblages of tree canopy organisms with those&lt;br/&gt;found on ground
sites;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4-search for species new to science in all of the
targeted groups&lt;br/&gt;of organisms;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5- sample for biota
along vertical transects of individual trees at&lt;br/&gt;different heights to
quantify the association of the relative species&lt;br/&gt;composition,
abundance, and diversity of these assemblages with the&lt;br/&gt;available
environmental characteristics (host tree species, vegetation&lt;br/&gt;type,
height class, light, pH, and humidity);&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;6- compare the tree
canopy-targeted groups and assemblages on&lt;br/&gt;different tree
species;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;7- provide research experiences for students that
will enhance&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for postgraduate
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will determine if the biota (myxomycetes,
protostelids,&lt;br/&gt;dictyostelids, fungi, mosses, liverworts, lichens, and
ferns), of&lt;br/&gt;species assemblages, and communities found on the bark of
living trees&lt;br/&gt;and vines above three meters differ from those found in
habitats on&lt;br/&gt;ground sites. This project will assist in determining if
these&lt;br/&gt;assemblages and communities can be predicted based on
measured&lt;br/&gt;environmental parameters that will provide a basis for
future&lt;br/&gt;comparisons with forests that are harvested using forestry
management&lt;br/&gt;strategies. The methodology used to obtain samples from the
tree&lt;br/&gt;canopy will be the double rope climbing technique that will
enable the&lt;br/&gt;collector to access the treetops. Collections will be made
from the&lt;br/&gt;tree canopy and also from moist chamber cultures in the
laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;Statistical analysis of species assemblages identified
from each tree&lt;br/&gt;will be compared. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These species
assemblages and communities are important since they are&lt;br/&gt;the first
species to show signs of environmental degradation such as&lt;br/&gt;acid rain,
sulfur and nitrogen dioxide deposits, and ozone. Data&lt;br/&gt;generated from
this project will help park managers assess the&lt;br/&gt;environmental impacts
of human factors not only in old growth forests&lt;br/&gt;but with any forest
vegetation type. This project will involve four&lt;br/&gt;RUI (Research in
Undergraduate Institutions) institutions collaborating in&lt;br/&gt;the study of
the different targeted groups of organisms with an&lt;br/&gt;international
component of experts from Norway, Russia, and Lithuania&lt;br/&gt;who will
provide species identification for specific groups of&lt;br/&gt;organisms. Women
and minorities who are underrepresented in field&lt;br/&gt;biology research will
participate along with volunteers, park interns,&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate and
graduate students, and key project personnel. &lt;br/&gt; Results will be
highlighted in park interpretive exhibitions, website&lt;br/&gt;outreach, news
media coverage (print and television), publication of articles
in&lt;br/&gt;popular magazines, in refereed journals that will send a
powerful&lt;br/&gt;conservation message for biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;