* 0343161
* CAREER:  Quantifying Humanlike Enveloping Grasps
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2003,03/31/2007
* Nancy Pollard, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Rosenblum
* 03/31/2007
* USD 206,008.00

Over the past decade, our ability to produce graphical&lt;br/&gt;images has
improved to the extent that we can create&lt;br/&gt;imaginary scenes that are
virtually indistinguishable from&lt;br/&gt;reality. Digital humans have been
called the last frontier&lt;br/&gt;in this march to graphical realism, and the
area of human&lt;br/&gt;animation has also seen dramatic developments.
Increasing&lt;br/&gt;use of motion capture data and new techniques
for&lt;br/&gt;manipulating that data allow us to reproduce human motion
at&lt;br/&gt;an extremely high level of fidelity. Graphically
generated&lt;br/&gt;characters in video games and films can seem uncannily
real.&lt;br/&gt;Pending the development of easy-to-use tools for
directing&lt;br/&gt;digital humans, we should soon see digital humans
as&lt;br/&gt;plausible user interfaces, and animated characters
will&lt;br/&gt;become much more prevalent in education, demonstration,
and&lt;br/&gt;training applications. If digital humans are the
last&lt;br/&gt;frontier in realistic computer graphics, the last
frontier&lt;br/&gt;in realistic digital humans is generating believable
hand&lt;br/&gt;motion. Human hands are beautiful and complex
mechanisms,&lt;br/&gt;amazing in their utility and adaptability. It is argued
that&lt;br/&gt;it is our hands that make us human, and that hand
evolution&lt;br/&gt;was a primary factor in the development of
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;Hand use in autonomous digital human characters,
however, is&lt;br/&gt;generally quite unconvincing. Hands may be placed in
a&lt;br/&gt;single frozen pose, and interaction between characters
and&lt;br/&gt;objects is avoided when possible. The main problem is
that&lt;br/&gt;geometric models of the human hand have far too
much&lt;br/&gt;flexibility. This flexibility makes working with
hands&lt;br/&gt;difficult even for trained animators, and it poses
a&lt;br/&gt;tremendous challenge for creating autonomous characters
that&lt;br/&gt;must interact with their environment. I believe that the
key&lt;br/&gt;to making further progress in hand motion for
digital&lt;br/&gt;characters is much more detailed consideration of
the&lt;br/&gt;anatomy of the human hand. In analysis of human grasps,
for&lt;br/&gt;example, critically important considerations include
the&lt;br/&gt;amount of contact between finger pads, palm, and object;
the&lt;br/&gt;ability of muscles to produce or resist task force; and
the&lt;br/&gt;stabilization roles of fingers and muscles, yet none
of&lt;br/&gt;these issues have been explored in grasp synthesis
research&lt;br/&gt;in either the robotics or computer graphics communities.
In&lt;br/&gt;pursuit of the goal of believable hand use for
digital&lt;br/&gt;characters, we propose an anatomy-based model of
human&lt;br/&gt;grasping. In particular, we propose a tendon-based
quality&lt;br/&gt;measure for humanlike enveloping grasps, and we plan
to&lt;br/&gt;evaluate this quality measure (1) for ability
to&lt;br/&gt;discriminate between grasps, (2) as a predictor of
grasp&lt;br/&gt;forces, and (3) for use in modeling grasp
acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;Because of the strong emphasis on human anatomy,
this&lt;br/&gt;research has the potential for additional impact
outside&lt;br/&gt;graphics and animation in areas including ergonomics
(tool&lt;br/&gt;design), robotics (robot hand design), and
anthropology&lt;br/&gt;(research in human hand evolution and tool use).
The&lt;br/&gt;educational portion of this proposal focuses on teaching
and&lt;br/&gt;mentoring of undergraduates. The research ideas,
techniques,&lt;br/&gt;and results will be incorporated into a course at Brown
that&lt;br/&gt;attracts both un-dergraduate and graduate students, and
will&lt;br/&gt;provide them with an opportunity to learn and experiment
in&lt;br/&gt;a problem domain that is a nice mix of
computational&lt;br/&gt;geometry and numerical optimization, grounded in
human&lt;br/&gt;anatomy and supported by data. A special effort will be
made&lt;br/&gt;to include undergraduate women in the research program,
for&lt;br/&gt;example, through the CRA Distributed Mentor
Program.&lt;br/&gt;Research results will include a library of example
grasps&lt;br/&gt;and applied forces, as well as a tool for adapting
the&lt;br/&gt;examples to new hand and object geometries. Once
this&lt;br/&gt;research is published, the data and tools will be
made&lt;br/&gt;available to other researchers on the web, and should
serve&lt;br/&gt;as a useful resource for creating digital characters
for&lt;br/&gt;education, entertainment, and training applications.&lt;br/&gt;