* 0343960
* LTREB: Long Term Studies of African Lions
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Craig Packer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 06/30/2010
* USD 450,000.00

Over the next five years, this ongoing study of Serengeti lion populations will
monitor the ranging patterns and demographic performance of lions in the
Serengeti National Park and Ngorongoro Crater, Tanzania. By continuing this
long-term monitoring, the LTREB project will provide essential data on the
effectiveness of a large-scale vaccination program that has been designed to
protect wild carnivores from canine distemper virus (CDV) and canine parvovirus.
The project will also clarify the ecological factors that influence the
virulence and severity of CDV should another outbreak take place. The data will
be used to test a series of models that reconstruct the Serengeti ecosystem. The
lion project provides the most detailed data on any single species in the
Serengeti, and it is particularly valuable in terms of the lions' response to
ecological perturbations such as the predicted increase in year-to-year
variability in rainfall. The project will also conduct a number of detailed
studies to clarify the lions' ecology. First, relationships between lions and
hyenas will be studied in detail to determine how these two species co-exist
despite their similar ecological requirements. Second, new data will be
collected on the lions' prey preferences as a function of prey density. Third, a
simple experiment in large-scale habitat modification (through a series of
controlled grassfires) will be undertaken to alter the carrying capacity of the
Serengeti plains. Fourth, a genetic translocation experiment will be attempted
so as to alleviate the degree of close inbreeding in the small, isolated
Ngorongoro lion population. The project has several broader impacts. First,
multi-host pathogens are the most serious public health problem since they can
infect humans. If an effective vaccination program in domestic dogs can prevent
the spread of disease in the wild carnivores of the Serengeti, this will provide
a model for similar programs around the world. More fundamental, perhaps, the
Serengeti lion study provides a high-profile example of the impacts
of&lt;br/&gt;ecological change, whether in terms of infectious disease or from
extreme weather&lt;br/&gt;conditions.&lt;br/&gt;