* 0343787
* Functional Analysis of a Putative Signal Transduction Receptor Required for Mating in Tetrahymena
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2010
* Kathleen Karrer, Marquette University
* Continuing grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 03/31/2010
* USD 461,000.00

Almost all cells read and respond to signals from the environment or from
neighboring cells. The signal interacts with a signal receptor protein on the
cell membrane. That interaction initiates a series of chemical reactions within
the responding cell that determine its developmental fate and ultimate identity.
The mating interactions between cells of the protozoan Tetrahymena provide a
good model system to study signaling between cells because, in Tetrahymena, it
is possible to specifically remove or "knock out" a gene of interest. By
observing the behavior of the knockout cell lines, it is possible to determine
what processes require the activity of that gene. Furthermore, specific regions
of a gene that are essential for its activity, can be identified by replacing
the gene with a slightly modified version of the same gene. A gene has been
identified that is specifically active during sexual reproduction in
Tetrahymena. The structure of the protein encoded by the gene, MCP1, was deduced
from the gene sequence and comparison to known proteins. Structural analysis
suggests that the gene encodes a signal receptor. The project has two specific
goals. 1.) To determine whether MCP1 is required for mating in Tetrahymena. If
so, mating knockout cells will be studied microscopically and biochemically to
determine precisely what part of the mating process is defective in MCP1
knockouts. 2.) Specific predictions of the signal receptor model will be tested,
including whether the gene product is a membrane protein. The broader impacts of
the study will be primarily in the training of students at both the graduate and
undergraduate levels. Two Ph.D candidates are currently doing dissertation
research on the project. The laboratory tradition of independent research for
undergraduates will continue. In the past, several of these students have
published in peer-reviewed journals and/or gone on to postgraduate studies.