* 0343991
* Molecular Mechanisms of Species-Specific Sperm Adhesion and the Evolution of Species Specificity in Sea Urchins
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2007
* Charles Glabe, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 01/31/2007
* USD 389,897.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this proposal are to understand the
molecular mechanisms of species-specific sperm egg adhesion in sea urchins and
the evolution of genes encoding the macromolecules that mediate adhesion during
fertilization. Sperm adhesion is one of many specific cell adhesion and
recognition events that occur during development, but the molecular basis for
the specific recognition and adhesion remains poorly understood. After 30 years
of intensive investigation, we have finally succeeded in cloning and sequencing
the egg surface receptor (Egg Bindin Receptor, EBR1) for sperm adhesion from two
species of urchins, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus and S. franciscanus (S. p. and
S. f.). EBR1 from S. f. and S. p. encode a novel subclass of ADAMTS proteins
that contain a number of different functional modules, including a
metalloprotease domain and thrombospondin type 1 repeats (TSR) core region, but
have entirely different species-specific domains. ADAMTS molecules are widely
expressed and are believed to play important roles in cell and matrix
recognition and adhesion events during development. &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Glabe will
investigate the molecular basis for the species-specific interaction between the
sperm adhesive protein, bindin and EBR1. He will determine which of the repeat
domains (alone or in combination) in the EBR1 protein are important for
mediating the species-specificity of the interaction of EBR1with bindin and we
will analyze the molecular basis for specific adhesion dissected by mapping key
residues that differ between closely related species and testing their
contribution to the specificity. EBR1s contain a reprolysin type zinc
metalloprotease domain that contains a complete catalytic active site, thus the
hypothesis that this protease domain is catalytically active will be tested. He
will examine several potential functions of protease activity during sperm-egg
interaction, including sperm penetration of the vitelline envelope (VE), the
elevation of the VE from the egg surface, and the release or destruction of the
sperm receptor on the VE. &lt;br/&gt;Because of the fact that EBR1 genes from
other closely related species of sea urchins have species-specific adhesive
function, we will sequence EBR1s from other species in order to determine their
sequence divergence, molecular phylogeny, and whether they display evidence of
positive Darwinian selection. Regions of sequence divergence that are important
for determining species-specificity will be identified. Positive selection for
sequence divergence is often associated with molecules that play a role in
speciation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: ADAMTS proteins are a family
of proteins that play important roles in cell recognition, adhesion and
morphogenesis in fertilization and early development. Further characterization
of EBR1s and the sperm protein bindin may provide more general insights into the
mechanisms of adhesive specificity and the functions of ADAMTS family proteins.
How new species arise and become reproductively isolated is an important and
fascinating problem in evolution. Understanding the evolution of EBR1 proteins
will lead to greater knowledge of the molecular mechanisms associated with
reproductive isolation and speciation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;