* 0343142
* GOALI:  Photoresist Dissolution and Stripping in Gas Expanded Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Melvin Carter, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/2008
* USD 347,271.00

Hess, Dennis W. / GA Tech Res Corp - GIT Carter, Melvin K. / DuPont Electronic
Technologies

"GOALI: Photoresist Dissolution and Stripping in Gas-Expanded Liquids"

State-of-the-art integrated circuit (IC) fabrication processes require more than
25 patterning or photolithography steps. Controlled, effective removal of
photoresist (PR) and associated etch residues/contaminants after pattern
formation is critical to achieve successful manufacturing processes with high
device yield and reliability. PR/residue removal is currently performed by
plasma processes followed by the use of environmentally hazardous, corrosive
chemical treatments and extensive deionized water (DIW) rinses. Such approaches
use large quantities of chemicals and DIW and thus are environmentally harmful.

Gas-expanded liquids (GELs) represent a promising alternative to the traditional
liquid-phase processes used extensively in the fabrication of ICs. Research with
GELs in separations and reaction engineering suggests that these fluids may also
offer numerous benefits in microelectronics process technology. GELs of
particular interest include those formulated with carbon dioxide and
conventional solvents (e.g., alcohols) used in microelectronic device
fabrication. GELs have superior mass-transport properties while maintaining the
solvent ability necessary for PR and etch residue removal. In addition,
environmental benefits associated with organic film and contaminant removal
using GELs may be substantial. Finally, since the pressures needed for GEL
formation are significantly lower than those required to implement supercritical
fluid (SCF) technology, energy requirements and hazards associated with GELs
will be reduced relative to SCFs.

A mass transport-based model formulated to describe the dissolution of films in
GELs suggests that GELs may be superior to traditional liquids in several
respects. For instance, dissolution rates can be increased by as much as 50% in
a GEL relative to a pure liquid. Furthermore, the amount of solvent consumed in
a PR removal process may be significantly reduced. The proposed research will
experimentally investigate the accuracy of these models and establish if large-
scale industrial processes are feasible. Investigations will be performed to
address the fundamental physical and chemical interactions causing swelling and
dissolution of organic films in GELs. Joint efforts with Dupont-EKC, a
manufacturer and supplier of wet chemical formulations to the IC industry for
resist and residue removal will permit the identification, formulation, and
investigation of GELs capable of implementation into IC manufacturing.

The combination of fundamental investigations of GEL interactions with surfaces
and films (Georgia Tech), removal of films/residues on 8-inch wafers in a
prototype commercial reactor (EKC), reformulation/design of commercial solvent
mixtures expressly for the purpose of resist/residue removal (EKC), and
investigation of the fundamental properties of these new GELs (Georgia Tech)
will ensure the connection of fundamental studies with direct application to
manufacturing operations for future generations of ICs.

Broader Impacts:

The proposed research will lead to the development of more environmentally
benign processes for the fabrication of future ICs. Professor Hess' group is
well equipped to perform this research, with regard to laboratory facilities and
microelectronics processing expertise. This work will establish relationships
between the properties of GELs and their interaction with PR layers; such
results will supply a fundamental understanding of surface cleaning and
preparation using GELs in IC process engineering, while EKC will ensure the
transfer of this knowledge into manufacturing expertise. The proposed research
project is ideal for chemical engineering graduate students in that experimental
work is combined with fundamental thermodynamic and kinetics studies; the joint
effort with EKC will allow students to work directly with a supplier of chemical
formulations to the IC industry.

The project will result in: (1) improved technology, environmental concerns,
safety, and economics in IC fabrication by developing novel, more
environmentally benign cleaning and surface preparation processes, (2) provide
molecular level information concerning the interaction of GELs with polymer
materials, (3) development of novel examples/case studies in the IC and
environmental areas to be incorporated into core undergraduate and graduate ChE
courses, (4) train minority undergraduate students each summer who are
participants in the Georgia Tech Summer Undergraduate Research in Engineering
Program (SURE), (5) educate high school students and teachers in IC fabrication
and environmental issues.

