* 0344261
* The Role of Prenylation in Meristem Function
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Mark Running, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Zhongchi Liu
* 04/30/2007
* USD 378,175.00

The activities of shoot meristems are the primary determinants for establishing
the overall aerial architecture of the plant: its stature, the numbers and
positions of branches, leaves, and flowers, the time to maturation, and the
course of flower and fruit development. Meristems act by integrating external
environmental signals with genetic cues to determine numbers and positions of
primordia initiation events. These activities are simultaneously coordinated
with signaling events that regulate cell divisions within the meristem, which
assures continued maintenance of meristem cell populations while the meristem
allocates cells to primordia and stem production. Dr. Running designed a
sensitized Arabidopsis screen that allows for rapid identification of mutants
that affect meristem function. Among the mutants he isolated was pluripetala,
which shows a progressive loss of control of shoot meristem cell proliferation,
along with shorter stature and extra floral organs. He cloned PLURIPETALA and
found that it encodes the alpha subunit shared between the prenylation enzymes
farnesyltransferase and geranylgeranyltransferase-I. Prenylation is a lipid
posttranslational modification that facilitates membrane localization and
association of target proteins, particularly proteins involved in signal
transduction. Unlike equivalent prenylation mutants in animal and yeast systems,
pluripetala plants are viable and fertile. Therefore, pluripetala mutant plants
provide a unique opportunity for testing the functional role of prenylation of
proteins in vivo, including the effects of prenylation on protein subcellular
localization and cell-cell trafficking. In addition, identification of
prenylation targets using bioinformatics and experimental assays will provide
insight into components of signaling pathways involved in meristem function and
flower development. His specific aims are to: (1) examine the role of
prenylation in plant growth and development; (2) examine the specific roles of
each component of the prenylation complex and their relation to each other; and
(3) determine the functional role of prenylation on two potential target
proteins in plants.

The proposed activity will improve understanding of the role of prenylation in
plants, which is involved in a number of processes, including meristem function,
flower development, and hormone responses. These processes are of interest to a
wide variety of plant scientists and have potential applications for
agriculture. His multidisciplinary approach to the study of plant development
combines genetics, molecular biology, and cellular biology techniques and will
provide excellent training opportunities for postdoctoral fellows and students.
In addition, he is developing a summer workshop for local high school teachers
for continuing science education. This program will involve instruction,
demonstration, and hands-on experience in laboratory research, which will be
carried out in part in the Running lab. Educational resources will also be
developed for classroom instruction. Lastly, he is developing a web-based
resource for disseminating information on lipid posttranslational modifications,
including prenylation, in plants. This database includes information on the
identification of putative targets using bioinformatics tools along with those
that have been experimentally confirmed. Experiments in this proposal will allow
for updates and refinement to this database, which we expect will be very useful
to members of the plant scientific community because of the vast number of
processes in which lipid post translational modification plays a role.

