* 0344209
* Influence of Gene Size and Exon-Intron Structure on Patterns and Rates of Evolution in Drosophila
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Josep Comeron, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 03/31/2008
* USD 380,000.00

The genetic information of most genes that code for proteins in eukaryotes is
not contiguous but split into segments called 'exons' and 'introns'. Exons
correspond to sequences with information for the amino acids of the encoded
protein while introns are intervening sequences between exons that do not carry
information for protein sequence. The number of introns in a gene varies
considerably not only among different genes but also when comparing homologous
genes between species. Nevertheless, little is known about the causes for intron
presence and the evolution of exon-intron structures. Theoretical models of
natural selection forecast that, all else being equal, genes with introns might
exhibit a selective advantage compared to genes without introns, which would
explain the prevalence of introns in most genomes. In this project the PI will
investigate this possibility by applying population genetics techniques, both
experimental and theoretical. To this purpose, the PI will obtain information of
nucleotide variability within species (i.e., polymorphism) and between species
(i.e., divergence) in several species of Drosophila and will estimate the
efficacy of natural selection's taking advantage of advantageous mutations and
eliminating deleterious mutations in four groups of genes classified according
to the size of the coding sequence and intron presence/absence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from the proposed work will be significant for
the field of population genetics and it will give new insight into the forces
involved in the evolution of introns and gene structures, and genome size and
organization in eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;