* 0344735
* Functional Mechanisms of Control in the Bivalve Pump: an Experimental Approach to Resolve Current Controversy
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Sandra Shumway, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 01/31/2008
* USD 429,558.00

Functional Mechanisms of Control in the Bivalve Pump:&lt;br/&gt;An Experimental
Approach to Resolve Current Controversy&lt;br/&gt;J. Evan Ward and Sandra
Shumway&lt;br/&gt;University of Connecticut&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bivalve
molluscs (e.g., clams, oysters, scallops) are found in almost all depths in
marine,&lt;br/&gt;estuarine and freshwater environments. These organisms obtain
their food by filtering particles from the water surrounding them. They possess
highly efficient and complicated mechanisms for extracting these particles, and
therefore are significant ecologically in coupling water-column and bottom
communities. They exert great control over the supply and distribution of
particles (their food) in many coastal ecosystems, and thus can influence the
general well-being of other organisms as well as the overall environment.
Because these organisms play such a key role in ecosystems, it is important to
understand how they obtain and process food and non-food particles, and the
intrinsic and extrinsic controls of the feeding process. The ability to study
feeding processes of bivalves has been linked with advances and application of
analytical equipment. These investigators have pioneered the use of two systems,
flow cytometry and video endoscopy, in studies related to suspension feeders. In
doing so, they have greatly increased our understanding of the functional
morphology of feeding structures and kinematics of particle capture, transport,
rejection, and ingestion in several groups of suspension feeders. In the present
study, two new techniques will be used, a newly developed Pressure-Gape System
and Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV). These methods will further our
understanding of the physiological bases of water processing, i.e. pumping and
filtration, in bivalve molluscs. The research is divided into three major
projects and will examine feeding in three species of bivalves, each with a
specific gill structure: blue mussels (Mytilus edulis), eastern oysters
(Crassostrea virginica) and sea scallops (Placopecten magellanicus). The overall
objectives are to: 1) Investigate the functional mechanisms of water processing
in suspension feeding bivalves at levels of both the organism and organ using
newly developed techniques, and 2) Test key assumptions of existing models of
water-pumping performance in bivalves. Experiments are designed to: a) Determine
relationships between pumping pressure and rate (volume flux) to obtain base-
line data on pumping characteristics for the three bivalve species; b)
Investigate mechanisms by which bivalves alter pumping activity by examining
potential loci for control, e.g. changes in lateral cilia activity, valve gape,
contractions of the gill; c) Test the hypotheses that bivalve pumping activity
is a binary process (on/off), or an autonomous process; d) Test the hypothesis
that bivalve pumping activity is mediated by exogenous factors, such as food
quantity and quality, and is under compensatory control; e) Examine the
variation in pumping behavior and performance among the three bivalve species.
This research has the potential to resolve some of the long-standing
controversies regarding the physiological basis of water processing in bivalves,
and to provide a starting point for the study of these processes in other
suspension-feeding invertebrates. The approach is unique in that the researchers
are integrating several techniques to study mechanisms associated with a
fundamental process, filter feeding, at both the organ and organism level. The
researchers will be able to relate these findings to performance by the animals
in the natural environment. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved
in all aspects of the study and participation by females and underrepresented
minorities will be encouraged.&lt;br/&gt;