* 0344123
* Function of UGT74B1 and Related Thiohydroximate Glucosyltransferases in Glucosinolate Biosynthesis
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2004,02/29/2008
* Steffen Abel, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Michael L. Mishkind
* 02/29/2008
* USD 311,951.00

Glucosinolates are a diverse class of natural compounds synthesized by plants
and vegetables of the crucifer family. The functions of glucosinolates in plants
are largely unknown. However, their hydrolytic breakdown products exert a
variety of biological activities in plants, animals, and humans, which range
from the participation in plant defense against pathogens and herbivores to the
prevention of cancers. Although substantial progress has been made in
understanding glucosinolate metabolism, many of the genes involved in
glucosinolate biosynthesis and its regulation remain to be identified or warrant
functional characterization. Glucosinolates are synthesized from amino acids in
three major stages: (i) side-chain elongation of the parental amino acids, (ii)
formation of the glycone moiety that is common to all glucosinolates, and (iii)
modification of the (elongated) amino acid side-chain. The second stage involves
transfer of a glucose molecule (glucosylation) to intermediate compounds known
as thiohydroximates. Based on biochemical studies by others in Brassica, a gene
in Arabidopsis has been identified by us that encodes a putative thiohydroximate
glucosyltransferase (UGT74B1). Preliminary data point to a biochemical and
biological role for UGT74B1 in glucosinolate biosynthesis. Furthermore, the
results suggest that additional enzymes exist in Arabidopsis that catalyze
glucosylation of thiohydroximate intermediates. Therefore, the following
objectives are proposed: (i) to thoroughly characterize the catalytic activity
and substrate specificity of UGT74B1; (ii) to extend our studies to the
discovery of additional thiohydroximate glucosyltransferases in Arabidopsis;
(iii) to select the most potent enzymes for a comparative biochemical analysis
of their kinetic properties and substrate specificities; and (iv) to study the
function of the corresponding genes in glucosinolate biosynthesis as well as
during plant development by various genetic approaches. The proposed research
will lead to a more comprehensive understanding of the glucosinolate pathway and
will contribute to the functional characterization of plant
glucosyltransferases, which have largely unknown but diverse functions in
primary and secondary metabolism. In the broader perspective, the availability
of characterized genes with functions in glucosinolate biosynthesis and its
regulation will enable rational metabolic engineering of plants for altered
glucosinolate profiles, with the prospect to reduce antinutritional
glucosinolates in Brassica seeds for animal feed, to modify glucosinolate
composition for crop protection, or to design functional foods with optimal
content of health-beneficial glucosinolates in cancer prevention strategies. In
addition, this highly collaborative project will provide an excellent
opportunity for continued high-level research training in broad and
interdisciplinary areas of contemporary molecular biology and biochemistry,
which will target postdoctoral researchers, undergraduate students and motivated
high school students of diverse backgrounds with interests in experimental
biology.

