* 0344430
* Biodiversity Surveys in the Southern Borderlands of the People's Republic of China
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2004,10/31/2011
* Burton Lim, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Lydeard
* 10/31/2011
* USD 778,500.00

This project represents an integrated effort to document the
terrestrial&lt;br/&gt;vertebrate biodiversity of the southern borderlands of
China, one of the&lt;br/&gt;least well explored regions worldwide. Specialists
working with birds,&lt;br/&gt;mammals, reptiles, and amphibians will staff the
expeditions, accompanied by&lt;br/&gt;experts with various parasite groups
(fleas, flies, ticks, lice, nematodes,&lt;br/&gt;cestodes, blood parasites,
coccidia, etc.). The 5 expeditions will each&lt;br/&gt;focus on a different
sector of the borderlands region, including the border&lt;br/&gt;areas with
Laos, Vietnam, Burma, and northeastern India. Each specialist&lt;br/&gt;will use
tools for inventory that are the 'state of the art' in his or her&lt;br/&gt;own
field. The end result will be extensive series of specimens and
other&lt;br/&gt;new biological material for detailed study, as well as numerous
scientific&lt;br/&gt;publications documenting local vertebrate and parasite
communities,&lt;br/&gt;taxonomic insights, and new species. Parasite specimens
will be collected&lt;br/&gt;and stabilized, with a view towards long-term
curation and eventual study.&lt;br/&gt;Project data will be served to the
broader scientific community with maximum&lt;br/&gt;efficiency via Internet-
based distributed database technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
near-unique in its broad-spectrum assessment of vertebrates&lt;br/&gt;and many
groups of parasites. Such a view of vertebrates and the full (or
at&lt;br/&gt;least a broad sample of the) diversity of their parasites is
available from&lt;br/&gt;few places on Earth, making for a new view into the
true biological richness&lt;br/&gt;of an area. In the case of the Chinese
southern borderlands, not only will&lt;br/&gt;many of the parasites be unknown
to science, but even some or many of the&lt;br/&gt;vertebrate hosts as well.
Many new insights into the conservation of&lt;br/&gt;biological diversity will
come from such detailed views of the nature of&lt;br/&gt;this diversity. This
information will go beyond the quick-and-easy&lt;br/&gt;vertebrate-based
conservation priorities that currently dominate&lt;br/&gt;conservation biology
to provide a detailed view of the true dimensions of&lt;br/&gt;biological
diversity in a complex and little-known region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;