* 0344047
* SGER: Development of a Multi-Scale Manufacturing Teaching Laboratory
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Timothy Fisher, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 08/31/2005
* USD 99,998.00

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) project will introduce multi-
scale manufacturing education into the mechanical engineering curriculum at
Purdue to address critical current and future needs of research and industrial
enterprise. Traditional manufacturing occurs at macroscopic length scales using
mills, lathes, and rapid prototyping (layered manufacturing) tools. In the
future, mechanical components will be increasingly created at the micrometer and
eventually nanometer length scales. Thus, mechanical engineers of the 21st
century must gain additional experience in microfabrication and nanofabrication
of silicon and non-silicon materials. To accomplish this objective, a combined
teaching lab - student shop will be established to support small-scale
fabrication in conjunction with a well-established student machine shop, where
instruction in traditional manufacturing methods will continue. The new
laboratory facility, the Multi-scale Manufacturing Center (MMC) Pilot Facility,
will address all major microfabrication processes, with a focus on "soft
lithography," and will be affiliated with Purdue's ME Student Machine Shop,
which already supports service-learning initiatives, national student car
projects, and numerous other student activities. As such, it will support dual
use for education and research, because both graduate and undergraduate students
will routinely use these facilities for research projects in addition to
scheduled classes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort will have tremendously broad
impact, both at Purdue and throughout the country. This seed effort will begin
the initial phase of a planned reformation of the ME curriculum in manufacturing
at Purdue. Ultimately, a new MMC facility will be established in a building
expansion project scheduled for initiation in 2005. When implemented, this
facility will enable each ME undergraduate (approximately 250/class) to use the
facility more than a dozen times during their studies. At the national scale, we
expect that the proposed work will serve as a model for establishment of multi-
scale manufacturing educational laboratories throughout the country. Recognizing
a common inertia among engineering departments in implementing lab-based
curriculum reforms, we anticipate that the free dissemination of laboratory
manuals, guides, and brochures, presentations at prominent workshops and
conferences, and future opportunities for federal funding of such reforms will
facilitate adoption, either fully or partially, of the products of the proposed
research. &lt;br/&gt;