* 0344578
* Dissecting the Interaction Between the Genome and the Environment During Embryological Development in the Annual Killifish Austrofundulus limnaeus
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2009
* Jason Podrabsky, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* mary chamberlin
* 02/28/2009
* USD 471,993.00

The environment in which an embryo develops can alter the activity of genes and
cause developmental changes that last throughout the organism's life span. For
example, in many cold-blooded animals (e.g., many species of reptiles and fish)
the sex of an individual is determined by temperature-sensitive genes during
embryonic and larval development. In the annual killifish Austrofundulus
limnaeus, environmental factors including temperature, oxygen availability, and
photoperiod have profound effects on embryonic development. These fish live in
small seasonal mud puddles in tropical desert regions and must survive for long
periods of time without water. When water is present in the puddles, the adult
fish thrive. However, when the ponds dry each year, the adult fish die because
they can not survive without water. The species survives the duration of the dry
season in the form of drought-tolerant embryos that enter a state of "suspended
animation" termed diapause. The amount of time that an embryo spends in diapause
is dependent on environmental conditions during development. When environmental
conditions are poor (e.g., low temperatures, short day lengths, or lack of
water) embryos of annual killifish remain in diapause for long periods of time
in order to "wait out" the harsh conditions associated with the dry season.
However, when environmental conditions are favorable for survival of adult fish
(e.g., warm temperatures, and abundant water) the embryos may stay in diapause
for only a short period of time, or may skip diapause all together. The research
outlined in this proposal is aimed at understanding how environmental cues can
alter the developmental pattern of annual killifish to either include or exclude
a period of dormancy in diapause. Entry or exit from diapause in annual
killifish is likely caused by the action of specific genes. This research will
use microarray or "gene chip" technology to identify these genes. The annual
killifish "gene chip" will contain a large percentage of the annual killifish
genes and will be used as a screening tool to identify which genes are
associated with entry into and exit from diapause in annual killifish. The
identification of these genes is the first step towards understanding how
environmental cues can alter the developmental program of annual killifish.