* 0344647
* Testing a Developmental Mechanism by an Integrated Empirical-Computational Approach
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Stuart Newman, New York Medical College
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 03/31/2008
* USD 480,000.00

Testing a Developmental Mechanism by an Integrated
Empirical-&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational
Approach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stuart A. Newman, Ph.D., New York Medical
College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mark Alber, Ph.D., University of Notre
Dame&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this project is to define and test an activator-inhibitor based mechanism for
skeletal pattern formation in vertebrate limb mesenchymal cells. The strategy
involves working with three distinct but interrelated "models" for this process:
(i) a readily manipulable in vitro experimental model utilizing high-density
('micromass") cultures of avian limb mesenchymal cells; (ii) a conceptual
developmental model that focuses on experimentally confirmed gene expression-
growth factor-cell behavioral interactions common to the in vivo and in vitro
patterning process; and (iii) a discrete cellular automaton (CA)-based
computational model that has been shown to capture, in a semi-quantitative
sense, the major features of the in vitro model, under assumptions that derive
from the developmental model. The key interactions specified by
the&lt;br/&gt;computational model ultimately can be integrated into a
multiscale, continuous representation of limb development in vivo. Before this
is possible, however, it is necessary to determine whether these interactions
uniquely simulate chondrogenic pattern formation in vitro, and whether
introduction of additional, experimentally-confirmed molecular interactions and
geometrical considerations increases or decreases the fidelity of the model to
the in vitro results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computational model is an "agent-
oriented" model that represents cells by points on a lattice which obey rules
motivated by experimental findings. The "cells" follow these rules as autonomous
agents, interacting with other cells and with microenvironments produced by cell
activities. The rules include random cell motion, production and lateral
deposition of a substrate adhesion molecule corresponding to fibronectin,
production and release of a diffusible activator, corresponding to TGF-B that
stimulates production of the SAM, and another diffusible factor ("inhibitor")
that suppresses the activity of the activator. The cellular automaton is modeled
on a 2- dimensional square lattice to emulate the quasi-2D micromass
culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Newman laboratory will misexpress and inhibit
expression of TGF-B , fibronectin, FGF2 and 8 (elicitors of lateral inhibition)
and candidate inhibitory molecules in vitro and compare pattern results with
corresponding manipulations of the CA model; Dr. Alber and his associates will
refine the CA model so as to provide cells with more realistic shapes, allow
them to move and accumulate in a third dimension, cause them to exhibit
differential adhesion, and will develop a set of quantitative methods for
pattern analysis, applicable to both micromass cultures and simulations, so as
to facilitate detailed comparison between in vitro and in silico
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The project can be expected to
yield several benefits that extend beyond the particular scientific problem
addressed. The cellular automata approach is a general tool that can provide
developmental biologists working in the area of pattern formation with a way of
designing experiments, making predictions, and testing hypotheses. The cross-
disciplinary nature of the project will provide a prototype for collaborative
efforts by experimental biologists and mathematical, physical, and computational
scientists. The work will also have educational value by providing
interdisciplinary research experience to graduate students in experimental
biology and applied mathematics, who will all spend time in the research groups
of the alternate field.&lt;br/&gt;