* 0344118
* Collaborative-RUI: CO2-Induced Changes in Heat-Shock Proteins and Photosynthetic Tolerance to Acute Heat Stress
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2004,11/30/2007
* Scott Heckathorn, Washington and Lee University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 11/30/2007
* USD 130,698.00

PROJECT LAY SUMMARY-&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Human activities are increasing
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) levels. Elevated CO2 decreases the
concentration of mineral nutrients and protein in plant leaves, and it increases
leaf temperatures. Also, increases in CO2 may be partly responsible for recent
increases in global temperatures, which are predicted to increase further in
this century. Thus, in the future, plants, and particularly leaves, will
experience higher temperatures. Unfortunately, photosynthesis, which occurs
mostly in leaves, is among the most sensitive of plant processes to heat stress,
so increases in heat stress will decrease plant growth and survival. However,
the effects of high CO2 on the tolerance of photosynthesis to heat stress are
not understood. Further, effects of high CO2 on production of heat-shock
proteins (HSPs) have not been examined, yet HSPs are principle cellular
adaptations to heat stress in nearly all organisms, and HSPs play prominent
roles in protection of photosynthesis during heat stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
As with most proteins, HSP production in plants is limited by the cellular
concentration of mineral nutrients and total protein, and any decreases in HSP
content will decrease the protection of photosynthesis during heat stress by
HSPs. Thus, we hypothesize that HSP production will decrease at high CO2, and
this will negatively affect plant and photosynthetic tolerance to heat stress.
We further hypothesize that high-CO2 decreases in HSPs will vary predictably
among different categories of plants and under different nutrient and growth-
temperature conditions. We will test these specific hypotheses in this research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research addresses problems that are
currently important to both science and society. The project will increase the
understanding of how CO2 affects plant tolerance to heat stress, which will
become more common in the future (e.g., How will human-driven increases in CO2
affect the heat tolerance of crops and native vegetation? Will different types
of plants be affected to the same extent? Will differential effects on
thermotolerance contribute to changes in the survival of species, and hence
biodiversity?). This research will also be useful in improving crop heat
tolerance via biotechnology or breeding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project is a
collaboration between investigators at a Ph.D.-granting and an undergraduate
institution. Both principal investigators have strong records of involving
undergraduate students, women, and minorities in their research programs, and in
integrating NSF-funded research into their teaching, and this will continue with
the proposed project. Thus, this project will advance discovery while promoting
teaching and training, and will increase participation of under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;