* 0344496
* Expressed Nuclear Genes in the Plant Family Solanaceae: Unification of Phylogenetic Inference with Character Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Todd Barkman, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 12/31/2007
* USD 223,477.00

The plant family Solanaceae is one of the most economically important in the
world because it contains tomato, potato, eggplant, peppers, and tobacco.
Because of its great importance, many studies have been directed towards
producing evolutionary-based classifications of the family; however, additional
investigations are required to resolve existing ambiguities from previous
research. Evolutionary-based classifications are necessary because they provide
valuable frameworks that can be used to predict species that may provide
valuable chemicals that are medicinally important or traits that could be useful
to crop breeders. The first objective of this project by Dr. Todd Barkman of
Western Michigan University is to use DNA sequences coding for the protein
salicylic acid methyl transferase (SAMT) to test and refine existing
evolutionary-based classifications of the tomato family. The SAMT enzyme is
critical for plant survival and reproduction because it makes a chemical that is
involved in pathogen and herbivore defense, and in addition in some plants, is
produced by flowers as a scent compound for pollinator attraction. Because of
the multiple important roles this protein plays in the tomato family, the second
objective of this project is to characterize SAMT activation patterns in leaves
and flowers to determine how plants have evolved the ability to manipulate the
regulation of this protein for these distinct functions. This novel approach
combines gene sequence data with gene activation data to provide an avenue into
understanding how plants defend themselves against pathogens and herbivores but
at the same time attract insects for pollination.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research project will have implications for crop improvement programs aimed at
enhancing activation of SAMT by artificial breeding or genetic engineering
thereby leading to increased natural resistance to pathogens in tobacco, tomato,
potato, eggplant, and pepper. Additionally, this project is geared towards
training students in state-of-the-art research methods at Western Michigan
University (WMU). In fact, much of the preliminary data for this project has
been collected by an underrepresented minority undergraduate student. This
student has already presented her results at 3 national meetings in the last
year and is preparing to submit a manuscript for publication in a peer-reviewed
journal within the coming months. These funds will allow her to complete her
work on this project and serve to establish her in the field of plant science.
This project will not only train undergraduates to use state-of-the-art
molecular methods in a traditional classroom setting, it will involve training
of undergraduate and graduate students in a rigorous research setting to provide
data that will be important for improving crop plant production. &lt;br/&gt;