* 0344728
* A Translational Control Mechanism in Drosophila Somatic Tissues
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2008
* Elizabeth Gavis, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Chris T. Amemiya
* 01/31/2008
* USD 430,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Control of mRNA translation is an important mechanism for temporal
and spatial regulation of gene expression during the development of an organism.
In the early Drosophila embryo, translational repression of nanos mRNA is
essential for formation of the anterior-posterior body axis. Repression is
mediated by a translational control element (TCE) within the nanos 3'
untranslated region (3'UTR). Ectopic expression studies have shown that the
nanos TCE can repress translation in several different somatic cell types at
later stages of development as well. These include subsets of cells in the
nervous system and the dorsal pouch epithelium. Analysis of the effect of TCE
mutations on translational repression has revealed that the TCE acts through a
different recognition mechanism in the dorsal pouch than is required for its
function in the early embryo. Complimentarity of sequences required for TCE
function in the dorsal pouch to a Drosophila microRNA suggests that the TCE may
be a microRNA target in somatic tissues.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work combines
genetic and molecular approaches to investigate this second mode of TCE-mediated
translational regulation. Specific Aim 1 addresses the mechanistic differences
between TCE-mediated repression in the early embryo and TCE-mediated repression
in the central and peripheral nervous systems. Aim 2 encompasses genetic and
cell culture approaches to test the hypothesis that TCE-mediated regulation in
somatic tissues is microRNA-dependent. This portion of the proposal will be
carried out time and resource permitting. Finally, a novel genetic screen
proposed in Aim 3 will permit isolation of mutations in regulatory factors
required for TCE function. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Post-transcriptional
mechanisms that act through 3'UTR sequences play critical roles in regulation of
gene expression in developmental processes like cell cycle regulation, embryonic
patterning and cell fate determination. The mechanisms underlying the function
of many 3'UTR regulatory elements is poorly understood, however. Based on the
paradigm for 3'UTR-mediated translational regulation by small noncoding RNAs in
C. elegans, the recent identification of hundreds of noncoding microRNAs in
flies, worms, mammals, and plants suggests that translational control is more
widespread than previously anticipated. The proposed investigation of a newly
identified mode of TCE recognition will provide an important foundation for
understanding how different mechanisms of 3'UTR recognition result in control of
protein synthesis and may identify a new microRNA target. In addition, the nanos
TCE provides a new paradigm to investigate how multiple modes of regulation can
be combined within a single element.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Increasing the
number of women entering careers in the biological sciences and remaining in
these career paths is of critical importance to both research and education.
Participation of female undergraduate and graduate students in the proposed
research will provide appropriate training and mentoring to enable them to make
optimal, sustainable career choices. A second priority, education outreach, is
addressed through the use of portable laboratory modules to introduce
fundamental concepts in modern molecular biology and genetics to New Jersey
public elementary and middle school students. Participation of graduate students
in the development and execution of these modules will provide them with
valuable teaching experience. Additional efforts will focus on the development
of a curriculum for a new, multi-institutional MD/PhD program and the
implementation of that program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;