* 0344019
* Genetic Variation and Herbivory in Aspen: Consequences for Ecosystem Processes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Michael Madritch, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2010
* USD 824,996.00

Scientists have long known that genetic variation exists within plant
populations, but the importance of this source of biological diversity for basic
ecosystem processes (e.g., carbon and nitrogen cycling) is poorly understood.
Another poorly recognized aspect of ecosystem science is how forest herbivores,
such as insect pests, influence nutrient cycles. As insect herbivores feed, they
induce chemical changes in plants and alter inputs of organic matter to the
soil. These impacts in turn are likely to influence basic ecological properties
that influence forest health, and the capacity of forests to take up carbon from
the atmosphere. This proposal integrates two major themes - the ecosystem
consequences of both genetic variation and herbivory - through the shared common
denominator of plant chemistry. The purpose of this research is to investigate
the independent and interactive effects of within-species genetic variation and
herbivory on basic ecosystem processes (decomposition and nutrient cycling). We
will use trembling aspen as a model system because of its expansive geographic
range and ecological importance, and because aspen expresses striking genetic
variation in plant chemistry and is subject to dramatic defoliation events. Our
methods will span the range from short-term chamber experiments with soil,
microorganisms, and purified chemical extracts, to long-term multi-year
experiments that investigate nutrient cycling in natural aspen stands. This
research will provide fundamental new insights into the importance of
biodiversity to forest ecosystem function, and thereby inform policies of state
and federal agencies involved in management of forest lands. Moreover, this work
will contribute to the scientific and technical training of undergraduate and
postdoctoral students.