* 0344971
* The Interaction Between Resource Quality and Aggregate Turnover Controls Ecosystem Nitrogen and Carbon Cycling
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Johan Six, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Ann Russell
* 03/31/2008
* USD 620,000.00

Concerns about sustainability and high environmental costs of agriculture in
developed and developing countries are pertinent. Here, we focus on how the
interactions between organic materials, mineral nitrogen inputs and the dynamics
of soil aggregates control carbon and nitrogen cycling in natural and
agricultural systems across different climate zones (i.e. African Humid Forest
zone, Moist Savanna zone, and Dry Savanna zone). An understanding of these
interactions is needed for an integrated and ecological sound management of
organic (OR) and mineral resources (MR). It is postulated that aggregate
turnover plays a fundamental role in the interactions between OR and MR by the
multitude of regulatory effects aggregates have on processes in the soil system,
like the protection of soil organic matter, determining microbial community
structure, limit O2 diffusion, regulate water flow, influence nutrient ad- and
desorption, and reduce erosion. Fundamental knowledge of N synchrony, C turnover
and C plus N storage in soil across a wide range of ecosystems is central to our
ability to predict ecosystem behavior and develop sustainable ecosystem
management practices.

The combined use of OR plus MR is a holistic approach in soil fertility research
that embraces the full range of biological, physical, chemical, social, economic
and political factors influencing the sustainability of the soil system.
However, to fully benefit from this approach, the mechanistic linkage between
soil structural dynamics and resource use efficiency need to be understood. This
project forms a consortium between African and American scientists and will
expose graduate and undergraduate students from different backgrounds to a
challenging environment. Students will think and learn about the widest variety
of issues on ecosystem science across national and continental borders.