* 0344933
* Juvenile Hormone Regulation of the Ecdysone Cascade in Insect Metamorphosis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* Lynn Riddiford, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Mark R. Brodl
* 05/31/2010
* USD 674,670.00

In insects ecdysone causes molting and metamorphosis and juvenile hormone (JH)
allows molting but prevents the metamorphic action of ecdysone. Ongoing
immunocytochemical studies of how JH modulates the ecdysone-induced cascade of
transcription factors in the tobacco hornworm, Manduca sexta, pupal wing at the
outset of adult development will be completed. The technique of RNA interference
to eliminate specific mRNAs in this pathway will be used to determine the roles
of key transcription factors of this cascade in pattern formation and cuticle
deposition. This same transcription factor cascade will be analyzed
immunocytochemically during pupal commitment of the wing imaginal disc and of
the eye primordium during the molt to the final larval stage and at the
initiation of pupal development. The role of JH in the maintenance of the larval
state of these two adult precursors will be assessed by experimental
manipulations, both in the animal and in tissue culture&lt;br/&gt;Moling, an
epidermal protein that appears only in the last larval stage of Manduca, belongs
to the Takeout family of proteins that includes some JH-binding proteins.
Recombinant Moling will be produced by a baculovirus system, then used to test
whether it binds JH and, if so, the binding will be characterized. Also, the
pattern of its disappearance in the epidermis relative to the time of pupal
commitment and the appearance of Broad expression will be studied
immunocytochemically. Putative homologs of Moling in Drosophila that are
regulated by JH will be analyzed for their presence and possible role in larval
epidermal development and metamorphosis.&lt;br/&gt; The role of USP as a
possible JH receptor in Drosophila is being studied in collaboration with Dr.
Grace Jones. Bioassays of JH in the prevention of abdominal metamorphosis will
be done with animals bearing mutated forms of USP hypothesized to have little or
no JH binding activity.&lt;br/&gt;