* 0344009
* Diversification and Biogeography of Lasiopetaleae [Malvaceae] and the History of the Southwestern Australian Flora
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Barbara Whitlock, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 12/31/2007
* USD 220,741.00

The southwestern corner of Australia is designated a biodiversity hotspot
because of its diverse and unique flora. Over 5400 species of plants grow in an
area the size of New Mexico; 79% of these species are found only in southwestern
Australia. Despite this botanical importance, the origins and history of this
unique flora have not been studied intensively. In this project by Dr. Barbara
Whitlock and Dr. Carolyn Wilkins, one group of plants, the velvet bushes or
Lasiopetaleae, is used as a model to understand the origins, history, and
diversity of the southwestern Australian flora. Lasiopetaleae include ten genera
and about 180 species of shrubs and trees, placed in the mallow or cotton family
Malvaceae. They are found throughout Australia but are especially diverse in the
southwest. The first step is to determine how all the species of Lasiopetaleae
are related to each other using information from DNA sequences, morphology, and
anatomy. These relationships are portrayed as an evolutionary tree, or
phylogeny. This involves extensive fieldwork throughout Australia to find and
collect specimens from 100+ species of Lasiopetaleae. Once the phylogeny is
known, it will be used to understand where the group originated and how geologic
events have shaped evolution within the group. It will also be used to determine
if the southwestern flora is so diverse because evolution occurs more rapidly
there. Three measures will be used to examine the rate of evolution: (1)
speciation, or the formation of new species; (2) DNA mutations; and (3)
morphology and anatomy. Once these rates are calculated, they can be compared to
Lasiopetaleae growing in other regions of Australia and to other groups of
plants elsewhere in the world. Together, these measures will shed light on the
underlying evolutionary processes that led to the high diversity in southwestern
Australia. &lt;br/&gt; This study will generate hypotheses that will later be
used as a framework for future studies of other groups of southwestern
Australian plants, leading to a fuller understanding of the origin of a
biodiversity hotspot. The new specimens that will be collected for this project
will likely result in the recognition of new species and expand knowledge of the
biodiversity of Australia significantly. They will allow for the status of rare
species to be determined, resulting in more informed conservation decisions. To
insure that discoveries and results are shared as widely as possible,
information on specimens including digital photographs will be entered into an
online database. This will help disseminate results to the nonscientific
community and lead to a greater appreciation of the Western Australian flora. In
addition, this project will strengthen communication and intellectual exchange
among American and Australian scientists. It will promote education in
systematic biology by training students in field methods in Australia, and a
graduate student in molecular biology techniques at the University of Miami.
This project will also broaden the participation in systematic biology of two
women who are at early stages in their careers. &lt;br/&gt;