* 0344618
* Novel Immune-Type Receptors and Cytotoxicity In Zebrafish
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2004,01/31/2005
* Jeffrey Yoder, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 01/31/2005
* USD 96,641.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many vertebrates, one function of the
innate immune system is carried out by cytotoxic cells that recognize and
destroy virally infected or cancerous cells. The molecular mechanisms involved
in these processes are well studied in mammalian natural killer (NK) cells, but
very little is known about them in other species. A family of Novel Immune Type
Receptor (NITR) genes has recently been identified in bony fish with
characteristics similar to the mammalian NK receptors. Thus, it has been
hypothesized that these genes play a role in cytotoxic cell function in fish.
&lt;br/&gt;This project will determine whether zebrafish NITR gene families are
expressed in cell lineages known to possess cytotoxic properties and whether
zebrafish NITR-expressing cells exhibit cytotoxic activity. First, tissue-
specific expression patterns will be determined for multiple NITR gene families
by RT-PCR and RNA blot analysis. Second, expression of NITR genes will be
examined by RNA in situ hybridization in cell lineages known to be cytotoxic.
Third, transgenic lines of zebrafish will be generated and analyzed in which the
Green Fluorescent Protein will serve as an in vivo fluorescent biomarker for
NITR-expressing cells, which will then be isolated and tested for cytotoxic
activity. Knowledge gained from this project will provide new insight into the
function of cytotoxic signaling pathways and elucidate the molecular mechanisms
of innate immune reactivity in fish.&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will
contribute to a better understanding of immune function in fish, including those
of agricultural importance and will have implications for understanding the
molecular mechanisms of cytotoxic defense in organisms that occupy vastly
different environmental niches and encounter diverse pathogens. This project
will involve multiple graduate and undergraduate students who will gain
expertise in various genetic, molecular and biochemical techniques, while being
trained in experimental design and the scientific process. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;