* 0344444
* Structure-Activity Relationships and Modes of Action of Plant Antifungal Defensins
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Thomas Smith, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 04/30/2008
* USD 539,998.00

Fungal infection is a serious problem in both the production and storage of
food. Not only can fungi cause severe losses in food production but can also
produce potent carcinogens in stored grain. Plants produce small proteins called
defensins that are involved in defense against fungal pathogens. Defensins are
cysteine-rich proteins that inhibit the growth of a broad range of fungi at low
concentrations. The long-range goal of this project is to understand the mode of
action of these natural antifungal agents and to eventually apply that knowledge
to protect both crops and consumers. Plant defensins are highly varied in their
amino acid sequences, but they share common structural elements. Two defensins,
MsDef1 and MsDef2, have been isolated from alfalfa. While their amino acid
sequences are 65% identical, they have markedly different antifungal activity in
both spectrum and morphological effect on fungi. Recent work by the PI has shown
for the first time that one of these defensins, MsDef1, blocks a specific
calcium channel in mammalian cells, whereas MsDef2 does not. In contrast, a
structurally related highly potent antifungal defensin isolated from radish does
not block this calcium channel. It is proposed that MsDef1 inhibits fungal
growth through disruption of a calcium gradient in the fungal hyphae and that
plant defensins have different modes of action. Work from the PI's lab also
suggests that fungal and mammalian calcium channels share more functional
similarity than previously thought. This project will directly test these
hypotheses by taking advantage of the electrophysiological, molecular, and
genetic tools available in the model fungus Neurospora crassa. The three-
dimensional structures of the alfalfa defensins will be determined and these
structures will be used to ascertain the structural motif required for calcium
channel recognition and the active sites of these peptides will be determined by
mutational analysis. In addition, the ability of these peptides to block a
specific calcium channel in fungal cells will be determined to further examine
the evolutionary connection between the fungal and animal calcium channels. This
research will not only aid in our understanding of how defensins arrest the
growth of fungi but will also pave the way for the development of disease
resistant transgenic crops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;