* 0344826
* Genome Organization and Transmission Genetics of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2004,08/31/2005
* John Taylor, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2005
* USD 340,000.00

The goal of this project is to uncover genome organization (size and ploidy) and
the reproductive mode of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AM fungi, Glomeromycota)
using genetic, population genetic and cytological approaches. AM fungi colonize
roots of most land plants, including many crop species, where they facilitate
uptake of minerals from the soil. Consequently, they are a key component of
terrestrial ecosystems. Yet, AM fungi remain one of the least genetically
understood microorganisms. With no sexual morphology, AM fungi are hypothesized
to reproduce clonally, but there are theoretical and empirical reasons to doubt
this hypothesis. To select tools needed to challenge the hypothesis of
clonality, a thorough analysis of genome organization will be performed. Next,
patterns of genetic variation in a field population of an AM fungus will be
analyzed to detect signatures of recombination or clonality. This work will be
supplemented by a cytological study tracing the fate of nuclei during AM fungal
life cycle, for which genetically transformed strains expressing GFP-labeled
histone will be constructed to enable visualization of nuclei in living cells.
Understanding the genome organization of AM fungi is essential for future
sequencing of AM fungal genomes. Reproductive mode is a single most important
piece of information needed to develop transmission genetics of AM fungi, which
will be greatly aided by the genetic transformation system developed in this
study. Another product of this work, genetic markers, will augment the
phenotype-based taxonomy of AM fungi. All these tools will enable systematic
evaluation of the role of AM fungi in nature and agrosystems, and facilitate
breeding (if reproduction is sexual) or selection (if reproduction is clonal) of
AM fungi for specific purposes of improved plant mineral nutrition, pest
control, protection from drought, salinity, or toxic metal stress.
Glomeromycota, if proven clonal, may represent an ancient asexual lineage and
they may offer a system to study mechanisms of long-term evolutionary survival
in the absence of meiotic recombination.