* 0344525
* Workshop on Bifurcation Theory and Spatio-Temporal Pattern Formation; Decembe 11-13, 2003; Toronto, Canada
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* N. Sri Namachchivaya, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2005
* USD 10,000.00

Nonlinear phenomena and the formation of spatio-temporal patterns play an
increasingly important role in current research on partial differential
equations and are at the center of many engineering disciplines. Their analysis
have made tremendous progress over the last decade with the development of new
tools in nonlinear dynamics. In turn, problems in nonlinear mechanics have
stimulated important research in dynamical systems theory. Practical
applications of fundamental results in these areas are beginning to appear
across the entire spectrum of science. Research in this area is characterized by
international and interdisciplinary cooperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field
of bifurcation theory and pattern formation is very active area of both pure and
applied research, throughout the world today. The aim of this International
Workshop is to provide a forum for the discussion of developments in Non-linear
Dynamics and Bifurcation Theory. We will make special efforts to promote
communications between the two communities dealing with nonlinear phenomena,
from theoretical and applied points of view, by promoting themes of common
interest in emerging areas of Spatio-Temporal Pattern Formation. The Workshop
will review both fundamental theory and its applications in mechanical systems,
fluid-structure interactions, and other areas of mechanics, science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Workshop intended for present and future
researchers in the area of bifurcation theory and pattern formation. An
important by-product of this activity will be the education of a new generation
of truly multidisciplinary graduate students in nonlinear dynamics and related
fields. We anticipate significant numbers of participants from Canada and the
US. It will provide an opportunity for graduate students for the framework and
for direction in their research plans, and to establish new research
links.&lt;br/&gt;