* 0344053
* Investigtion of the Integrated Roles of Abl, Trio, and Neurotactin in Axon Outgrowth
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Mark Seeger, Denison University
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 03/31/2007
* USD 240,000.00

Project Summary

Intellectual Merit Criteria: The Drosophla model system has been instrumental in
identifying many of the molecules and interactions involved in steering growth
cones to their targets during nervous system development. Much work in this area
has focused on the dynamic role of the cytoskeleton in directional growth cone
movement; how axon guidance receptors signal to the cytoskeleton and how
cytoplasmic proteins affect cytoskeletal dynamics. One of the key cytoplasmic
regulators of cytoskelton dynamics is the Abelson tyrosine kinase (Abl). Genetic
work from the Liebl and Seeger laboratories has shown that the guanine-
nucleotide-exchange-factor protein Trio as well as the transmembrane neuronal
cell adhesion molecule Neurotactin (Nrt) and Neurotactin's ligand Amalgam (Ama)
are integrated into Abl-mediated signaling networks during growth cone
outgrowth. Much of this proposal is designed to identify the molecular bases of
these genetic interactions. Throughout this proposal Dr. Liebl exploits the
strengths of the Drosophila model system. For example, we have identified a
protein:protein interaction between Trio and Abl involving these proteins' SH3
domains. He proposes a structure/function analysis of Trio, assaying the ability
of Trio deletion constructs, such as an SH3-deleted version of Trio, to rescue
aspects of the trio mutant phenotype. We have identified Trio as a
phosphotyrosine containing protein. He proposes to both mapping the Trio's major
tyrosine phosphorylation site(s), we propose and to determine the in vivo
relevance of Trio's tyrosine phosphorylation by testing for the rescue of trio
mutant phenotypes with a version of Trio in which tyrosine phosphorylation sites
have been mutated to phenylalanine. We have also initiated a genetic screen in
which proteins that interact with Trio may be identified via mutation. Under
this proposal we will map and clone the genes for these proteins. The
cytoplasmic domain of Nrt is essential for its role as an adhesion molecule, and
is Nrt's link into Abl signaling networks. A structure/function analysis of
Nrt's cytodomain will be carried out integrating a Drosophila cell culture
adhesion assay system, in vivo rescue of nrt mutant phenotypes, and comparative
genomic approaches utilizing the Drosophila pseudoobsura and Anopheles gambiae
(mosquito) genomes. The results of these and other proposed experiments will
allow him to begin to understand the molecular underpinnings of the trio, Abl
and nrt, Abl genetic interactions and the roles of these specific molecules in
the growth cone. Through this work, a fuller, more accurate understanding of the
molecular machinery controlling growth cone guidance will emerge.

Broader Impacts Criteria: This is a collaborative proposal between Dr. Liebl at
Denison University, an undergraduate, liberal arts college, and Dr. Seeger at
Ohio State University, a major research institution. This research collaboration
has been active over the past five years. During this time undergraduate
students at both Denison and Ohio State have been exposed to substantive
research projects. The most recent publications resulting from this
collaboration, in Neuron and Development, included ten undergraduate co-authors,
seven of whom were women. Members of the Liebl and Seeger labs meet regularly to
discuss data and exchange materials. Seeger's graduate students have "shadowed"
Liebl to gain insight into a career at a liberal arts institution. Denison
undergraduates are welcomed into Seeger's Ohio State lab in order to do
experiments not technically possible in Liebl's Denison facilities. Thus this
collaboration has proved to be a rich training ground for both graduate and
undergraduate researchers, with nine undergraduates from Liebl's lab, and four
undergraduates from Seeger's lab going on to post-graduate (M.D. and/or Ph.D.,
D.V.M.) study over the past six years. Both Liebl and Seeger regularly teach
undergraduate courses with laboratory sections. Having an active research
program and ongoing exposure to the intellectual culture of a major research
institution has kept Liebl's teaching up-to-date. Being exposed to the liberal
arts culture where teaching excellence is of high priority has invigorated and
informed Seeger's teaching.