* 0344221
* Significance of Apyrase Activity for Plant Growth and Development
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Stanley Roux, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2008
* USD 483,740.00

The main objective of this research is to learn more about how an enzyme that
hydrolyzes nucleotides (NTPs and NDPs), called apyrase, exerts its dramatic
effects on plant growth and development. A major apyrase in peas is, like many
animal apyrases, an "ectoapyrase", anchored in the plasma membrane with its
active site facing out into the plant wall. The two Arabidopsis apyrases that
most resemble the pea apyrase, Atapy1 and Atapy2, are also likely to be
ectoapyrases, consistent with the hypothesis that the function of these enzymes
is to regulate the concentration of extracellular ATP and ADP, which are both
hormone-like agents in vertebrates. Consistent with this interpretation, raising
the extracellular ATP concentration ([xATP]) in the medium and chemically
inhibiting apyrase activity can produce the same physiological and growth
effects as genetically knocking out apyrase expression. That apyrases play a
regulatory role in plants is supported by the observation that plants that have
knock out mutations in Atapy1 and Atapy2 are dwarf and produce pollen that,
though viable, cannot germinate. To better understand the implications of these
findings this project proposes to investigate the molecular bases underlying
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Current evidence indicates that the Arabidopsis
apyrases, like animal ectoapyrases, are needed to maintain low [xATP]. Direct
measurements show that [xATP] rises to at least 0.2 mM in the fluid released at
leaf wound sites. Concentrations of xATP near to or below this level applied to
unwounded plants can turn on the same signaling steps that are turned on by
wounding. To learn just how high [xATP] rises in various plant tissues, this
project proposes to develop a real-time assay for measuring the [ATP] near the
external face of the plasma membrane. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; In animals xATP
signals are received by specialized receptors. To learn whether there are
similar receptors in plants, this project proposes to characterize recently
selected mutants that are hyper- or hyposensitive to xATP. Independent of its
potential to be a hormone-like agent in plants, xATP could also play a role in
regulating the activity of transporters that export various growth-regulating
substances out of plant cells. The proposal further tests this hypothesis, with
a focus on apyrase effects on the transport of auxin and of herbicides. One
potentially important benefit to society from this study is that apyrase
inhibitors, though not toxic by themselves, appear to enhance the potency of
herbicides. There is some commercial interest in developing apyrase inhibitors
as herbicide synergizers, allowing a decreased use of the herbicides in the
environment. Regarding apyrase involvement in growth control, the proposed work
takes advantage of a remarkably facile method to suppress apyrase expression to
study whether apyrase effects on leaf, stem and root growth extend also to
growth in pollen tubes, whose growth characteristics are among the best studied
in plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research will provide a fertile
training ground for graduate students. High school and minority undergraduate
students will also actively participate in the research. &lt;br/&gt;