* 0344722
* Biodiversity of Cryptic Fungal Symbionts, Harpellales, Living Within the Guts of Aquatic Insects in North America
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Merlin White, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2008
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;NSF BS&amp;I Proposal 0344722&lt;br/&gt;Merlin M. White,
PI&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Fungi belonging to the order Harpellales (class
Trichomycetes) live hidden within the guts of immature aquatic insects, such as
mayflies, stoneflies, and many kinds of lower dipterans (mosquitoes, blackflies,
midges, etc.). The symbiotic relationships with their hosts are usually
commensalistic or neutral, but some fungi can provide nutrients to the insect
hosts to allow more rapid host development when food is suboptimal in the
environment. Other fungal species are parasitic at some stage of the insect
development. Though Harpellales are known to be worldwide, all evidence suggests
that only a fraction of the fungal species is known, that in this study many new
host types will be found, and that new symbiotic relationships will be
discovered. Intensive field work will reveal the species richness of Harpellales
in North America, to include USA, Canada, and Mexico, the latter country being
unexplored to date. Participants will include mycological and entomological
collaborators in each country, and student trainees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; New
species will be cultured when possible. and extraction of DNA from cultures as
well as directly from fungi within the gut will be used for sequencing and
cladistic analysis to strengthen phylogenetic studies within the Harpellales and
to determine more accurately their relationships with other fungi, thus
producing more substantial hypotheses on the origins and evolution of these
symbionts and a better understanding of their current and historical
biogeography. A comprehensive worldwide database of all Harpellales worldwide
will be developed to include information on the taxonomy of fungi and hosts, and
collection data on geographical distributions, types of habitats, and other
pertinent information. Interactive keys to all known species will be produced.
All of this information, including descriptions of new species and images, will
be available and added to an existing monograph on the Internet
(www.nhm.ku.edu/~fungi). Also provided on the Internet and in compact disk
format will be instructions to mycologists, entomologists, and students on
methods of collecting, dissecting, culturing, and studying these cryptic fungi
in insects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;