* 0345183
* ACT/SGER:      Evaluation of a Novel Approach for Improved Growth of CdZnTe
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Jeffrey Derby, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,347.00

This project addresses crystal growth of CdZnTe, a material useful as a
portable, low-cost, and sensitive means to monitor radioactive materials via the
detection of emitted gamma rays. There are several technologies for gamma
detectors, such as classical sodium iodide (NaI) scintillation devices and
liquid-nitrogen-cooled Germanium detectors. However, gamma detectors based on
cadmium zinc telluride (CdZnTe) offer unique advantages: 1. CdZnTe operates as a
direct detector, thereby allowing for the design of small detection probes and
portable devices. 2. CdZnTe devices work at room temperature, thus avoiding
cooling technology. 3. Since CdZnTe detectors have a much better resolution
compared to NaI detectors, they are the only room temperature detectors that
allow hand-held and portable devices to provide a detection of radioactive
signatures behind significant lead or steel shieldings. Low cost, large-area,
single crystals with low compositional variation and homogeneous electrical
properties are sought. Currently, the growth of large, single crystals of CdZnTe
is accomplished by the Bridgman method and is notoriously difficult. These
crystals typically exhibit rather poor crystalline perfection, significant
concentrations of large defects, and poor uniformity of Zn concentration. The
objective of this project is to apply large-scale numerical simulation to assess
an alternative growth configuration for CdZnTe - a destabilizing vertical
Bridgman configuration rather than the classical stabilizing configuration.
While counter intuitive and exploratory, this new growth technique may allow for
dramatic improvements in CdZnTe substrate quality and process yields, and
provides new understanding of bulk crystal growth processes. &lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental research issues associated with
electronic/photonic materials having technological relevance. An important
feature of the project is education and training, with emphasis on integration
of research and education. The project aids in the development of the scientific
workforce by exposing students to technical issues important for the security of
the nation. Other broader impacts include relevance to the ACT program and
potential advances in nuclear medical imaging devices, digital radiography, and
high-resolution astrophysical imaging. Additionally, the understanding learned
form this project will be applicable to the growth of other crystalline
materials via the Bridgman method. &lt;br/&gt;This award is supported jointly by
the NSF and the Intelligence Community. The Approaches to Combat Terrorism (ACT)
Program in the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences supports new
concepts in basic research and workforce development with the potential to
contribute to national security.&lt;br/&gt;