* 0345434
* The International Cooperative Biodiversity Groups-Drug Discovery, Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Development
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2008
* Joshua Rosenthal, NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH
* Interagency Agreement
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2008
* USD 2,500,000.00

This proposal is for continued NSF support for an important interagency grants
program led by the Fogarty International Center of the National Institutes of
Health. The National Institutes of Health, the National Science Foundation and
the U.S. Department of Agriculture have, since 1993, jointly supported
International Cooperative Biodiversity Groups to address the interdependent
issues of biodiversity conservation, economic capacity, and human health through
discovery and development of therapeutic agents for diseases of importance in
developing countries as well as those important to developed countries.
Innovative and integrated approaches to access to genetic resources and benefit-
sharing with host country stakeholders and participants is an important
component of the overall program. Particularly relevant disease areas and health
needs include cancer, HIV-AIDS and its opportunistic infections, tuberculosis,
malaria, and other emerging diseases, mental disorders of adults and children,
drug abuse and cardiovascular and pulmonary diseases. Projects that work on
marine coral reef organisms, endophytic fungi, extremophilic bacteria and other
poorly understood groups are particularly encouraged. The following cross-
cutting approaches guide the research and capacity-building efforts toward these
goals: a) assisting with the discovery and development of drugs that address
priority health needs of the participating developing country(ies) and of the
United States; b) assisting with research on other natural products-based
materials, such as locally used botanical medicines; c) developing biological
inventories of native species and, where relevant, indigenous knowledge; d)
training targeted toward achieving the research goals of this program and
meeting the needs of the participating country; and, e) enhancing the scientific
infrastructure within the host country.&lt;br/&gt; The broader impacts of the
ICBG program are central to its design and execution. In addition to
dissemination of the scientific results in traditional academic channels, the
projects engage in extensive outreach to host country organizations that support
research, conservation and education and those that make policy on access to
genetic resources. Research training of developing country scientists is a
required component of each project, as is the Internet posting of flora and
fauna data from conservation parks. Finally, a central goal of the projects is
the identification of molecules that will be developed into drugs to treat
globally important diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;