* 0345551
* RUI:     Electrophilic Reactions of Triflic Acid and Chlorosulfonyl Isocyanate with Fluorosubstituted Terminal Alkenes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Dale Shellhamer, Point Loma Nazarene College
* Standard Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 04/30/2007
* USD 108,000.00

With this Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) award, the Organic and
Macromolecular Program supports the research of Dr. Dale F. Shellhamer of the
Department of chemistry at Point Loma Nazarene College. The research examines
the regio- and stereochemistry of the addition of electron deficient species to
alkenes substituted with one or more fluorine atoms. The investigations will
blend synthetic and mechanistic chemistry in order to answer fundamental
questions concerning the reactivity of organic fluorine-containing compounds.
Since fluorinated organic compounds are important in contemporary medicine,
industry and agriculture, knowledge of their diverse chemical behavior is quite
important. In addition to adding mechanistic understanding, these studies will
generate a new class of molecules that may prove useful in medicinal
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program, Professor Shellhammer has designed research projects that can
be accomplished by undergraduates after their sophomore year of chemistry. These
students will synthesize a large number of fluoro organics, use modern
instruments to characterize these compounds, and present their findings at
weekly seminars. A major goal is to generate enthusiasm for science among
undergraduates and prepare students for advanced study in graduate school. This
innovative approach to undergraduate research will serve to challenge and
prepare students as well as make significant contributions to organo fluorine
chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;