* 0345478
* RUI: Toward a Molecular Understanding of DNA-Protein Crosslinking via Guanine Oxidation
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Eric Stemp, Mount Saint Mary's University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 04/30/2009
* USD 316,626.00

Oxidative damage to DNA is a major stress in a living system. This project will
study the mechanisms of oxidative damage using the flash-quench technique, which
selectively oxidizes only the guanine base in DNA. In this photochemical method,
a DNA-binding molecule is excited by light (the flash) and then donates an
electron to an electron acceptor (the quench); the resulting oxidant then
removes an electron from guanine to produce a reactive guanine radical, which in
turn can form a permanent bond with protein (a crosslink). The overall objective
of this work is to understand the molecular details of how the removal of an
electron from guanine leads to DNA-protein crosslinks, and there are several
specific goals for this research. First, the effect of local DNA environment,
thought to alter the oxidation potential of guanine and the reactivity of
guanine radical, will be examined via gel electrophoresis and spectroscopic
methods. Next, the relative importance of crosslinking as a reaction pathway
will be assessed by using HPLC to compare the amount of crosslinked guanines to
the amount of other oxidized guanine species. Lastly, because there is a paucity
of structural information regarding DNA-protein crosslinks, specific crosslinks
will be produced in high enough yield for characterization. This approach will
initially involve model systems where only one type of amino acid-base adduct is
expected, and progress to the formation of specific crosslinks by utilizing DNA
sequences with sites particularly vulnerable to oxidation. Enzymatic digestion,
followed by HPLC purification, will be employed to isolate the crosslinked
moiety, which will then be characterized by mass spectrometry, UV-visible
spectroscopy and NMR spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact. This
research at the chemistry-biology interface will provide a significant training
opportunity for undergraduates, as the multidisciplinary approach will require
students to learn a wide variety of biochemical methods and spectroscopic
techniques. In addition, this project should contribute to the advancement of
underrepresented groups in science, since the student population at the host
institution is primarily female and reflects the rich ethnic diversity of Los
Angeles.