* 0345752
* GnRH Signaling Via Cerebrospinal Fluid
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2006
* Heather Billings, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 06/30/2006
* USD 200,204.00

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) targets the pituitary and regulates the
release of luteinizing hormone and follicle stimulating hormone, which is
essential for proper reproductive function. Preliminary studies indicate a
subset of GnRH neurons provides direct contact with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
Recent evidence in ewes strongly suggests GnRH secreted into CSF is required for
facilitation of mating behavior and may be necessary for the synchronization of
events around the time of ovulation. Therefore, in this project, the GnRH
neurons providing input to CSF will be examined during the periovulatory period
using neuroanatomical and immunocytochemical techniques to identify the source
of GnRH release into CSF, and to determine whether mating increases the
activation of these neurons. Since there is very close synchronization of
secretion between GnRH secreted into CSF and pituitary portal circulation, it
will be determined whether the same or different GnRH neurons contact both CSF
and pituitary circulation. These experiments will provide fundamental knowledge
necessary for future studies focusing on the mechanism(s) of action of GnRH
secreted into CSF for normal reproduction. Increased understanding of the
functions and mechanisms of action of this CSF route of GnRH secretion would
have broad-ranging implications for such areas as endangered species breeding
programs, livestock production, and treatment of infertility and sexual
dysfunction in women. This work will have broader impacts in a number of areas
including enhancing the infrastructure for research and training women and
underrepresented minorities in the sciences. Lastly, the findings of this
research will be disseminated through public outreach programs and interactions
with staff at zoological gardens committed to endangered species conservation.