* 0345945
* DMUU: Decision Center for a Desert City: The Science and Policy of Climate Uncertainty
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2011
* Grady Gammage, Arizona State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2011
* USD 7,503,929.00

The confluence of rapid population growth and the threat of global warming in an
uncertain climate environment pose challenging policy and decision-making issues
for the urbanizing desert of Central Arizona. The Decision Center for a Desert
City (DCDC) will coordinate a program of interdisciplinary research and
community outreach to improve water-management decisions in central Arizona. To
that end, DCDC will study the cognitive processes by which individuals and water
managers make decisions, apply sophisticated models of decision science to
water-allocation problems, develop GIS-based decision-support tools that foster
better long-term and more integrated decision making, use climate models to
define the dimensions of uncertain water availability both locally and
regionally, and develop innovative educational programs organized around water,
climate, and decision making. DCDC seeks to build a new model of science and
policy engagement that allows decision makers and scientists to collaborate on
important research questions and experiment with new
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even the best climate science cannot reduce
significantly the uncertainty associated with global climate change, the climate
cycles that lead to droughts and floods, and the expanding and intensifying
urban heat island that now grips the rapidly growing Phoenix area. In
collaboration with local, state, and regional water managers, DCDC will produce
basic interdisciplinary research about water availability, climatic uncertainty,
and human decision making, create decision support tools to foster better water-
management decisions, develop scenarios of different water futures and share
them with decision makers and the public, and investigate the nature of research
activity and decision making within DCDC itself for lessons about to build an
effective organization at the boundary of science and policy. DCDC is closely
aligned with Arizona State University's Decision Theater, a 3-D immersive space
for visualization and outreach to the community. Many of the nation's, and
indeed the world's, most rapidly growing urban areas are in arid environments
and face a future of greater water uncertainty. Arid cities therefore will
benefit from a clearer articulation of the effects of climate change on urban
water demand and supply and on community response to growing uncertainty. This
award was supported as part of the Fiscal Year 2003 Human and Social Dynamics
priority area special competition on Decision Making Under Uncertainty (DMUU).