* 0345344
* Collaborative Research: Bedrock and Sediment Controls on River Incision, Henry Mountains and Navajo Mountain, Utah
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Leonard Sklar, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2008
* USD 45,899.00

There has been considerable progress in the past decade on understanding the
interactions among climate, erosion, and tectonics. This has been accomplished
primarily with generic rule sets for river incision that lump together a diverse
set of erosional mechanisms. Much has been gained from these generic analyses:

we now know well what we need to know better and why. There is a clear need,
however, to develop and test process-specific models of river incision into
bedrock. In particular, the quantitative relationships among rock mass quality,
sediment load, and erosional efficiency stand out as important unknowns; the
lithologic and sediment controls on river morphology and incision rate must be
better understood before landscapes can be confidently interpreted in terms of
the climatic and tectonic factors that drive landscape evolution. Recent
theoretical and experimental advances demonstrate that only detailed physically-
based incision models provide a suitable framework for significant further
progress, assuming a suitable field site can be found and a comprehensive data
set systematically collected. We propose a coupled field, laboratory and
theoretical investigation, focused on channels draining the Henry Mountains and
nearby Navajo Mountain, Utah. These field areas present an excellent natural
experiment for studing bedrock and sediment controls on river incision and
morphology. Preliminary DEM and Remote sensing analyses and initial field
observations reveal significant, systematic differences in channel morphology
(slope, width, percent rock exposure, erosional bed forms, roughness) as a
function of substrate lithology and diorite sediment supply. The two principal
goals of the proposed research are (1) test, refine, and extend the saltation-
abrasion river incision model [Sklar, 2003; Sklar and Dietrich, 1998; Sklar and
Dietrich, 2001], and (2) to develop and test an in-situ method for objective
measurerment of substrate erodibility (or rock mass quality) at geomorphically
relevant scales. Specifically, we will test five focused hypotheses, exploiting
the opportunity presented by field conditions in the Henry Mountains and nearby
Navajo Mountain field sites. The saltation-abrasion model is the most fully
developed river incision model to date and makes specific, testable quantitative
predictions about the interrelations among channel morphology, sediment load,
substrate erodibility, percent rock exposure, and incision rate. Model
predictions supported by experimental data [Sklar, 2003; Sklar and Dietrich,
2001] have far-reaching implications orogen evolution and the interaction of
tectonics and climate, but have not been tested in the field. Outreach and
Broader Impacts: There is broad and growing recognition that dynamic
interactions between tectonics and geomorphology play a fundamental role in
orogenesis. Lithologic and sediment controls play a critical, but little studied
role in landscape and orogen evolution. Fundamental advances in our
understanding of the linkages between bedrock lithology, sediment
characteristics and channel morphology are also of potentially enormous value in
solving applied problems of anticipating, minimizing and mitigating for landuse
impacts and restoring damaged riverine habitat. Much of the proposed study will
define the core of a doctoral thesis research program of J. Johnson, an MIT
Ph.D. student preparing for an academic career. Moreover, our study will engage
one or more undergraduates each year at MIT in a special research project, and
involve undergraduates at SFSU, a primarily undergraduate institution. In
addition, this collaborative research project has the benefit of engaging L.
Sklar - a recently hired assistant professor at SFSU - in NSFsponsored research,
providing him the opportunity to participate in the supervision and training of
an MIT graduate student. Also, in addition to dissemination of our results in
the scientific literature, we are compiling a digital database in GIS format
with public domain digital elevation data, geologic maps, satellite images, and
geomorphic field data as layers that we will make publicly available on the Web.
Finally, both the subject matter and field areas of this project are well suited
to educational outreach. We propose to (1) develop poster displays and brochures
for the general public at visitors centers at national parks, monuments and
recreation areas in Utah, and (2) design a website to communicate our results in
the context of canyon incision and the landscapes of the Colorado Plateau,
especially the formation of Grand Canyon and Canyonlands. Informal discussions
with park rangers at Canyonlands NP have been met with enthusiasm.