* 0345943
* The Paleoecology of Pinnipeds on the Pacific Rim
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Paul Koch, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/2007
* USD 147,515.00

The Paleoecology of Pinnipeds on the Pacific Rim Intellectual Merits - Recent
studies have shown that humans, including prehistoric people, play a major role
in shaping the ecosystems they inhabit, and that some of the ecosystems we are
familiar with today operated differently in the recent past. Historical and
paleoecological data provide crucial contextual information for the conservation
communities considering future management decisions, especially for species that
have witnessed relatively recent population declines. Our overarching goal is to
explore how environmental and anthropogenic factors interacted to generate
ecological shifts on the northeastern Pacific coast over the past 5000 years.
The most complete record of these changes is found in coastal archaeological
sites, where the faunas of past terrestrial and marine ecosystems can be studied
to investigate paleoecologic shifts. Furthermore, the recognition of major
ecological shifts will be important for archaeologists attempting to decipher
changes in human demography and resource utilization. In past studies, northern
fur seals were studied using isotopic and archaeological data to show that the
species has changed its breeding and migratory behavior over the past 1000
years. Fur seal bones were also dated to show that the collapse of local
breeding colonies was not synchronous across the Pacific margin. For this study,
we will investigate changes in foraging, migratory, weaning, and haul-out
behavior in four different pinniped species since the mid-Holocene through
construction of time series on isotopic composition, presence/absence, relative
abundance, and age/sex distribution. In addition, we will develop two new
methods to assess weaning age in pinnipeds. The first will use growth structures
in pinniped teeth as proxies for weaning age and maternal investment. The other
is a biogeochemical approach that uses changes in the N isotope ratios in bone
growth series and tooth dentin. We will focus on four centers of pinniped
diversity - the eastern Aleutian Islands, the US-Canadian border, the Oregon
coast, and the Channel Islands. This project will include an extensive
literature search and compilation of existing faunal information into a database
on Holocene pinniped dynamics along the NE Pacific margin.

Broader Impacts - This study will show how insights into the ecology of
threatened species may be gleaned from archaeological data. This is important
for species in relict populations, whose current ecology may be shaped by recent
exploitation or environmental change. Three of the four species we will study
are presently undergoing rapid population declines, but the causes for these
declines are far from clear. This study will provide baseline data on the
ecology of these species over deep time, and indicate whether or not they
experienced similar declines in the past in relation to anthropogenic or
environmental perturbations. We will work with conservation biologists to make
our data available to those making management decisions. To this end, in winter
2004 we will co-host a conference, funded by the UC-PACRIM, which will bring
together archaeologists, historians, marine mammal ecologists, conservation
biologists, and social scientists. Our goal is to evaluate the archaeological
and historical record of NE Pacific pinnipeds in the context of the ecology of
these species today, and then to develop strategies for integrating this
information into decision-making processes of conservation policy makers. A more
immediate impact of this project will be the education of graduate and
undergraduate students at UCSC. In addition, our prehistoric approach to marine
mammal ecology was developed into a module for COSMOS (California State Summer
School for Mathematics and Science) in 2002 and 2003. A diverse group of
students (grades 8-12) took part in a 4-week course that integrated field,
laboratory, and classroom exercises designed to introduce scholarly and
motivated young people to science.