* 0345649
* The Perception and Neutralization of Vowel Length Contrasts
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Scott Myers, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2007
* USD 98,270.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Scott Myers will conduct research
on the perception of vowel length. In many languages, the length of a vowel can
distinguish words. In Kinyarwanda, a language spoken in Rwanda, gutaka means 'to
scream' if the second vowel is short, but 'to decorate' if that vowel is long.
Many factors affect the duration of a vowel, including how fast one speaks. A
perception experiment will be conducted in Rwanda to test how speakers of
Kinyarwanda decide when a vowel is long or short, given the variability of vowel
duration. A second factor concerning vowel length contrasts concerns the
positions in which the contrast is neutralized. In Kinyarwanda, for example, a
word-final vowel must be short. One explanation for such patterns is that vowel
length tends to be neutralized in positions where it is difficult to determine
the duration of a vowel. To test this hypothesis, a second series of perception
experiments will be conducted with speakers of Finnish, another language with
vowel length contrasts, to determine whether the contexts that favor
neutralization are also contexts where listeners have difficulty determining
vowel length. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has descriptive, theoretical
and practical significance. Understanding how listeners identify categories of
sounds when the physical realization of those categories is highly variable is
important to the understanding of speech perception, and is also the most
important challenge in the design of computer speech recognition programs. The
other experiments deal with the question of where phonological restrictions on
distribution come from. Similar restrictions on which sounds can go where are
found in unrelated languages all over the world. The results of this research
may provide evidence bearing on the hypothesis that at least some of these
common sound patterns are to be attributed to perceptual factors. The project
will provide research experience in acoustic phonetics for a graduate student,
and will also contribute to broadening the participation of underrepresented
groups in science by involving scholars at the National University of Rwanda in
experimental phonetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;