* 0345600
* DMUU: Uncertainty, Decision, and Climate Change
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2004,08/31/2008
* Edward Parson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2008
* USD 50,000.00

This developmental project supports a two-year seminar series and an intensive
summer workshop directed at building capacity for integrated research, analysis,
decision support, and graduate education in climate change and decision making
under uncertainty at the University of Michigan (UM). The project seeks to
increase integration of existing areas of strength at the University in the
earth and life sciences, the social and cognitive sciences, and the professional
schools. Seminars will include both internal speakers from across the University
whose work related to climate change or decision making could contribute to and
benefit from integration of these capabilities; and outside researchers whose
work is likely to build interest in the required collaborative activities and
illustrate potential synergies. The summer workshop will bring together
researchers and practitioners for extended examination of especially promising
topics that bridge climate-change and decision-making research and analysis.
Workshop topics will be developed collaboratively based on discussions in the
first year of the project, but topics presently under consideration include the
following: a) analysis of greenhouse-gas emission projections and mitigation
policies under uncertainty; b) exploratory development of alternative methods
for uncertainty-based analysis of climate-change impacts, vulnerability, and
adaptation (i.e., alternatives to the present dominant method, forward
propagation of uncertainty from emission scenarios through climate-model
projections to impacts in a few pre-identified domains); c) refining
understanding of assessment methods and processes for adaptive responses to the
climate-change issue under uncertainty and advancing knowledge, and; d) the
applicability and limits of the "insurance" analogy for responding to the threat
of global climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite two decades of major
advances in the atmospheric sciences related to climate change, and in the
analysis of human and societal decision making under uncertainty, these two
areas remain only weakly connected, both in academic research and in practical
policy deliberations and decision making. By improving the integration of
existing disciplinary capabilities at UM, the project will help build capacity
to do societally valuable research, training, and decision support for managing
the risk of global climate change and other dimensions of global environmental
change. Project activities will also contribute to interdisciplinary graduate-
student training and to building linkages between academic researchers and
professionals with responsibilities related to climate-change and associated
issues of mitigation and adaptation. Insights from project activities will be
made widely available through print and web-based publication. This
developmental award was supported as part of the Fiscal Year 2003 Human and
Social Dynamics priority area special competition on Decision Making Under
Uncertainty (DMUU).