* 0345481
* Towards Characterizing Depth and Lateral Variations of Anisotropy Across the North American Continent
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Barbara Romanowicz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 02/28/2007
* USD 124,047.00

The capability of investigating seismic anisotropy in the upper mantle under the
north American continent is being developed, in anticipation of the unprecented
dataset that will be collected under&lt;br/&gt;the USArray effort within
Earthscope. A waveform modelling approach is used, through which information
from entire long period seismograms, including seismic surface waves, overtones
and body waves can be equally exploited. We consider a realistic model of the
continental upper mantle, parametrized in terms of anisotropy with an axis of
symmetry of arbitrary orientation. Such a model is physically plausible, under
the assumption that seismic anisotropy is caused by the alignment of mantle
minerals olivine (and pyroxene) crystals in the past and/or present deformation
strain field and can account for the observation of both radial and azimuthal
anisotropy in surface wave data, as well as shear wave
splitting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The waveform modelling technique builds upon our
past global waveform tomography work. In particular, it utilizes broadband
elastic sensitivity kernels appropriate for long period body waves. The codes
are being adapted to the regional upper-mantle continental scale (local basis
functions) and to the complex parametrization, which involves the 5 radial
anisotropy parameters plus two angles representing the orientation of the
symmetry axis of anisotropy. Most of the theoretical framework for the type of
parametrization we are implementing has been developed previously, but it has
only been applied so far to surface wave data. While awaiting for the bulk of
the USArray data, this approach will be tested using available global and
regional seismic broadband network data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In general,
studies of upper mantle anisotropy consider only partial information: azimuthal
anisotropy or radial anisotropy in surface wave data, or splitting of SKS waves.
The denser regional sampling of the continent afforded by USArray provides an
unprecedented opportunity to address the issue of upper mantle anisotropy
integrating information from various phases, and to bring constraints on the
depth dependence and lateral variations of anisotropy, and its relation to
continental dynamics,addressing timely research questions such as the relation
to geological age of the variations in thickness of continental lithosphere, the
strength of coupling between the lithosphere and underlying asthenosphere and
the nature of the lithosphere/asthenosphere boundary, the relation of upper-
mantle anisotropy to present-day flow and/or past tectonic events. &lt;br/&gt;.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;