* 0345203
* The Non-vertebrate Chordate Oikopleura and Evolution of Vertebrate Developmental Innovations
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* John Postlethwait, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 06/30/2008
* USD 420,000.00

NSF0345203 The Non-vertebrate Chordate Oikopleura and Evolution of Vertebrate
Developmental Innovations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developmental innovations
transformed ancient filter-feeding chordates into voracious predators, the
ancestors of the vertebrates. These innovations are proposed to include a three-
part brain, neural crest, and epidermal placodes, and to be associated with
extensive genome amplification. A central problem is an understanding of the
molecular genetic changes that permitted the evolution of new developmental
mechanisms responsible for the vertebrate bauplan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to the Vertebrata (or Craniata), the phylum Chordata contains two other
sub-phyla, Cephalochordata (the sister group to the Vertebrata), and the basally
diverging Urochordata. Urochordate larvae have a typical chordate morphology
including notochord, dorsal nerve cord, pharyngeal slit primordia, and a
muscular post-anal tail. Urochordates of the class Ascidiacea are well studied
classically, molecularly, and genomically, but their larvae usually lack a
complete one-way digestive system, and metamorphosis destroys much of the
central nervous system as the body plan reorganizes into a sessile, filter-
feeding adult. In contrast, urochordates of the class Larvacea (or
Appendicularia), including Oikopleura dioica, maintain a complete chordate body
plan as free-living adults, which may be an advantage for the investigation of
the chordate bauplan. Furthermore, in contrast to cephalochordates, Oikopleura
embryos are available year round and can be maintained many generations in the
lab. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this proposal is to help
understand the evolutionary origin of vertebrate developmental innovations
utilizing Oikopleura dioica to complement investigations on ascidians and
cephalochordates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit Objectives: Aim 1. To
determine the fate map of Oikopleura embryos. Understanding the fate map is
essential for investigations of cell fate determination. Methods include
injection of fluorescent dyes into blastomeres at various ages, and four-
dimensional reconstructions in multi-photon confocal microscopy. Aim 2. To test
in Oikopleura the developmental role of orthologs of genes shown to be required
for the development of vertebrate neural crest and placodes. Methods for Aim 2
include down-regulating gene function with morpholino antisense
oligonucleotides, and testing gene function by transient transgenesis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact Objectives: Aim 3. To train two minority
undergraduates studying Oikopleura molecular developmental genetics in a ten-
week summer research program, and one minority undergraduate for academic year
research. Aim 4. To increase knowledge of the basic biology of a major player in
global carbon sequestration. Larvaceans bypass most of the microbial food web by
converting picophytoplankton into biomass directly available to predatory fish
and into fast-sinking carbon trapped in their discarded houses that are
transported to ocean depths. In the face of global warming, likely due at least
in part to rising atmospheric carbon dioxide, it is crucial to understand better
the biology of this key global link in the carbon cycle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;