* 0345636
* Conference:  Workshop on Facilitating Microbial Research Through Advanced Data Management Infrastructure to be held October 27-29, 2003 in Arlington, VA
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2004
* Joseph Pekny, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/2004
* USD 100,636.00

The objective of this workshop is to allow scientists to reach a mutual
understanding of the&lt;br/&gt;needs of microbial research, to understand how
these needs can be addressed through an&lt;br/&gt;improved data management
infrastructure, and to provide a roadmap for implementation of such an
infrastructure. The workshop will facilitate the understanding of the available
data management and knowledge extraction technology, the future direction of
this field, and how it can be used to advance microbial research. Recent
advances in the life sciences have resulted in an increasing amount of
scientific data. This valuable data has been stored in separate databases.
However, there are no efficient mechanisms that allow scientists to issue
complex queries including multidatabase queries. Yet such mechanisms would
considerably improve the rate at which scientists process and analyze the data
compressing the cycle from investigation to discovery. This workshop will bring
together scientists who are impacted by the emergence of these numerous
databases, since they use these databases on a regular basis to advance
microbial research. In addition, the workshop will include a number of
researchers in information technology with interests in databases and
information retrieval. The workshop will feature speakers from academia,
industry and research centers. Some of the speakers will present their
experience in maintaining microorganism databases such as the TIGR Comprehensive
Microbial Resource. Other speakers will focus on the state of the art in
database management and information retrieval issues including database
integration, ontologies and semantic web technology. Furthermore, the workshop
will include speakers with interests in microbial research that relies on
microorganism databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will expose database
researchers to the challenges of microbial research and encourage them to use
these challenges as real life study cases when developing new data management
systems. The workshop will provide a forum for an exchange of ideas from
scientists and researchers with different backgrounds. The outcome of the
workshop will be a data management infrastructure implementation plan of
importance to the entire field of microbial biology. &lt;br/&gt;