* 0345627
* Workshop on ToBI for Spontaneous English Speech
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Nanette Veilleux, Simmons University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2007
* USD 45,000.00

With National Science Foundation support, Simmons College will host an
international workshop August 13-15, 2004, on the Tones and Break Indices (ToBI)
labeling system. Interacting with computers using speech is still not a natural
process, and one of the reasons is that computers do not fully incorporate the
prosodic information (intonation and timing) of spoken utterances. The ToBI
labeling system was developed with NSF support in the 1990's to label prosodic
features, such as emphasis and phrasing, which convey information vital to the
meaning of speech. Since that time, the ToBI conventions have furthered the
understanding of prosody by allowing a large community of researchers to share
data using common labels and to extend these conventions to other languages.
Most of these advances have come in theoretical areas; in contrast, applications
to automatic speech synthesis, recognition and understanding systems have been
slowed by the challenges of using ToBI, which was developed largely on the basis
of scripted speech, to label the kind of natural spontaneous speech that is now
a research priority. The workshop will address this problem by (i) identifying
some of the critical labeling challenges of spontaneous speech, through
preparatory on-line discussions of example utterances; (ii) organizing workshop
sessions around these issues and incorporating the group's resolution of these
issues (as well as a larger sampling of utterances) in a revised ToBI manual,
available on-line; and (iii) providing an ongoing forum in the form of a
website, hosted at Simmons College, on which challenging utterances are posted
monthly for labeling by interested participants, and labeling results are
summarized for on-line discussion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extension of ToBI
to meet the challenges of spontaneous speech, such as disfluencies,
interruptions and unscripted dialogue structures, will expand the already-
demonstrated benefits of a common prosody labeling system. Being able to share
data across laboratories means faster progress toward understanding how speakers
use prosody in communicative speech, because it helps investigators formulate
theories of intonation and timing, design experiments for testing their
theoretical predictions, and develop algorithms for dealing with prosody in
automatic processing systems. As a result, this new tool will have the potential
to make human-computer interactions using speech more natural. Additional
benefits will include better methods for automatic translation, improved
materials for second language teaching and more user-friendly aids for those
with speech-related handicaps.&lt;br/&gt;