* 0345870
* DMUU: Workshops -- Climate Decision Making Under Uncertainty & Precautionary Principle in Climate Change Policy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Christina Shannon, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2009
* USD 50,000.00

The goal of this project is to identify specific research needs with respect to
the adequate representation of climate change uncertainties and the development
of decision criteria and analytical tools for decision making in the face of
these uncertainties, with particular emphasis on the formulation of adaptation
and mitigation responses to climate change. This will be accomplished by
organizing two workshops covering some important aspects of decision making in
relation to climate change, viewed from both normative and positive
perspectives. One workshop, Decision Making Under Uncertainty, will examine
alternative approaches to the representation of uncertainty and alternative
criteria for decision making under uncertainty considered from a variety of
perspectives, both theoretical and empirical, including economics, psychology,
and risk communication. The theoretical section of the workshop will bring
together leading economic theorists; the empirical section of the workshop will
focus on the meaningfulness to decision makers of alternative approaches to the
representation of uncertainty and alternative criteria for decision making under
uncertainty and their practicality in the context of the climate uncertainties
and hydrology uncertainties at various different temporal and/or spatial scales.
The second workshop, The Precautionary Principle in Climate Change Policy,
explores the implications of recent economic research on the nature and
significance of the irreversibility effect for the design and climate change
policy.

Almost all of the existing analyses of climate change are deterministic rather
probabilistic in nature and concentrate on changes in mean temperature and
precipitation. However, there is growing recognition among climate researchers
of the need for analyses that account for changes in the variability of
temperature and precipitation, some of which are likely to be felt in the near-
term. These workshops will further the development of decision analytic tools
that incorporate climate variability and uncertainty and therefore help public
and private decision makers to address issues of adaptation and mitigation in
the face of climate change. The proceedings of the two workshops will be posted
on a web site and manuscripts will be prepared for peer-reviewed journals. This
developmental award was supported as part of the Fiscal Year 2003 Human and
Social Dynamics priority area special competition on Decision Making Under
Uncertainty (DMUU).