* 0345838
* COLLABORATIVE PROPOSAL: Silicified Paleocene Plants from North Dakota: Phylogenetic and Biogeographic Significance
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Kathleen Pigg, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2008
* USD 160,001.00

COLLABORATIVE PROPOSAL: Silicified Paleocene plants from North Dakota:
phylogenetic and biogeographic significance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kathleen Pigg,
Arizona State University; Melanie DeVore, Georgia College&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0345838
and EAR-0345569&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Late
Paleocene marks a pivotal time in the early diversification of many important
flowering plant families. Plants of this time occur after the biotic recovery
from the Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction events, yet shortly before the major
climate changes of the Paleocene/Eocene transition. The Late Paleocene Almont
and Beicegel Creek floras from North Dakota provide an unparalleled opportunity
to study the changing flora that occurred at this time and to expand the
documentation of rarer Paleocene elements, especially the emergence of mostly
temperate families (Ranunculaceae, the buttercup family) and genera [Cornus,
(the dogwoods) and Acer (maples)]. Because these unusually preserved floras
document both internal anatomy and external surface features of fossil plant
remains, they can serve as a benchmark with which to compare two disparate types
of fossils of the same age: European seed and fruit assemblages and leaf
compression floras of western North America and Asia. The funded research will
provide invaluable information useful for other studies focusing on the
evolutionary history of temperate families (Actinidiaceae, Betulaceae,
Ranunculaceae) and the biogeographic history and development of North American
and Asian floras.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide an excellent
opportunity for outreach. First graduate and undergraduate students, including
women and underrepresented groups will be trained in paleobiology. Second, there
are a number of other avenues for outreach including incorporation of
information in formal courses ranging from introductory environmental science to
community ecology and plant anatomy, public lectures in museums, and activities
for K-12 schools (through GC&amp;SU's Academic Outreach Program). Finally, an
exhibit on the Almont Flora will be established for GC&amp;SU's new museum
showcasing the research of the Department of Biology and Environmental Sciences
five faculty members who work with Cenozoic floras and
faunas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;