* 0345773
* Learning Complex Auditory Categories
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Andrew Lotto, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Maling
* 04/30/2007
* USD 199,990.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Lori Holt, Dr. Andrew Lotto, and
Dr. Randy Diehl will collaboratively investigate the basic perceptual and
cognitive processes that underlie complex auditory categorization, such as
phonetic categorization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the goals of the project is
to develop efficient and robust L2 training techniques. In order to accomplish
this, it is important to understand how the auditory system deals with
variability in the input to create useful categories. With prior NSF support,
the PIs have developed a methodology for training listeners to categorize novel
non-speech sounds that have some of the same complexity as speech sounds. This
approach allows the researcher to have complete control of listeners' experience
and provides a view of category learning as it is happening. In this project,
this methodology will be applied specifically to study the problem of feature
determination and weighting in categorization. Results from these studies will
be analyzed within a Bayesian statistical decision framework, which provides a
means to compute how an "ideal observer" would perform in the task. Thus, it is
possible to determine if listeners are performing optimally and, if not,
discover what biases they exhibit in weighting
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the results of these methodologies,
training regimens for L2 category learning will be created and tested by
training adult Japanese listeners on English /l/-/r/. In addition to the broader
impact derived from a better understanding of auditory categorization and
improved L2 training techniques, this project will develop techniques that may
be useful for therapy with new users of hearing aids or cochlear implants. This
program of research also provides a unique training opportunity for students.
The three laboratories involved are connected to world-class experimental groups
with different emphases (perceptual systems, cognitive neuroscience, audition
and communication disorders). This inter-disciplinary setting will provide
substantial interdisciplinary interaction for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;