* 0345397
* Game based software adaptation
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Dusko Pavlovic, Kestrel Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;0345397&lt;br/&gt;Dusko Pavlovic&lt;br/&gt;Kestrel
Institute&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As any other industry, software production has
been advancing by automating large parts of its process.&lt;br/&gt;The machine
code has been automatically compiled from high level programs for some forty
years. In&lt;br/&gt;maintenance, however, the adaptation of the system to the
changed environments or requirements is still&lt;br/&gt;executed and supervised
by the engineers. The need is present and the means available for
automated&lt;br/&gt;runtime adaptation. To accomplish this goal, integrated
advances must be made in two main areas: software&lt;br/&gt;semantics and
program change or adaptation. The need arises for an interdisciplinary approach,
combining&lt;br/&gt;the foundational structures from game semantics with the
engineering methods for developing self-adaptive&lt;br/&gt;software. This
project will extend and bring closer together our past individual and
collaborative efforts in:&lt;br/&gt;game semantics of programming languages
(Oxford); specification-carrying software (Kestrel); and selfadaptive
architectures (MIT).&lt;br/&gt;In traditional semantics computations are usually
viewed as sequences of actions of the System. The properties of interest
(safety, liveness, fairness) are then presented as predicates over such
sequences. The essence of game semantics is to make explicit the actions of the
Environment as well as the System. The interaction of the two is then construed
as a game: the Environment chooses the inputs, and the System must respond with
the correct outputs. A program is then a strategy for the System, prescribing a
response to each move of the Environment.