* 0345897
* Quantifying Sedimentary Capture of Biological Information
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Susan Kidwell, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2008
* USD 287,864.00

Quantifying Sedimentary Capture of Biological Information: meta-analysis of bias
in molluscan shell assemblages&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Susan M. Kidwell&lt;br/&gt;(
EAR-0345897)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geohistorical
information on the state of marine ecosystems - that is, data from sedimentary
cores for periods that pre-date quantitative studies by scientists -- provides
unique opportunities to (a) extend ecological time-series into the past and
thereby identify pre-impact baselines and drivers of relatively recent
environmental change, and (b) use past geointervals to test for organizing
principles in the behavior of species and communities. To extract full value
from sedimentary records, however, we need a quantitative evaluation of post-
mortem bias in biological information, particularly under ordinary conditions of
sedimentary time-averaging. The primary method used to evaluate bio-data capture
by sedimentary records is a "live-dead" study, in which the taxonomic
composition and numerical abundances of skeletal remains (here, the shells of
benthic mollusks) are compared against the local living community. This project
will use both conventional statistics and meta-analysis (new to sedimentary
geology and paleoecology) both to quantify bias and to rank factors that
determine data quality. Factors to be investigated include (1) intrinsic biology
(e.g., species' body size, shell mineralogy, life habit), (2) extrinsic
environment (e.g., habitat type, bathymetry, latitude), and (3) methodology
(e.g., sampling gear and density in time/space, mesh-size used to separate
specimens from sediment). The effects of spatial scaling (i.e., the capture of
environmental gradients, the capture of regional information by single death
assemblages) will also be tested explicitly. &lt;br/&gt;These analyses, using
existing data generated from many decades of fieldwork around the world in
coastal and shelf settings, and representing millions of dollars of past
investment by geological, biological and fisheries groups, are an important step
in improving the design of paleobiologic sampling and protocols for analysis,
particularly for studies that seek to (a) link geohistorical with neontologic
information, or (2) use death assemblages to substitute for or augment
neontologic inventories of biodiversity. A key aspect of the project is
enlarging of the digital database both by further literature search, and by the
"rescue" of data from 4 exceptionally valuable past ecological surveys in US
coastal waters. Patterns revealed (or debunked) by meta-analysis provide new
hypotheses for field experimentation and numerical modeling, as is already
occurring in response to pilot work on this subject. In addition, it is expected
that the techniques developed from this work (including factors identified as
critical to bio-data capture) can be applied to the evaluation of other major
groups and environments. &lt;br/&gt;