* 0345618
* Mechanisms and Rates of Preservation of Biogenic Remains in Continental Shelf and Slope Environments
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Karla Parsons-Hubbard, Oberlin College
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 09/30/2009
* USD 396,883.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanisms and Rates of Preservation of Biogenic Remains
in Continental Shelf and Slope Environments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Karla M.
Parsons-Hubbard&lt;br/&gt;Oberlin
College&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0345618&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The Shelf
and Slope Experimental Taphonomy Initiative (SSETI) is a long-term experiment
studying the fate of organism remains on the sea floor. The fossilization
potential of organisms that die at the sediment-water interface is poorly
understood, particularly in deep offshore shelf and slope environments. The
modern shelf and slope setting is a reasonable proxy for ancient epicontinental
sea deposits and has only rarely been studied with respect to its fossilization
potential. The SSETI experiment began in 1993 when molluscan remains,
crustaceans, echinoids, and woody plant debris were deployed in mesh bags in 21
different EODs at 10 major sites on the continental shelf and slope of the Gulf
of Mexico and Caribbean. Each site has multiple replicates for repeated sampling
over the ensuing years to decades. The project proposed here is to recover
experimental arrays that have been on the sea floor for 12 years. Collections of
samples have been taken at targeted intervals (1 year, 2 years, 8 years) to
document taphonomic rates and processes, and to determine whether different
types of shell, wood, test, or cuticle respond differently to processes in the
taphonomically active zone (TAZ) in different environments and over time. To
answer these questions, repeated sampling of the remains must be accompanied by
a detailed characterization of the TAZ. This is accomplished through porewater
geochemical analysis using in situ micro-electrode sampling and through
measurements of sediment oxygen demand. The goal of this work is to link the
instantaneous chemical conditions in the TAZ to the long-term effects on shells
residing at, or just below, the sediment-water interface. Results through year
eight show a very tight correlation between the porewater geochemistry and
dissolution of molluscan material. These findings are greatly advancing
knowledge about the cycling of carbonate on the sea floor and has important
applications to paleontology, paleoecology, and has direct implications for
carbon budgets and climate modeling. In particular, the results of this work are
critical to planners seeking to use the sea floor as a carbon sink. &lt;br/&gt;