* 0345037
* Physiology and Mechanism of Archaeal Nitrate Respiration
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Imke Schroeder, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 03/31/2008
* USD 344,340.00

Denitrification is a uniquely prokaryotic respiratory pathway, in which nitrate
is reduced to atmospheric N2. This mode of respiration plays an essential role
in the maintenance of the global nitrogen cycle on earth. The goal of this
proposal is to examine denitrification in the archaea, since bioenergetic
pathways are not well understood in these microbes. The archaea are
metabolically as diverse as the bacteria, but also possess unique physiological
features due to the extreme environments that they inhabit on Earth.
Denitrification in extreme thermophilic environments presents several
challenges. First, the toxic effect of the denitrification intermediates is
enhanced because of the high temperature. Second, hot environments are enriched
with tungsten, a metal that typically inactivates the molybdenum-containing
nitrate reductase that is a key enzyme of the denitrification pathway.

The hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrobaculum aerophilum will be used as a model
organism to examine the unique biochemistry and bioenergetics of archaeal
denitrification. In this project a combination of biochemical, biophysical and
molecular approaches will be employed to further characterize the molybdenum and
tungsten-containing nitrate reductase. In addition, the N2O reductase, which is
predicted to be a novel enzyme, as well as the electron donating formate
dehydrogenase will be characterized. Since tungsten plays a major role in the
physiology of P. aerophilum denitrification, the tungsten-uptake system in P.
aerophilum will be investigated. Finally, studies concerning operon structure
and tungsten-dependent gene regulation of denitrification pathway genes are
proposed.

Broader Impact: Underrepresented minority students will be recruited from the
UCLA CARE program, which provides training for underrepresented individuals in
academic and technological fields. The PI has routinely participated in the UCLA
Care's summer program and students from this program typically continue their
scientific training in the PI's laboratory. In addition, the PI will continue to
provide research opportunities to minority students recruited from the large
Introductory Microbiology class that she teaches yearly.