* 0345740
* Gender, Class, and the Political Economy of Reproductive Change in Puerto Rico
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Harry Sanabria, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/2007
* USD 175,000.00

This project studies the decline of fertility in Puerto Rico during the first 40
years after the 1898 occupation by the United States, the earliest and most
dramatic fertility decline in Latin America. This interdisciplinary project will
examine the driving forces behind this decline, focusing on post-1898 changes in
the realm of work and labor, gender relations, and marital and domestic
arrangements that gave rise to class-specific reproductive behavior. The project
will construct a sample of 1600 women stratified by class and time period; draw
a sub-sample of 160 women who appear in judicial proceedings records; and
contextualize the data with records and information from civil and religious
archives. The project will test hypotheses relating a women's decreasing
fertility to her increasing economic status and
autonomy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: By bringing together scholars from
cultural anthropology, sociology, demography, and history, this project
represents broad based and systemic interdisciplinary research. The project will
strengthen the integration of research, teaching, and training by fostering the
teaching of new undergraduate and graduate courses at The University of
Pittsburgh; strengthening the Departmental High School Apprenticeship Program at
the University of Pittsburgh (in which local high school students are introduced
to contemporary issues in anthropology); broadening the scope of anthropology
internships by means of which undergraduate majors at the University of
Pittsburgh actively participate in faculty research projects; and sponsoring an
interdisciplinary conference to be held at the University of Pittsburgh, which
will bring together scholars from anthropology, history, sociology, and
demography for a comprehensive survey of scholarship to generate new research
agendas focusing on Puerto Rico. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;