* 0345967
* Transition to High School in a Multi-Ethnic Sample: Opportunities and Risks
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2010
* Sandra Graham, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 07/31/2010
* USD 661,195.00

The purpose of this research is to examine the transition to high school in an
urban adolescent sample. The sample is large, comprised of about 1500 early
adolescents in two cohorts who had been recruited in 6th grade for a
longitudinal study of peer harassment in middle school. The sample is also
ethnically diverse, with participants who are African American, Latino,
Asian/Pacific Islander, and Caucasian. Latino and Asian students also differ in
immigrant history. Data on students' social adjustment, emotional well-being,
achievement attitudes, and academic outcomes will be gathered in Fall and Spring
during 9th for Cohort 2 and during 10th grade for Cohort 1. The specific aims of
the project are to examine: (1) how social risk in middle school (i.e., having a
reputation as an aggressor or victim of harassment) affects the high school
transition; (2) whether there are particular pathways to (mal)adjustment that
are predicted by social risk; and (3) how the transition process is influenced
by contextual factors such as ethnic identity, the ethnic composition of high
schools, and immigrant history. The data collected during this one-year project
will help assure that there are multiple time points to examine the high school
transition as a process that unfolds over time. Cutting-edge statistical
techniques will be used to model trajectories of change in academic achievement,
including growth, decline, and the possibility of recovery. Findings will
provide new insights into the social and cultural underpinnings of a smooth
versus disruptive high school transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research can have broader impact in two ways. First, the study of social
vulnerability in 9th and 10th grade is relevant to educational practice because
those are the grades when high school youth who have become alienated from
school are most at risk for dropping out. Teachers and other educational
professionals need to become better informed about the importance of the social
lives of adolescents to sustained achievement strivings. Second, the multiethnic
focus of the research and the timeliness of the topic provide an excellent
context for attracting and mentoring talented students of color, at the
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels. The Principal Investigator has
an excellent track record of fostering the intellectual and professional
development of students of color. &lt;br/&gt;