* 0346707
* NSF-EC Cooperative Activity in Materials Research: Mechanical Measurement of Spin Transport in Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Pritiraj Mohanty, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2007
* USD 300,000.00

This collaborative project focuses on detection and control of spin transport in
nanoscale magnetic heterostructures, which have recently been at the heart of
two distinct areas, spintronics and quantum-information processing. The main
goal of the project is to develop advanced techniques for the detection of spin
transfer by the resulting nanomechanical torque. Conversely, spin current and
spin population can be created by the application of external torque. This
experimental effort will build upon the recent progress in ultra-sensitive force
detection methods in nano-electro-mechanical systems (NEMS) and advanced
techniques for fabrication of multi-layered, suspended hybrid nanostructures
with magnetic and non-magnetic materials. Complementary experiments will be
carried out in the nanoscale research laboratory at Boston University and the
high-field, low-temperature measurement facilities in Centre de Recherches sur
les Tres Basses Temperatures (CRTBT) at the Centre Nationale de la Recherche
Scientific (CNRS), Grenoble, France. Both faculty and graduate students will
participate in long-term exchanges between these institutions. The students will
gain valuable exposure from the international collaboration on these joint
experiments. This NSF project is co-funded by the Division of Materials Research
and International Office (Western Europe) as a Cooperative Activity in Materials
Research between the NSF and the European Community. The project will be carried
out in collaboration with CNRS, Grenoble, France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
collaborative research project between Boston University and the Centre
Nationale de la Recherche Scientific (CNRS), Grenoble, France. This project
focuses on a novel approach of detecting and controlling electron spin by
nanomechanical torque. Manipulation of electron spin by torque avoids the
ubiquitous problem in spintronics, namely the extraction of spin information
from a charge current. This project will have joint experiments in both Boston
University and CNRS to take advantage of the complementary expertise and
facilities. Structure fabrication and measurements will be carried out in the
nanoscale research laboratory at Boston University, and characterization
measurements will be done at the high-field, low-temperature measurement
facilities in Centre de Recherches sur les Tres Basses Temperatures (CRTBT) at
the CNRS, Grenoble, France. Both faculty and graduate students will participate
in long-term exchanges between these institutions. The students will gain
valuable exposure from the close collaboration with the international
researchers. This NSF project is co-funded by the Division of Materials Research
and International Office (Western Europe) as a Cooperative Activity in Materials
Research between the NSF and the European Community. The project will be carried
out in collaboration with CNRS, Grenoble, France.&lt;br/&gt;