* 0346810
* CAREER: The Design, Synthesis and Study of Electro-active Materials Based on Stacked Polyfluorens
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Rajendra Rathore, Marquette University
* Continuing grant
* Tyrone D. Mitchell
* 12/31/2008
* USD 575,600.00

Professor Rajendra Rathore of the Department of Chemistry at Marquette
University is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program to
perform research that integrates the disciplines of synthetic organic chemistry,
molecular recognition, and material science with the aim of studying and
exploiting new cofacially-stacked benzenoid structures that can be potentially
utilized for the development of various electronic and optoelectronic devices in
the emerging field of nanotechnology. In his proposal, he has outlined the
design and synthesis of a variety of new cofacially-stacked benzenoid structures
bearing multiple redox-active chromophores for the preparation of (advanced)
nanomaterials for practical usage. Some of the examples include: suitably
tailored redox-active polyaromatic hydrocarbons for self assembly, cofacially-
stacked (poly)stilbenoid hydrocarbons, and (poly)fluorene derivatives for the
preparation of wire-like materials. He will demonstrate the functioning of
various covalently linked polychromophoric molecules with cofacially-stacked
benzenoid spacers for the potential utilization for the design and construction
of molecular wires that will find widespread applications in the area of
molecular electronics. The study of the proposed novel molecules, using various
spectroscopic techniques including time-resolved spectroscopy, will expand the
understanding of the nature of through-space and through-bond electronic
interactions between various organic redox centers linked via cofacially-stacked
benzenoid spacers.

With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
Rathore will design and synthesize new cofacially-stacked benzenoid structures.
This is an important step that will allow the development of a variety of new
molecular and supramolecular nanostructures in order to achieve photoinduced
charge separation over long distances and with high quantum efficiency. His work
will create exciting challenges for future research. Moreover, these fundamental
studies of the electron transport through cofacially-stacked p-systems will also
be highly relevant to the understanding of the (controversial) electron-
transport phenomenon observed in DNA through p-stacked bases. Ultimately, the
easy fabrication of organic molecules and the high degree of synthetic
flexibility in the preparation of these molecular assemblies will allow their
ready modification and eventual incorporation into polymers and thin films for
potential practical applications in the field of nanotechnology. Finally, the
research proposed herein will also promote multidisciplinary research programs
that offer high quality training and research facilities for both undergraduate
and graduate students within the university.