* 0346800
* CAREER:  Reaction-Based Processing of High Temperature Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* William Fahrenholtz, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;The research and educational objectives of this CAREER project focus
on the reaction-based processing of multi-phase materials designed for use at
elevated temperatures. Four different research projects have been outlined to
investigate different aspect of reaction-based processing: 1) use of in situ
reactions to tailor the interfacial chemistry in ceramic-metal systems; 2)
determination of reaction mechanisms in ceramic-metal systems; 3) calculation
and experimental verification of phase equilibrium diagrams in ultra-high
temperature ceramic systems; and 4) development of new routes for the processing
of Zr-based ceramics. Taken together, these projects will provide new processing
routes, better control of microstructure, improved knowledge of reaction
mechanisms, and a fundamental understanding of phase stability in high
temperature materials. The results will benefit government and industry
development of new aerospace vehicles and other systems that operate in extreme
environments. High temperature materials will also serve as the focus for
educational activities that include the direct training of four graduate
students and up to ten undergraduates as well as professional development
activities for all Ceramic Engineering undergraduates at University of Missouri-
Rolla.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efficiency of systems that convert heat into
useful work (e.g., electrical power plants, internal combustion engines) can be
increased by increasing the operating temperatures. The materials used to
construct these systems limit the maximum operating temperature. When used at
elevated temperatures, materials must be stable against reaction with other
materials and must be resistant to internal physical changes that can alter
performance over time. This project will address the critical need for improved
high temperature materials by increasing the fundamental understanding of
processing-microstructure-property relations in high temperature systems. The
project will also facilitate the training of undergraduate and graduate students
for potential careers in this field.&lt;br/&gt;