* 0346380
* Support for the Bird Collection at Delaware Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Jean Woods, Delaware Museum of Natural History, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 02/28/2007
* USD 408,452.00

A grant has been awarded to the Delaware Museum of Natural History under the
direction of Dr. Jean L. Woods and Gene K. Hess to address storage deficiencies
in the bird specimen collections. Current threats to the collections include
overcrowding, damage from insects, and exposure to non-archival materials. The
bird collections at the Museum are the fifteenth largest in North America
(119,000 specimens) and include significant numbers of specimens from the
Philippines, Mexico and North America. The Museum also curates the second
largest collection of bird eggs in North America. These collections represent an
historical record of bird life from these locations, and are inherently
irreplaceable. This grant will allow the Delaware Museum of Natural History to
make major strides in safeguarding the collections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
grant will fund installation of a compact storage system and new museum-quality
specimen cabinets to house the bird skin collection. The compact storage system
will accommodate the collections by using approximately 25% less space than
currently used. This will ease overcrowding in the collections and allow
sufficient space for expansion well into the future. It also will provide
additional workspace for Staff and visitors. The new specimen cabinets should
prevent further insect damage to the specimens and meet all current standards
for use of archival quality materials in the storage of natural history
collections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These improvements will ensure that the
Museum will be able to continue its mission "to excite and inform people about
the natural world." Scientists from all over the world use specimens from the
collections in their research. Dozens of scientific papers and reports have been
published based on this research. The Museum's collections also greatly benefit
the local community. Specimens from the bird collections are used in long-term
and temporary exhibits in the Museum's galleries. Specimens are also used in
outreach programs, many of which target underserved communities. Specimens are
loaned to local universities for use in their classes and students can earn
college credit by completing projects in the collections. Artists and
photographers also use the collections. In summary, the improvements resulting
from this grant will benefit all of the people who currently use the collections
and ensure that the collections will be safeguarded to inform and inspire future
generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;