* 0346624
* Databasing, Curating, and Protecting: A proposal to update and modernize the University of Washington Herbarium
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2004,05/31/2008
* David Giblin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 05/31/2008
* USD 475,719.00

A grant has been awarded to the University of Washington under the direction of
Dr. R. Olmstead to improve the long-term preservation of and access to the
University of Washington Herbarium's (WTU) vascular plant, nonvascular plant,
and fungal collections. The University of Washington Herbarium is the largest
herbarium in the Pacific Northwest, with over 570,000 specimens divided among
vascular plants, cryptogams (bryophytes and lichens), fungi, and algae. The
collections are an invaluable botanical resource because they support
systematics, floristics, and conservation biology research both nationally and
internationally. The goals of this project include replacing wooden specimen
cases with steel ones, converting the outdated compactor system from electronics
based to mechanical assist, databasing all western North America vascular plant
specimens, and curating the moss and lichen collections.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purchase of steel herbarium cases will protect tens of
thousands of specimens against pest, fire, or water damage. Currently these
specimens are exposed to these risks due to their storage in wooden cabinets.
Archival storage specialists will be contracted to convert the existing mobile
storage unit to mechanical assist in order to eliminate further reliance on a 22
year-old electronic system for which neither spare parts nor trained maintenance
personnel are available. Housing specimens in modern cases, and having operable
storage equipment will ensure that the collections are available to current and
future users of all backgrounds. A database manager will be hired to supervise
the databasing of WTU's Pacific Northwest vascular plant collection. A curator
with graduate-level training in systematics will be hired to curate the moss and
lichen collections. These important collections, including specimens resulting
from recent biotic surveys, have not received the attention of a trained expert
in over 20 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities of this project support
the University of Washington's mission of research, education, and public
outreach. Improved storage of and accessibility to WTU's specimens ensures novel
opportunities for the scholarly use of the collections by on and off-site
researchers for generations to come. Participation in this project by
undergraduate students provides training opportunities in museum curation and
research. Importantly, the impact of this project extends well beyond the
scientific and university community. Users of WTU's collections include the
public, students from all education levels, government agency personnel, and
conservation-oriented non-profit organizations. Reliable access to properly
stored and curated specimens ensures their long-term availability to a broad
audience. &lt;br/&gt;