* 0346032
* Collaborative Research: Seismic Tomography and Location Calibration Around the SAFOD Site
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2006
* Steven Roecker, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 02/28/2006
* USD 166,895.00

A key objective of the San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth (SAFOD) project is
to drill through the rupture patch of a small repeating earthquake. The size of
the rupture patch is on the order of tens of meters; hence knowing its location
to a comparable degree of accuracy is vital to SAFOD's success. Results from
previous work in this area by PI's Thurber and Roecker, which involved the
analysis of data from the deployment of dense, temporary networks of seismic
stations (PASO-UNO and PASO-DOS) in the vicinity of the drill site, show that
while the epicenter of the target patch is consistent with the results of a
previous study, the depth is significantly shallower than anyone previously
supposed; different enough to require rethinking the original drilling plan.
Results from a number of trial inversions, including the application of two
different tomographic techniques, indicate that this result is robust. The
uncertainty in depth estimated to be on the order of 200-m, which, while an
improvement over previous efforts, is still larger than what would be required
to successfully guide the three phases of SAFOD drilling (Phases I and II
require ~100-m accuracy, while Phase III requires ~10-m accuracy). This project
is applying recently developed and upgraded analysis techniques to both increase
the amount of data currently available and significantly reduce the level of
noise. A new double-differencing tomography technique is also being utilized
that has been shown to dramatically improve both event locations and wavespeed
images over those obtained with standard techniques. In addition, important new
data is now available from a set of November 2003 seismic experiments. This is a
critical new dataset, and its analysis and incorporation into the modeling will
lead to significant improvements to the model and earthquake locations. These
steps are expected to yield a reduction in uncertainties to less than 100-m by
the time Phase I drilling begins in summer 2004. Once Phase I drilling is
complete, a temporary seismic network (PASO-TRES) will installed and operated
for 12 months, reoccupying 12 of the PASO-DOS sites. In addition to recording
ambient seismicity simultaneously with the instruments in the drill hole and
permanent stations in the area, signals from 10 small (~2 lb) shots will be
recorded in order to calibrate wavespeeds and estimate absolute location
accuracy by treating the downhole sensors as "virtual earthquakes." The
combination of PASO-TRES data, both active and passive, with those from the
permanent stations near the drill site (HRSN and USGS) and downhole sensors,
when subjected to the same analysis techniques as those employed on PASO-DOS,
will allow a further reduction in the uncertainties in hypocenter location to
the level required to direct the Phase II drilling.