* 0346781
* Specimen-Level Database Expansion and Information Distribution of the Hawaiian Terrestrial Arthropod Holdings at Bishop Museum
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Neal Evenhuis, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Standard Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 06/30/2008
* USD 445,521.00

A grant has been awarded to the Bishop Museum under the direction of Dr. Neal
Evenhuis to database the specimens of flies and beetles from Hawaii in the
collections of the Bishop Museum in Honolulu and make this information available
to a wide user community through the Web, scientific publications, and
educational activities at the Museum. The Bishop Museum was one of the first
museums in the country to make its holdings of insect specimens available to the
world via the Web. This project will significantly enhance that specimen-based
information already available and being used by scientists, students, teachers,
and the lay public and allow the completion of the databasing for the Hawaiian
flies and beetles. These two groups of insects were chosen because they show the
highest amount of endemism of insects in Hawaii (each having over 60% endemic
species), contain rare and vulnerable species, and have been used as ecological
indicators (in determining, for instance, if a particular area has been
adversely affected by introduced pest species). These two groups together make
up about 1/3 of the total number of insects known from Hawaii. In addition,
flies and beetles are important ecologically: they make up a significant portion
of the diet of some rare forest bird species found only in Hawaii. Their
presence or absence or reduction of populations in certain areas can have a
profound effect on the health of forest bird populations in those same
areas.&lt;br/&gt; Information for a total of about 180,000 specimens of flies
(76,000) and beetles (104,000) will be entered into a database at roughly 60,000
records per year by a team of technicians, volunteers, and curators at the
Museum. Important information such as the scientific name of each specimen,
location it was collected, date of collection, and other data (for example, such
as host plants or parasite hosts) associated with each specimen will be entered
into the database. To speed up the processing and updating of information
entered into the database, tiny bar codes specifically made for small insect
labels will be used. The database being used will also be linked to other
databases at the Bishop Museum allowing a number of simultaneous requests for
data from various databases at the same time.&lt;br/&gt; The Bishop Museum feels
that sound decision-making processes can only occur if one has accurate and
readily accessible information. Conservation initiatives underway in Hawaii to
protect habitats in which threatened and endangered plants and animals occur
require information quickly, accurately, and with regard to a wide array of
locations and organisms. By empowering a wide array of users through online Web
access to the holdings of the Bishop Museum, better use of public and private
funds can be anticipated as a result of obtaining accurate information in a
cost-effective manner and making wise and sound decisions regarding land use and
conservation efforts. In addition, interaction of Hawaiian and Pacific island
school children using the information provided on the Web enhances their
knowledge and appreciation of their natural heritage and can stimulate them to
become more interested in biological sciences, thereby potentially filling a
large void of minorities in the biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;