* 0346819
* CAREER:    The Evolution of Polar Nanoregions and Its Coupling with Cation-Ordered Domains in Pb(B'B'')O3 Relaxor Ferroelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Xiaoli Tan, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER project addresses the interactions between the polar nanoregions and
the cation ordering domains and the effects of the chemical domains on the
dynamic transition of the polar domains in relaxor ferroelectrics of complex
perovskite Pb(B'B")O3. These two types domains are both on the nanometer scale
and their interplay is the physical origin for the observed superior properties.
Application of an electric field leads to a transformation of the polar regions
into ferroelectric macrodomains, corresponding to a first order phase
transition. However, our current understanding of the coupling between these two
nanoscale features is very limited and the evolution of the polar nanodomains in
the presence of external fields has never been explored. A unique in situ
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) approach will be taken in this study in
order to deliver electric voltage to TEM specimens at controlled low
temperatures. This experiment seeks to visualize, in real time, the evolution of
fundamental nanoscale features in relaxor ceramics. The results derived from
this project are significant because they are expected to (i) identify the
coupling between chemical order and electric dipole order, (ii) establish the
mechanism of the field-induced phase transition, and (iii) refine existing
kinetics models for better understanding of relaxor
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research findings will be treated within the
broader context of nanomaterials science and utilized for nanoscience education.
Integrated educational activities will be pursued to promote nanoscience
education by exposing a large number of students at various levels to this new
knowledge. The science and application of nanomaterials will be introduced into
the K-12 curriculum through a series of summer workshops for Iowa high school
science teachers and Web-based lesson plans for 5th-8th graders created by high
school interns. As an underrepresented group, women will be involved through the
Iowa State University's Program for Women in Science and Engineering (PWSE) and
the Internet Explorers program of the College of Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;