* 0346898
* CAREER: Measuring Large-Amplitude Motions in Proteins Using Fourier Transform Electron Spin Resonance
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2009
* Sunil Saxena, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2009
* USD 700,676.00

Thermal motions that create structural fluctuations are crucial for mediating
protein function in phenomena such as enzyme activation. In this project, a
Fourier Transform (FT) electron spin resonance (ESR) method will be developed to
measure the amplitude of distance fluctuations between two sites in a protein.
Sophisticated FT experiments will be used to extract the dipolar relaxation
between two electron-spins, which may be analyzed to determine the distances of
minimum and maximum approach between the spins. This method will extend current
spectroscopic methods that generally provide only the timescales of domain
motions and an averaged distance. The new method as well as the current ESR
methods will be applied to a membrane-spanning protein, glycine receptor, which
transiently permits the permeation of chloride ions across the membrane.
Structural transitions underlie the remarkable specificity of ion permeation in
this protein. Several mutant proteins with pairs of nitroxides tagged at various
sites will be expressed. Distances between tagged sites will be probed in three
key conformations using FT-ESR to obtain direct information on the identities
and amplitudes of domain movements responsible for ion-permeation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research will create new methods that
allow a significant refinement in the quantification of many important dynamic
events in proteins. The educational aspects of this project encompass outreach,
training, and teaching activities. Outreach efforts will attract undergraduates
in the Pittsburgh area to careers in science. Opportunities will be created for
undergraduates at local 4-year colleges to present their research at
conferences. Partnerships with faculty at 4-year colleges will be developed to
enable their students' participation in FT-ESR research. Graduate training will
include a systematic professional skills development program, so that Chemistry
students can transition effectively into careers in an interdisciplinary job
environment. Proposed development in coursework will introduce undergraduates to
new techniques for studying single molecules, and new curriculum at the graduate
level will train students in modern magnetic resonance methods. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in a highly interdisciplinary research
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Biomolecular Systems Cluster of the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Experimental Physical
Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division fund this project jointly.