* 0346375
* ACT/SGER:      Advanced Electrodes and Membranes for Power Sources
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* Michael Wagner, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 98,928.00

The goal of this project is to improve battery materials for use in lithium and
lithium ion cells useful for a number of applications areas such as those in
which high energy density, cell voltage and charge retention are critical. One
aim is to develop composite solid electrolyte membranes useful for advanced
lithium battery technology. Prototype lithium/water batteries will be built and
tested with the goal of developing batteries with multiyear service lives. The
composite electrolyte membranes will be applicable in other solid state lithium
battery designs, and have superior processability. In addition to the
development of composite electrolytes, the efficacy of certain nanomaterials
such as solid electrolyte interphase stabilizers for the positive electrodes of
lithium-ion batteries will be investigated. Success in this project would
greatly enhance the service life of lithium-ion batteries, especially important
in, for example, satellite communications, sensing and monitoring. The proposed
research will train graduate and undergraduate students, including
underrepresented minorities, in a multidisciplinary field of national
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Batteries play a
crucial role in national security by providing power for many of the devices in
service today and those anticipated in the future. Lithium and lithium ion cells
are useful for number of these current and anticipated applications due to their
high storage capacity, light-weight and long life. For example, prototype
lithium/water batteries will be built and tested with the goal of developing
batteries with multiyear service lives for oceanic applications. The technology
developed will then be extended to other advanced battery designs such as
lithium/air. In addition to the development of advanced lithium batteries,
nanomaterial additives to the positive electrodes of lithium-ion batteries will
be investigated. The proposed research will train graduate and undergraduate
students, including underrepresented minorities, in a multidisciplinary field of
critical national importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;