* 0346532
* Workshop : Frontiers in Genomics: Insights into Protist Evolutionary Biology, to be held on May 19-21, 2004 in Iowa City, IA.
* BIO,EF
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Debashish Bhattacharya, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2005
* USD 61,249.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Debashish Bhattacharya at the University of Iowa
to organize a workshop entitled, "Frontiers in Genomics: Insights into Protist
Evolutionary Biology", followed by a symposium at the annual meeting of the
Society of Protozoologists entitled, "Genome Evolution in Microbial Eukaryotes".
Dr. Laura Katz at Smith College is co-organizer of these special meetings. The
specific aims of the workshop are to define the role of genomics in resolving
the deepest nodes in the eukaryotic tree of life, to identify challenges in
characterizing protist genomes, and in proposing specific solutions to these
challenges. The findings of the workshop will be disseminated through a peer-
reviewed publication and online resources that will provide a description of
appropriate mechanisms for training future scientists in the area of protist
genomics. The ensuing symposium will be a public forum that will consist of
invited lectures from experts in the field of protist genomics that will provide
the community with an update on the emerging data as well as information on
appropriate genomic tools to use in the future. In addition, there will be a
poster session to highlight the work of undergraduate and graduate students, as
well as postdocs. The proceedings of the symposium will be published as an
edited volume to faciliate the broadest distribution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protists constitute the bulk of eukaryotic diversity yet
protist genomes remain relatively unexplored. The research community is now
moving out of the model organism stage of genomic sequencing and the
power/importance of comparative genomics is becoming apparent. Work on protist
genomes is, however, hampered by a lack of understanding of protistology among
genomicists and vice versa. The workshop and symposium will bridge these two
groups by bringing together expertise in protist diversity, genomic data
collection, and bioinformatics to spur protist genomic research and protist
evolutionary biology from a genomic perspective.&lt;br/&gt;