* 0346348
* ACT/SGER:     Liquid Crystal Materials for Biosensor Development
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2004
* Christopher Woolverton, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 08/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

This project combines liquid crystal (LC) physics and a concept of highly
selective antibody-antigen binding as an underlying principle for development of
a broad class of sensors capable of rapid (minutes) and accurate identification,
detection and source location of microbial pathogens. The detecting and
amplifying medium is a special class of materials referred to as lyotropic
chromonic liquid crystals (LCLCs). Small and isolated bacteria, viruses and
their antibodies cause no macroscopic distortions of the LCLC uniformly aligned
in a flat cassette. However, distortions of the liquid crystal bulk orientation
occur immediately once the immune complex formed via specific antibody-antigen
binding reaches a critical size of the order of few microns. Water-based LCLCs
are less harmful to bacteria then their regular thermotropic counterparts. The
distortions of orientation are easily detectable by optical means. The research
will advance the field of liquid crystals by introducing this new area of
applications and the field of biosensing by adding a new sensing medium. The
research will be conducted at the Liquid Crystal Institute, the world leader in
liquid crystal science and technology, in collaboration with the Departments of
Biological Sciences and Chemical Physics and will support training of students
from the two different disciplines in cutting-edge research techniques of great
value to national
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently available
tests of the presence of harmful microbes such as anthrax require a lengthy
evaluation period of up to two days. This project aims for the development of a
new class of microbial sensors capable of fast (minutes) and accurate detection.
The novelty is in an elegant fusion of the unique properties of liquid crystals
(similar to the materials used in displays and flat-panel TVs) and high
selectivity of biological interactions based on antibody-antigen binding. When
an antibody binds to an antigen of the targeted microbe, the reaction produces
an enlarged "immune complex." This immune complex distorts the surrounding
liquid crystal. The distortion can be detected optically, as it acts similarly
to the "pixels" in liquid crystal displays and TVs. The difference is that the
sensing medium is composed of liquid crystals based on water solutions that do
not harm the bacteria being examined. The research will be conducted at the
Liquid Crystal Institute, which is a world leader in liquid crystal science and
technology, in collaboration with the Departments of Biological Sciences and
Chemical Physics, and will support training of students from the two different
disciplines in cutting-edge research techniques of great value to national
security. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;