* 0346828
* CAREER: Boron-Containing Polymeric Lewis Acids in Supramolecular Chemistry and Materials Science
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2008
* Frieder Jaekle, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 12/31/2008
* USD 563,172.00

Professor Frieder Jaekle of the Department of Chemistry at Rutgers University-
Newark is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program to
perform research that focuses on the preparation and exploration of new
inorganic polymers for applications in the field of materials chemistry. Boron-
based polymeric Lewis acids of controlled molecular weight and well-defined
polymer architecture will be prepared through a modular approach that involves
three steps: (1) the controlled synthesis of functionalized polymers of various
architectures including homopolymers, random copolymers, block copolymers, and
telechelic polymers, (2) the quantitative replacement of the functional groups
with boron halides or other strong Lewis acids, and (3) the fine-tuning of the
Lewis acidity of the individual sites through high-yield substitution reactions
to give access to a family of new polymeric Lewis acids. He will take advantage
of the spontaneous and reversible formation of donor-acceptor bonds between
Lewis acids and Lewis bases for the development of innovative methods for the
synthesis of block copolymers and graft polymers as well as the reversible
cross-linking of polymers. Furthermore, Professor Jaekle will use the formation
of highly stable anionic borate and cationic boronium centers for the
development of new inorganic polyelectrolytes and amphiphilic block copolymers.
The described research efforts are likely to result in discoveries of novel
thermo-reversible polymers, of polymeric nanostructures, and of new functional
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Organic and
Macromolecular Chemistry Program, a "Materials Chemistry" Undergraduate
Laboratory Course will be developed that includes research level experiments on
the living polymerization of olefins, the characterization of conjugated
(electro-active) polymers, and the formation of nanoparticles. This effort will
enhance the training of a highly diverse student population in the areas of
polymer and materials chemistry. A new polymer chemistry Outreach Program with
local high schools will also be established in an effort at attracting minority
students into the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;