* 0346052
* Production of high-purity 229Th for analyses of U- and Th-series isotopes in geological materials
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Aaron Pietruszka, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 03/31/2008
* USD 210,583.00

EAR-0346052&lt;br/&gt;Pietruszka&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The short-lived
intermediate daughter isotopes of the U- and Th-decay series have proven to be
important tracers of the nature and time scales of recent Earth processes.
Current applications of these isotopes range widely from Quaternary
geochronology to groundwater hydrology to ocean chemistry to magmatic processes
beneath active volcanoes. One of the most important laboratory tools for these
measurements is a high-purity Th-229 isotopic tracer, which is used both to
determine the abundance of Th and, often, the Th isotope ratio of a sample by
mass spectrometry. Unfortunately, there is no commercially available supply of
high-purity Th-229 that will meet the current and future demands of the U- and
Th-series isotope research community. This project will secure a long-term
source of high-purity Th-229 through collaboration with the scientific staff of
the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The research conducted using this new high-
purity Th-229 tracer will include diverse topics of unambiguous benefit to
society, such as understanding climate and sea level change during the late
Quaternary, deciphering magmatic processes at active volcanoes, evaluating
potential sites for long-term storage of radioactive waste, and characterizing
the transport of radionuclides in groundwater. The purity of the Th-229 tracer
used by these researchers has a profound impact upon data quality, and thus, the
outcome of projects such as these. This is an issue of particular importance for
the future potential of measurements using plasma ionization mass spectrometry,
which makes it possible to push the limits of accuracy and precision for U- and
Th- series isotopic analyses of geological materials. Ultimately, this project
will also promote the ability of these researchers to teach and train
undergraduate and, especially, graduate students in the field of
geochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;