* 0346172
* Precipitation Studies in Trade Wind Clouds - The Rain In Cumulus over the Ocean (RICO) Experiment
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Harry Ochs, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 02/28/2010
* USD 1,467,977.00

This is a central project for the "Rain in Cumulus over the Ocean" (RICO)
experiment, a multi-institutional collaborative project involving more than 15
institutions that plans to study trade-wind Cumulus clouds in Nov 2004 - Jan
2005. The studies will cover four key areas: * the processes that lead to rapid
onset of precipitation in tropical cumulus clouds; * the transition from
initiation to mature precipitating system in such clouds; * the effect of
tradewind Cumuli on the properties of the tradewind layer; and * the role of
precipitation in the energy balance in the tradewind regime. A focus of the
study is an investigation of the rate at which rain forms in warm clouds, which
appears to be faster than predicted by models or calculations. The investigators
will investigate several hypotheses that have been advanced to explain this
rapid onset of precipitation, including the roles of giant particles,
turbulence, and entrainment. In the study, they will use recently developed
observational capabilities, including new radar capabilities for detecting the
nature of precipitation formation and new instruments for measuring the size
distributions of cloud droplets and aerosol particles. The investigators also
seek to study larger-scale characteristics and effects of tradewind Cumuli,
eventually leading to improved understanding of the roles of these regions and
of precipitation in the climate system.

Broader impacts of this project include a strong educational component. This
project and the broader RICO experiment will advance the training of graduate
students and new investigators in this line of research through their
involvement in the experiment and also through a special graduate-student
seminar to be conducted in connection with the field experiment. This has also
been the core effort around which the broader RICO experiment organized, and so
has provided the nucleus for a concerted interactive effort involving many other
investigators and institutions. The expected long-range impact will be that the
effects of trade-wind Cumulus and of rain from warm clouds can be better
represented in weather and climate models and so can lead to improved
predictions of precipitation.