* 0346434
* ACT/SGER:     Resonant Toxic Chemical Sensor Platform
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2003,02/28/2005
* Harry Tuller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/28/2005
* USD 79,198.00

This project, initiated in response to NSF 03-569: "Approaches to Combat
Terrorism," will investigate the potential of piezoelectric bulk acoustic wave
resonant sensors as sensitive platforms for the detection of various chemical
and biological species. The Principal Investigator's (PI's) group has previously
demonstrated that langanite (La3Ga5SiO14) based resonators can operate
effectively to 600 C over a wide range of pressures. For this reason, sensors
based on such devices are potentially capable of operating in a variety of
hostile environments, such as battlefields or industrial production facilities.
Such resonators can be integrated with porous Si or zeolite films, which can be
coated with catalysts or functional surface groups to detect a wide range of
chemical or biological species. The PI will construct langanite-based resonators
integrated with porous Si films that are photoelectrochemically etched to form
pores, thus providing high active surface areas. He will study the response of
the sensor to a simulant for chemical nerve warfare agents, determining the
sensitivity and response time as functions of the Si porosity and surface
catalyst loading. In addition, he will study the cross-sensitivity of the
sensors to humidity, stress, and other chemical and biological species. Robust
resonators developed under this program will enable redox studies of films, in-
situ thin film deposition monitoring, and high precision TGA analysis. This will
impact the field of catalysis, given the ability to monitor, in situ,
adsorption/desorption kinetics and many technological applications, such as
monitoring of automotive and factory emissions, detection of toxic agents and
feedback control in chemical and other industrial processes. Because of the
broad applicability of this work, it is supported both by funding from the U.S.
intelligence community and by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical and biological weapons are a
serious threat to national security and pose a potential danger to both
civilians and military personnel. Sensors developed under this program provide
the potential to monitor such threats remotely and under harsh environments.
More generally, piezoelectric resonators can be used to perform precise and
high-resolution mass measurements. The frequency of a piezoelectric bulk
acoustic wave resonator (essentially a tiny drum) depends upon the dimensions of
the resonator and the mass of the surface layer or membrane. By creating a
surface layer that has an affinity for a specific type of chemical or biological
species, one can create a sensor capable of detecting the presence or absence of
that species. In the absence of the particular species the resonator has one
frequency, and when such species are present, it has a different frequency. In
this project, the PI will construct a variety of sensors of this type and study
their characteristics. In particular, he will determine the amount of material
necessary to produce a detectable response, study the speed of the response, and
examine the effects of other factors - such as humidity, stress, and the
presence of other species - upon the performance of the sensor. This program
also benefits from collaboration with German colleagues and provides an
opportunity for graduate students to visit and interact with experts in related
fields. Undergraduate students are integrated into the research activities via
MIT's UROP program, and the PI lectures about advances in sensor and energy
related materials research to Science High School teachers.&lt;br/&gt;