* 0346514
* CAREER: Neuromotor Adaptations for Successful Transtibial Amputee Gait: Interactions with Limb Loading and Prosthetic Design Characteristics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2010
* Richard Neptune, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Semahat S. Demir
* 08/31/2010
* USD 403,130.00

0346514&lt;br/&gt;Neptune&lt;br/&gt;More than 400,000 lower-limb amputees now
live in the United States, with millions more throughout the world. Current
empirical approaches to prosthetic design have led to very limited improvement
in objective measures of amputee gait performance, primarily because these
approaches cannot identify the complex interactions between the prosthetic
design characteristics and the resulting gait performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan seeks to establish a scientific
framework for improving ambulatory function in transtibial amputees by using
advanced musculoskeletal modeling and dynamic simulations of amputee gait to 1)
identify the various neuromotor adaptations used by successful amputees, 2)
identify the consequences of using these neuromotor adaptations on limb loading,
and 3) to understand how limb loading is affected by the interactions between
these adaptations and specific prosthetic design characteristics. Limb loading
is an important clinical problem in amputee populations because of the
prevalence of discomfort and pain in the intact and residual limbs, which leads
to a higher incidence of degenerative joint disease compared to non-amputees and
greatly limits their quality of life. The proposed studies will provide the
necessary foundation for developing new foot-ankle prostheses that reduce limb
loading and the onset of secondary joint disorders. Working prototypes of the
prostheses will be generated using advanced manufacturing techniques and a
comprehensive clinical gait analysis will be used to assess their performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education plan seeks to integrate the PI's research
program in Biomechanics with recent advances in learning science to inspire an
excitement for engineering in middle school through graduate students and
improve the quality of engineering education. Recent studies in learning
science, instruction design and assessment techniques will be utilized to
develop 1) a new graduate course in Biomedical Device Design and Evaluation
emphasizing an interdisciplinary approach to formulating research and
development projects aimed at Aiding Persons with Disabilities, and 2) a
project-centered undergraduate course on the Biomechanics of Human Movement. In
addition, a set of biomechanics-based projects for a summer outreach program
with the Society of Women Engineers at UTAustin will be developed to encourage
6th and 7th grade girls to cultivate an interest in math, science and
engineering through hands-on activities and team challenges. &lt;br/&gt;