* 0347969
* CAREER:Advances in Universal Data Compression with Applications to Joint Source and Channel Coding
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2010
* Gil Shamir, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* richard brown
* 11/30/2010
* USD 400,600.00

The purpose of this research is to develop several unexplored areas
in&lt;br/&gt;data compression, as well as to utilize universal data
compression&lt;br/&gt;techniques in other applications including biological
modelling and a&lt;br/&gt;novel direction of joint source-channel coding. The
research focuses on&lt;br/&gt;four topics: (a) design of joint source-channel
universal source code&lt;br/&gt;based codes, (b) study of universal compression
for large and unknown&lt;br/&gt;source alphabets, (c) design of advanced
universal coding techniques for&lt;br/&gt;non-traditional, yet more realistic,
data models with practical&lt;br/&gt;implementations, and (d) the study of
random access lossless compression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Common techniques in
joint source-channel coding suffer from&lt;br/&gt;severe synchronization
problems in bad channel conditions and do&lt;br/&gt;not address universality
issues when the source statistics are&lt;br/&gt;unknown. This research develops
techniques to combat these&lt;br/&gt;problems, and even attain "free" gain in
channel decoding&lt;br/&gt;performance for redundant channel information
streams. Common&lt;br/&gt;compression schemes assume that the data is from a
known alphabet,&lt;br/&gt;it has a "standard" stationary or constantly
changing&lt;br/&gt;statistical model, and it consists of a long sequence.
However,&lt;br/&gt;(a) there exist compression applications with large
unknown&lt;br/&gt;alphabets, such as text compression where the words constitute
the&lt;br/&gt;alphabet, (b) most real data sequences are usually neither
stationary&lt;br/&gt;nor of constantly varying statistics, and (c) random access
is&lt;br/&gt;necessary in large compressed data bases. The investigator
studies&lt;br/&gt;these three non-traditional problems. The research work
combines&lt;br/&gt;the development of rigorous theoretical results
including&lt;br/&gt;redundancy and description length bounds, with empirical
testing,&lt;br/&gt;algorithm design with focus on practical low-
complexity&lt;br/&gt;techniques, and implementation of proposed techniques.
Finally,&lt;br/&gt;the research also investigates the use of universal
compression&lt;br/&gt;techniques to segmentation and modelling of biological
sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;