* 0347698
* CAREER:  Cross-Layer Optimization for Robust Admission Control in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks:  A Theoretical Framework
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Andrew McDonald, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2009
* USD 416,090.00

This project represents a multiple year effort to develop a theoretical and
practical framework for the design and analysis of scalable ad hoc networks. The
research focuses on cross-layer interactions and fundamental limitations. The
research objectives are to develop rigorous approaches for determining bounds on
systems performance and to develop algorithms to optimize achievable capacity
and perform robust admission control for QoS traffic based on the novel cross-
layer concept of deferral-sets. These goals are based on the critical need for a
theoretical basis for consistent design and evaluation methodologies that
reflect fundamental system invariants and the impact of mobility, media access
control and cross-layer interaction. Novel inter-layer services will be
developed that may be used to provide statistical QoS guarantees. By
demonstrating the ability to provide statistically bounded service guarantees,
the proposed investigation has the potential to change the perception of ad hoc
networking in fundamental ways and thus increase the scope of both basic
research and applications involving these networks. This effort will have impact
beyond the area of wireless networks. Successful large-scale deployments of any
network, not only ad hoc networks, will naturally spur the development of novel
applications. For example, the global Internet has revolutionized the way
mankind conducts business, disseminates knowledge, teaches courses, and runs
governments in less than three decades. In addition, this effort will provide
undergraduate students with new opportunities to participate in research
oriented projects that focus on the critical areas under investigation in this
project.