* 0347302
* CAREER:  The Role of The Escherichia Coli Alternative Sigma Factor, Sigma(E), In Cell Envelope Homeostasis
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2010
* Sarah Ades, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2010
* USD 679,781.00

The cell envelope of Gram-negative bacteria is a complex, dynamic compartment
that is crucial for the survival of the cell. It provides a barrier between the
cell and the surrounding milieu, ensures the structural integrity, and
determines the morphology of the cell. The cell envelope is the site of many
dynamic processes including solute, protein and nutrient transport, biosynthesis
of many cellular macromolecules, and energy generation. In addition, the cell
envelope can be remodeled in response to stresses such as changes in temperature
and scarcity of nutrients, and is continually growing and changing as a result
of cell cycle progression. The signal transduction pathways and corresponding
responses that coordinate cell envelope processes and communicate information
between the cytoplasm and cell envelope to maintain cellular homeostasis in
bacteria are not fully understood. In Escherichia coli, one of the key pathways
that senses the integrity of the cell envelope is controlled by the alternative
sigma factor, s E , which has primarily been characterized for its role during
cell envelope stress. s E is an essential gene, suggesting a role for s E beyond
the stress response. The reason why this gene is required for viability is not
known. The objectives of this project are to elucidate the role of s E in
maintaining cell envelope integrity in unstressed cells and the regulatory
pathways that coordinate s E activity with other regulatory events in the cell.
This project also contains educational and public outreach components that focus
on educating undergraduates and graduate students in the field, educating future
science teachers, and informing the general public about current issues
concerning microbiology.