* 0347317
* CAREER:  Symbiotic Role of Bacterial Bioluminescence
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2004,08/31/2009
* Eric Stabb, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2009
* USD 567,000.00

All healthy plants and animals have a resident microbiota, and the associations
between bacteria and their hosts influence the development and ecological
success of both partners. The research aim of this project will advance our
understanding of host-bacteria interactions and will provide a novel opportunity
for lab-based studies of bacterial physiology in a context that is relevant to
bacterial survival in the environment -- in its natural animal host. This
research exploits the tractable light organ symbiosis between the bioluminescent
bacterium Vibrio fischeri and the nocturnal squid Euprymna scolopes as a model
system to elucidate the functional role of bacterial bioluminescence.
Theoretically, bioluminescence is energetically expensive, because it consumes
oxygen and reducing power, which might otherwise be used to generate energy
through respiration. Consistent with this theory, bioluminescence slows
bacterial growth in culture. However, bioluminescence is common in host-
associated marine bacteria like V. fischeri, and it enables V. fischeri to
fully-colonize the host light organ. The research focus of this project will
test possible benefits of bioluminescence in the host and reveal key differences
between bacterial physiology in the host and in culture. The teaching aim of
this project will broaden the learning opportunities for students in the field
of host-bacteria interactions through the establishment of a new course,
"Bacterial Symbioses", which integrates concepts in beneficial and pathogenic
host-bacteria interactions, and through undergraduate laboratory research
projects. The development of research and teaching programs that elucidate the
physiological underpinnings of natural bacteria-host interactions will be
pivotal in facing such current societal problems as the replacement of broad
spectrum antibiotics and the (re)emergence of diseases with environmental hosts.