* 0347555
* CAREER: Processing and Optimization of Generalized Quantification
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Antonio Badia, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2010
* USD 507,354.00

SQL is the standard query language for relational databases; however, it makes
expression of certain queries that appear to be simple in natural language
(e.g., Find the employees working in all the projects, or half the projects, or
check whether all employees are working on the same number of projects) awkward
or impossible. Even when such queries can be written, the optimization of their
processing is very difficult. This proposal addresses this shortcoming by
defining and studying a new query language, QLGQ that can express a large class
of queries in a natural and easy way. Although it is more flexible and powerful
than SQL, QLGQ shares important characteristics with it. Hence, it is expected
that study of QLGQ and its optimization will yield insights that can be applied
to SQL. The most immediate results are expected in possible extensions to SQL
and optimization techniques for them. As the research extends to other data
models (XML), contributions to the design of query languages for those models
are also expected. The broader impacts of this proposal are significant: as more
and more scientific and technological fields depend on the analysis of large
amounts of accumulated data for their progress, powerful query languages that
make such analysis possible become more and more important. The PI plans to
explore applications of the technology by collaborating with interested
potential users. It is also planned to seek commercial developments.
Dissemination of all results (papers, software, presentations, experiments,
etc.) is an important goal of the project and will be accomplished via a Web
site http://date.spd.louisville.edu/Research/GQs.htm. The PI will also present
results at workshops, talks, etc. for researchers (specialists or non-
specialists), database or XML practitioners, and students. The educational plan
for this project includes incorporation of the research into the PI's courses,
conducting seminars with students and actively trying to recruit both graduate
and undergraduate students to participate in the project.