* 0347968
* CAREER:      XML Middleware for Privacy-Preserving Database Publishing
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2004,04/30/2009
* Alin Deutsch, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2009
* USD 491,757.00

This project aims to help data owners deal with the ever-increasing demand of
publishing proprietary data on the Web as XML, in useful yet controlled ways.
One major thrust is the development of tools allowing data publishers to check
that the privacy of sensitive data is not inadvertently violated by what is
exposed to the outside view (even in indirect ways). The publisher specifies the
sensitive data via a secret query S against the proprietary schema and the tools
check that attackers cannot compute the answer to S (exactly or approximately)
from the published data. The research approach includes development of a
hierarchy of privacy guarantees, qualified by the accuracy of the approximation
and the attacker's computational resources. The second project goal is the
delivery of tools for integrating web publishing with the limited query
interfaces supported by current "web services" technologies. The focus is on web
services, which implement large sets of parameterized XML queries. The project
seeks solutions for (i) the query set specification using concise, intuitive
visual paradigms and (ii) the rewriting of client queries to execution plans,
which invoke only supported queries. The developed technologies will benefit all
categories of data owners who publish on the Web, from
commercial/governmental/academic institutions to private individuals. Some tools
will serve as course materials for undergraduate and graduate database classes,
but also for a compiler class at UCSD. Software and course materials will be
freely distributed for non-commercial purposes. The project Web site
http://www.db.ucsd.edu/people/alin/nsf-career will be used for the results
dissemination.