* 0347506
* CAREER:     Solving Over-Constrained Systems of Non-Linear Equations by Symbolic-Numeric Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2004,11/30/2011
* Agnes Szanto, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Balasubramanian Kalyanasundaram
* 11/30/2011
* USD 441,695.00

ABSTRACT PROPOSAL: 0347506 INSTITUTION: North Carolina State U PRINCIPAL
INVESTIGATOR: Szanto, Agnes TITLE: CAREER: Solving Over-Constrained Systems of
Non-Linear Equations by Symbolic-Numeric Methods

Non-linear, over-constrained systems of equations often arise in science and
engineering where mathematical models are used for analysis. Such areas include:
geo-physical phenomenon, computer graphics and vision, analysis of fluid and
mechanical structures. Over-constrained equations are difficult to use, as there
are no reliable and efficient methods for solving them. Traditional numerical
and symbolic solution methods are not designed to handle either over-constrained
systems or inexact coefficients. Thus, this research is exploring the theory,
algorithms and software for solving systems of non-linear, over-constrained
systems of equations. The goal is to lay the theoretical framework to extend
both symbolic and numeric techniques to over-constrained equation systems.
Special attention is paid to the integration of the research with graduate
education through the development of course plans that give the required
foundations for the students to participate in the proposed research. A wide
range of application areas is being emphasized.

This research considers two types of systems: (1) Over-constrained systems of
algebraic equations with inexact coefficients; and (2) Over-constrained systems
of differential equations with symmetric solutions. The plan for investigation
is: Over-constrained systems of algebraic equations with inexact coefficients.
First, a theoretical framework will be laid for reliable computation via
meaningful and verifiable notions of solutions together with backward error and
conditioning analysis. Next, effort will be made to substantially improve the
complexity of existing symbolic-numeric methods by exploiting the possible small
cardinality of the solution set. The goal is to devise an algorithm that is
polynomial in the input plus the output size. Over-constrained systems of
differential equations with symmetric solutions: Recent results on moving frame
methods allow to write a differential system in terms of the invariants of a
symmetry group, and to design invariant numerical approximations via invariant
finite difference equations. In order to apply these techniques on over-
constrained differential systems, the investigator will extend algebraic
elimination techniques to invariantized non-linear differential systems.
However, the application of the invariant differential operators introduces non-
commutativity in the associated differential algebra. The goal is to prove
termination and give degree bounds for the elimination algorithms. These two
problems are actually closely related and thus the investigator will also
explore their deep interconnection with the goal of laying the mathematical
bases of a unified approach.