* 0347548
* CAREER:  Learning and Optimization for Robust Multimodal Interpretation in Conversation Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2004,12/31/2010
* Joyce Chai, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 12/31/2010
* USD 524,000.00

Multimodal systems allow users to interact with computers through multiple
modalities such as speech, gesture, and gaze. One challenge for multimodal
systems is multimodal interpretation, which is the process of understanding what
a user intends to communicate. Despite recent progress in multimodal
interpretation, most systems still have problems handling unexpected or
unreliable user inputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to improve the
robustness of multimodal interpretation through two objectives: 1) to adapt
system interpretation capability over time through automated knowledge
acquisition, 2) to optimize interpretation through probabilistic reasoning.
Specifically, this research will develop supervised and unsupervised learning
approaches to automatically acquire knowledge, both offline from annotated data
and online from real time interactions. Furthermore, this project will develop
mechanisms to account for uncertainties that occur at different stages in the
interpretation process and to derive an optimal interpretation through
probabilistic reasoning about context and user intent. To support these
approaches, large corpora of multimodal data will be collected from human
machine conversation and annotated in terms of user intent and interaction
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide a benchmark for
algorithmic advancement and evaluation. The enhanced robustness and reliability
in multimodal interpretation will make multimodal systems more effective for
real world applications. Through a multimodal conversation system that helps
students explore options for undergraduate and graduate study at various
institutions and locations, the results of this research will be directly
applied to an education plan that includes outreach activities, curriculum
development, and student mentoring. This tight integration of research and
education will offer a unique multidisciplinary opportunity to synergize other
programs within the university such as speech processing, psycholinguistics, and
cognitive science. &lt;br/&gt;