* 0347988
* CAREER:     Performer-Centered Approaches to Computer-Assisted Music Making
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2013
* Elaine Chew, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2013
* USD 500,000.00

This research comprises projects that focus on two aspects of computer-assisted
music making: expression synthesis using a driving (steering wheel and pedals)
interface; and collaborative performance assessment. The common motivator in
both cases is the performer (the pilot of the expression synthesis machine, or
the ensemble musicians). The human performer is the engineer of expressive
performances and creator of coordinated interpretations in ensemble playing.
Incorporating the counsel of the performer is critical to the success of systems
for generating, tracking and assessing single- or multi-player performances. A
performance is the result of analysis, and decisions based on the analysis. This
process will be studied through computational models of music perception and
cognition, based in part on the PI's prior work relating to a representation for
tonality called the Spiral Array model. Developing the quantitative tools for
music analysis will form the foundation for the testbed
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Expression Synthesis Project (ESP) will
support a driving interface that will enable non-experts to create expressive
musical performances. Anecdotal evidence amongst musicians suggests that
generating an expressive performance is very much like driving a car. Not
everyone can play an instrument, but almost anyone can drive a car. In the first
instantiation of the ESP interface, the pedals will allow the user to control
the tempo (speed). The display will show landscape that directly map to musical
content (extracted through computational analysis), so as to guide the
expressive decisions. By relating preferred renditions of a piece to musical
structure, we can better understand and explain human creativity through music
performance. When the technology matures, plans to create an interactive ESP
museum installation will commence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Collaborative
Performance Assessment (CPA) project will create metrics and systems for
measuring temporal and contextual synchronization in collaborative performance.
The most immediate application of the technology is to distributed collaborative
performance. Ensemble playing requires coordinated decision-making amongst
performers. In score-based music, the ensemble players' tempo and timing of
expressive (musical) gestures must agree. In improvised music, the chords and
transitions must also be synchronized. CPA tools will provide feedback to
ensemble players to help them identify and solve problems so as to play together
better. In remote collaborations, the tools will be used to quantify the effects
of latency and presence, and to guide the design of distributed immersive
performance systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Expressive
performance is usually only accessible to expert musicians after many years of
practice. The ESP interface will allow expressive decisions to be explored long
before (or without) the mastery of an instrument or a piece. Furthermore, a
musical score is only an approximate representation of a composer's creation.
Most composers are not expert performers, so the realization of their creation
must be left to musicians' interpretations in live performance. The ESP system
will allow composers to record their expressive intent precisely. The system
will furthermore present a more intuitive interface for linking music to video
and for creating coordinated music and picture in movies, and thus will inspire
new entertainment technologies. CPA tools will give remote regions access to
artistes, bands and orchestras that would normally not pass their way. They will
enable distributed recordings to take place, allowing musicians to reduce their
time on the road. The PI plans to organize performances and demonstrations
showcasing distributed and local collaborations, to disseminate research
results. With diminishing funding for the arts, technology-driven music
applications such as those to be developed in this research will become a prime
motivator for music education in schools.