* 0347854
* CAREER: Improving Storage System Performance, Dependability and Manageability Using System Mining Techniques
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Yuanyuan Zhou, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Victor S. Frost
* 01/31/2010
* USD 449,405.00

Technology trends indicate that today's computing is becoming more and more
data-centric. The widespread use of devices and services has created
unprecedented demand to store and retrieve information. The current annual
growth of storage demand is 60%. By 2008, the average data center will manage 10
times as much data as it does today. According to a recent study conducted by UC
Berkeley, the annual storage demand is roughly 1.5 exabytes of storage, around
250 megabytes per person for everyone on earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To satisfy
the increasing data service demand, modern storage systems need to address three
challenges: (1) performance, delivering satisfactory performance to keep up with
the rapid growing processor speed; (2) dependability, providing reliability and
availability to minimize data access loss, which currently costs companies more
that $250,000/hour and one-third to one-half of a company's total IT budget; (3)
manageability, simplifying storage administrator's jobs to reduce the storage
maintenance cost, which is currently almost nine times the storage equipment
purchase price.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses these three
challenges. It investigates a novel technology called system mining that applies
data mining techniques to storage systems to improve their performance,
dependability and manageability. More specifically, the proposed system hinges
on the following innovations:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Performance: using
frequent sequence mining, clustering, classification and other data mining
algorithms to characterize storage access patterns and infer data semantics for
guiding storage cache management, prefetching, disk scheduling, and data layout
to maximize storage performance;&lt;br/&gt;2) Dependability: applying outlier
analysis, signature analysis and other data mining techniques to unified,
correlated activity logs to detect and correct storage administrators' mistakes
and other human errors;&lt;br/&gt;Manageability: building a context-aware,
"self-maturing" autonomic storage system that can learn from storage
administrators and automatically generate administrative scripts to gradually
minimize administrators' involvement.&lt;br/&gt;