* 0347390
* CAREER:  Fundamental Performance Limits and Trade-offs in Wireless Embedded Sensor Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Thomas Hou, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sajal Das
* 07/31/2010
* USD 449,295.00

Wireless sensor networks operate under a set of unique constraints and
requirements, bringing in new challenges that go far beyond existing theories
and algorithms. This project studies some fundamental performance limits and
trade-offs that are inherent to wireless sensor networks, with the aim of laying
a theoretical underpinning for future protocol design and algorithm
implementation. Specifically, there are three thrust areas under the overarching
theme of energy constraints and network lifetime on which we are concentrating
our efforts: (1) maximizing network lifetime through optimal power-controlled
flow routing; (2) understanding performance limits and the trade-offs between
relay node placement and energy provisioning; and (3) uncovering the inherent
properties associated with the energy-constrained rate allocation problem. Our
approach is multi-disciplinary: it spans the fields of wireless communications,
networking algorithms, and optimizations. The outcome of this research will fill
important gaps in the current understanding of wireless sensor networks,
enabling this growing field to fully realize its potential. The research in the
first area will help us to develop basic research methodologies for the study of
lifetime-centric flow routing in sensor networks. The research in the second
area will enhance understanding of performance limits and trade-offs with
significant implications for both theory and practice. The research in the third
area will reveal inherent properties in energy-constrained sensor networks and
formalize some basic theories for rate allocation and capacity. This project
will enrich our knowledge of wireless sensor networks as well as provide a basis
for novel graduate and undergraduate educational and mentoring activities.