* 0347104
* CAREER: Characterization of novel targets of activation-induced Alternative Splicing
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2004,05/31/2009
* Kristen Lynch, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 05/31/2009
* USD 592,963.00

Despite the recent advances in biology gained from the sequencing of the human
genome a great challenge still lies ahead, namely understanding how genetic
information is processed and utilized to yield a complex, multifunctional
organism. One of the most critical steps in the processing of genetic
information is that of RNA splicing. RNA is the intermediate molecule in the
conversion of genetic sequence, or DNA, into functional cellular components, or
proteins. When in the form of RNA, genetic information may be pieced together,
or spliced, in a variety of ways to give rise to multiple different proteins.
Dr. Lynch at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center is leading a
group of high school, undergraduate and graduate students to determine how the
splicing of RNA is regulated by a cell to allow distinct proteins to be produced
in response to changing cellular environments. Dr. Lynch and her students have
identified specific RNA sequences that may serve as markers for genes that are
susceptible to regulation of RNA splicing. Through further identification of
genes that contain such sequence markers and continued investigation as to the
mechanism of regulation conferred by such sequences, Dr. Lynch hopes to uncover
families of genes that are coordinately regulated within a cell in response to
environmental stimuli. These studies will also broaden the appreciation for how
RNA splicing can be used to alter cellular function. In addition, Dr. Lynch is
actively involved in updating curriculum and designing new coursework for
graduate students to reflect the importance of RNA splicing and other topics in
RNA biology to the future of biological research. In the classroom and in the
laboratory, Dr. Lynch seeks to be a mentor and role model for students and
provide them with the intellectual training required to participate in the
forefront of the post-genomic era of biological sciences.