* 0347676
* CAREER:  Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Thiolate-Heme Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2010
* Michael Green, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2010
* USD 728,144.00

Cytochrome P450, nitric oxide synthase, and chloroperoxidase are thiolate-
ligated heme-enzymes that play critical roles in a number of important
physiological processes (e.g. the metabolism of xenobiotics). They are unique
among oxidative heme-proteins in that they catalyze the insertion of an oxygen
atom, derived either from molecular oxygen or peroxide, into a variety of
organic substrates, often with high degrees of regio- and stereo-selectivity.
All three of these enzymes are thought to function through a highly reactive
iron-oxo intermediate, called compound I. It is known that the reactivity of
metal-oxos, with respect to oxygen transfer chemistry, generally scales with
redox potential: The more oxidizing the metal-oxo the more reactive it is. Thus,
it is somewhat surprising that Nature uses donating thiolate-ligands in its most
oxidizing heme-enzymes, as thiolate-ligation can drop the reduction potential of
a heme active site by several hundred millivolts. This project examines Nature's
use of thiolate ligands in oxidizing heme-enzymes. Spectroscopic methods (EXAFS,
EPR, Mossbauer, Raman, and UV/visible) will be coupled with theory to study
reactive intermediates in naturally-occurring and isotopically-labeled
chloroperoxidase. The aim is to obtain a better understanding of the electronic
and geometrical structures of the high-valent intermediates found in the
catalytic cycles of thiolate-ligated enzymes. The project also involves the
preparation and spectroscopic characterization of Cys_Sec mutants of cytochrome
P450. Understanding how changes in reactivity can be related to the different
size and redox properties of selenium will give us further insight into the role
of the axial-ligand in these systems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This award will support the course and curriculum development and the research
training of graduate and undergraduate students at the interface of chemistry
and biology. The project will broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups in science and enhance the infrastructure for research at Penn State
University through an increase in shared instrumentation. The societal benefits
of the research include a better understanding of oxygen transfer chemistry in
thiolate-ligated heme-proteins, which could be parlayed into improved catalysts
for industrial applications. The enzymes to be studied use only electrons,
protons, and dioxygen (or peroxide) to oxidize substrates. The only byproduct is
water. Thus, these enzymes are particularly 'green' catalysts, and synthetic
systems that could mimic their chemistry would be of obvious value.