* 0347658
* CAREER: Modeling Metal-Metal Oxide Interactions Using Spherosiloxane Adsorption on Single Crystal Metal Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Will Medlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 03/31/2010
* USD 448,155.00

The combined use of ab initio computational chemistry and experimental
spectroscopies in addressing engineering problems is becoming an increasingly
widespread approach. This CAREER project will emphasize the combination of
theory and experiment both in performing fundamental research and in educating
students with diverse levels of experience. The research component focuses on
development of a new model system that will enable detailed investigations of
the chemistry and physics of metal-insulator interfaces. These interfaces are
important for an array of applications, including microelectronics engineering,
heterogeneous catalysis, and chemical sensing, but have been difficult to study
using experiment or theory because they are typically "buried" under a
continuous solid layer. In this project, model interfaces that are accessible to
both experimental and theoretical techniques will be formed by adsorption of
SiO2-like spherosiloxane clusters onto catalytic metal single crystal surfaces.
A battery of experimental techniques will be used to characterize the adsorption
and reaction of spherosiloxanes, varying the composition and morphology of the
metal substrate along with the size of the spherosiloxane clusters. Results from
first-principles computations will be used in interpreting experimental
observations, helping to understand the molecular-level structure of the
interfaces formed. Once characterized, the model interface will be used to study
the mechanism for an important application: the detection of H2 gas using metal-
oxide-semiconductor devices. Teams of graduate and undergraduate students who
participate in this research will gain broad experience in theoretical
principles, advanced spectroscopic techniques, and real-world
applications.&lt;br/&gt;This synergy of theory, spectroscopic techniques, and
application development will be emphasized in instructional activities as well.
In these efforts, we will exploit the utility of computational chemistry
software for aiding students in visualization of chemical reactions at the
molecular scale. A new graduate/advanced undergraduate course will focus on
analysis of chemical reaction processes in terms of molecular-scale
transformations, with students' use of computational chemistry software
representing a key component of the course. Molecular modeling simulations will
also be introduced on a more basic level in undergraduate courses, where they
will provide both a method for analysis of thermodynamics and reaction kinetics
and an effective demonstration tool for visualization of reaction processes.
These demonstrations will also be used in outreach to area high schools,
emphasizing elementary chemistry concepts while at the same time exposing young
students to an important, growing area of research that makes use of computer
technology. Finally, this career plan calls for development of a web module that
provides simple explanations and examples for computational chemistry concepts;
this web site will be accessible to graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students. The web module will be an essential tool in achieving all the
educational goals of this project, including those relevant for graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students. Thus, the overall impact of these
activities will be the development of both a combined experimental/theoretical
approach to a specific engineering problem-the chemistry of metal-SiO2
interfaces-and educational tools that will encourage students to use this
synergistic approach in dealing with engineering problems in general.&lt;br/&gt;