* 0347376
* CAREER:  A Study of Open Source Software Project Success
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2004,07/31/2010
* Katherine Stewart, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2010
* USD 498,717.00

The PI will develop and test a model of the influences of team, project, and
user factors on success in open source software (OSS) development. A multi-
dimensional conceptualization of success will be explored, including both a
development and a usage perspective. The following general propositions are
developed: Team factors that enhance identification and commitment attract and
retain developer input and facilitate the successful conversion of that input
into output; Project factors that are aligned with developer motivations attract
developer input; Project factors that facilitate the coordination and
combination of developer contributions increase the successful conversion of
development input into output; Project factors act as cues to usefulness and
ease of use of the software, thereby influencing user interest and adoption; The
alignment of project factors with user factors influences user interest and
impact; Positive impact of prior OSS adoption will enhance user interest in
other OSS products. These propositions are further developed to provide the
basis for testable hypotheses. Data will be collected on a large sample of open
source projects using several sources: community websites (SourceForge.net and
Freshmeat.net), project homepages, surveys of project participants, and case
studies and surveys of users. Projects in the sample will be monitored over the
proposed research period, so that both cross-sectional between-projects effects
and longitudinal within-project effects can be analyzed. To start the process,
data collected in three pilot studies previously conducted by the PI to refine
her theoretical model and data collection strategies will be integrated and
significantly expanded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI expects this work will
advance our knowledge and understanding of OSS as a unique and important
phenomenon by providing a large sample investigation of influences on
development success, and by introducing a usage perspective on success that has
been lacking in prior work. Using a large sample of newly introduced projects
and following them over time, this study will complement prior work by
addressing limitations that have resulted from studying mainly large, successful
OSS projects and/or limiting study to cross-sectional analysis of publicly
available data (i.e., SourceForge data). This study combines both publicly
available data from OSS websites as well as survey data and case studies, to
provide a richer picture of success. Examining team, project, and user factors
in a single study will allow for interaction effects and comparison of the
relative importance of different kinds of success antecedents. The research
model is grounded in emerging research on OSS and relevant organizational
research literatures, investigating both factors unique in the OSS setting, as
well as factors drawn from other studies of virtual teams. The research is
expected to contribute not only to our understanding of OSS, but also to the
wider research literatures from which the model is derived, including the
information systems (IS) literatures on virtual teams and IS adoption and use.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Open source software represents a new
means of innovation that may have great societal benefits. The PI expects the
results of the research will enable organizations to effectively use open source
software and development approaches, and will further help policy makers to
determine appropriate means for fostering innovation. The PI will widely
disseminate the results of this research both in academia and industry. The
project will directly promote learning through the participation of
undergraduate and graduate students in the study activities; in particular, as
three of the four students who worked with the PI on her pilot studies (and who
she expect to continue working with her) are African Americans, the research may
directly increase the participation of under-represented groups.