* 0347961
* CAREER: Cross-Layer Integrated Protocol Design for Broadband Wireless Data Networks: A Microeconomic Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2004,06/30/2005
* Tara Javidi, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joseph B. Evans
* 06/30/2005
* USD 421,434.00

The use of wireless technology has the potential to significantly reduce the
cost and enhance the growth of broadband data access, which is currently
dominated by the cost of installation and maintenance of wired networks. A
significant challenge in wireless networks is the issue of cross-layer design,
which this research addresses by modeling broadband wireless networks as a
complex system of interacting economies with two parts, wireless bandwidth
(local), and the network core link-capacities (end-to-end). Media access control
(MAC) provides a bandwidth multiplexing scheme, while at the transport layer,
congestion/rate control determine the demand, hence the buffer and capacity
allocation. In other words, the optimal design of broadband wireless networks
can be viewed as the problem of scalable yet optimal utilization/sharing of
various resources among autonomous users. Economists have been studying similar
problems in various contexts such as air pollution, traffic management, etc. It
is known, for example, that in all of these scenarios a centralization of
decisions is not always possible or desirable. At the same time, unregulated
access can result in over-utilization (which is suboptimal) due to each user's
incentive to deviate from the common good (known as "tragedy of the commons").
Similarly, addressing the fundamental trade-offs between fairness, optimal
allocation, and decentralization is essential in a cross-layer design of
broadband wireless networks. This research provides a novel methodology that
addresses such issues across various layers of protocol stack, and integrates
these interdisciplinary studies into the academic curriculum.