* 0347466
* CAREER: A Unified Approach for Energy Management by Operating Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* Yung-Hsiang Lu, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Krishna Kant
* 05/31/2010
* USD 431,775.00

This proposal is to develop a unified approach in operating systems (Oss) for
managing energy consumption. The goal is to make energy management completely
automatic for all types of hardware components. This approach can be divided
into three parts: (1) creating an interface for characterizing hardware
components, (2) constructing energy models for supporting the Oss' run-time
decisions, and (3) developing techniques to determine components' power states
for managing energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using Oss for energy management is
still in its infancy. Timeout is a widely used (in most cases the only) solution
in real-world Oss. Moreover, users have to set the lengths of the timeout. No
operating systems can automatically find the appropriate timeout values based on
the component's characteristics or the executed
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of this proposal creates an
interface for automatically characterizing components' power consumption. This
hides the differences among components so that the Oss can manage the energy of
all components in a uniform way. The second part of this proposal constructs
energy models for estimating energy consumption; the models' coefficients can be
automatically determined by using the proposed interface. The third part of this
proposal develops techniques for determining components' power states. The OSs
automatically select appropriate algorithms and set the algorithms' parameters.
The parameters are calculated based on the components' characteristics. The
algorithms change components' power states, for example by scaling down the
performance of under-utilized components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education
plan emphasizes system integration and helps students develop the skills to
discover, define and solve complex problems. This plan includes three courses:
(1) a graduate course on embedded systems, (2) an undergraduate course on
computer organization, and (3) a graduate course on computer architectures.
Under-represented minorities, disadvantaged students, women and undergraduate
students will be recruited to participate in the research and education
programs.&lt;br/&gt;