* 0347253
* CAREER:  Conduction at the Molecular Scale and Nanoscience Education
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Douglas Natelson, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 02/28/2010
* USD 450,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project at William Marsh Rice
University focuses on electronic transport at the molecular-scale, integrated
with education and outreach efforts. Single-molecule transistors (SMTs) are
novel, unique tools for examining conduction through individual molecular
states. Relevant physics includes charge transfer at molecule-metal interfaces,
quantum coherence, disorder effects, vibrational excitations, Coulomb blockade,
and many-body correlations. This rich palette allows this project to address
fundamental scientific issues in condensed matter at the molecular scale, and to
provide a knowledge base for possible future molecular electronic technologies.
Investigations include: effects of work function and metal-molecule binding;
origins of nonlinear conduction in two-terminal molecular devices; molecules
coupled to correlated electrodes; and quantum impurity problems. This project
provides state-of-the-art research training in nanoscience. The PI is also
developing new coursework related to this research that will reinvigorate the
undergraduate Applied Physics version of the physics major. By leveraging
existing outreach programs, this research also reaches a broad audience,
including high school teachers, their students, and traditionally
underrepresented groups.

Transistors made from single small molecules are the ultimate limit of scaling
of active electronic devices. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
project at William Marsh Rice University focuses on using such systems to
examine electrical conduction at the molecular scale. These investigations are
integrated with education and outreach efforts. Single-molecule transistor
experiments are at the interface between physics, chemistry, and electrical
engineering. The tremendous variety of available molecules allows experiments to
examine diverse topics ranging from metal-molecule charge transfer to "quantum
impurity" problems with adjustable interactions between a single atom and many
electrons. The goal is an understanding of the basic physics of charge flow at
the nanometer scale, while simultaneously providing a knowledge base for
possible future molecular electronic technologies such as sensors. This project
provides state-of-the-art research training in nanoscience. The PI is also
developing new coursework related to this research that will reinvigorate the
undergraduate Applied Physics version of the physics major. By leveraging
existing outreach programs, this research also reaches a broad audience,
including high school teachers, their students, and traditionally
underrepresented groups.

