* 0347502
* CAREER: Time-domain Forward and Inverse Scattering Techniques for Ultrawideband Remote Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Fernando Teixeira, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2009
* USD 398,958.00

Microwave ground penetrating radar can detect landmines, locate underground
pipes and identify subsurface defects in runways. Millimeter-waves can penetrate
through non-conductive walls and clothing, and many packaging. Remote sensing
systems based on millimeter waves allow detection of contraband, plastic
explosives, and ceramic weapons, while providing good image identification and
resolution. Because microwaves and mm-waves can also better penetrate through
dust, fog, and smoke, they are useful in battlefield scenarios, terrorist attack
responses, and fire rescue operations.

In this project, we will study and develop new time-domain inversion techniques
that exploit fundamental aspects of ultra-wideband (UWB) scattering and
propagation in random (disordered) media. UWB remote sensing systems are
attractive because they take advantage of operation at both lower (more
penetration into lossy materials) and higher frequencies (larger resolution),
and are more immune to both atmospheric and multipath interference effects. The
new imaging and detection techniques will utilize time-reversal synthetic back-
propagation to achieve super-resolution, time-domain statistical stability, and
selective focusing of UWB signals in disordered media. We will also develop new
time-domain forward solvers for UWB wave propagation in random media. The
resulting forward solvers will allow the simulation of virtual scenes of
increasingly realistic remote sensing scenarios and with increased geometric
fidelity and numerical accuracy, thus allowing for better synthetic
discrimination of UWB weak scattering mechanisms and improved overall efficiency
of inverse scattering algorithms.

The above research objectives are integrated with an educational component aimed
at developing a strong interdisciplinary program for engineering students. At
the undergraduate level, it will involve the curricular revision and improvement
of undergraduate courses, and the introduction of undergraduate early research
experiences aligned with the above research objectives. At the graduate level,
this project will develop two new graduate courses, and will involve graduate
students on all aspects of this project.

