* 0347223
* Inventive Intersections: Sites, Artifacts and the Rise of Modern Science and Technology
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2005
* Pamela Smith, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2005
* USD 10,176.00

The Scientific and Industrial Revolutions are usually regarded as two of the
most important landmarks of European history. Traditionally, historians have
connected them by developments. More generally, the relationship between the
history of science and technology has long been viewed in similar binary terms:
did technology develop independently or should it be viewed as "applied
science"? The workshop proposed here offers a different perspective. It begins
by replacing the historiographically reified distinction between science and
technology with an historical examination of natural inquiry and invention
during the period between the so-called Scientific and
Industrial&lt;br/&gt;Revolutions. Not only are the terms "natural inquiry" and
"invention" historiographically neutral, they allow for the fact that inquiry
and invention could and did lead to both scientific and technological
development. In other words, it is not the case that natural inquiry falls under
the domain of the history of science and invention under the history of
technology; their dynamic interaction helped give rise to what institutionally
evolved as two domains.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will be organized by
focusing on key sites and artifacts that provided points of intersection for a
broad range of actors who inquired into and inventively engaged with nature and
art. Participants will analyze how the various interests and activities of
philosophers, doctors, merchants, courtiers, governmental and private patrons,
artisans, apothecaries and engineers were fused by their passage through these
materialized crossroads to give rise to both technological development and
scientific formation. The Scientific and Industrial Revolutions are hereby
reconfigured as episodes in an historical process whereby the processes and
results of natural inquiry and invention gained increasingly regularized and
institutionalized form, culminating in what we have since come to recognize as
modern science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of an ongoing
conversation in the history of science and technology, offering a challenging
response to some of the field's central questions. How do we account for the
development and interaction between these two paramount and important elements
of (post-) modern culture? What do we mean when we use terms such as the
"Scientific Revolution" and "Industrial Revolution"? What historical
developments tied these two "revolutions" together? How can the lessons of
history sensitize us to our current identities as scientists, technologists and
citizens?&lt;br/&gt;The major sponsor of this workshop, to be held in Amsterdam
in September 2004, is the Royal Dutch Academy of Sciences (KNAW). This proposal
requests funds solely to fund participation by American
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;