* 0348909
* CAREER: Robust Inference in Incomplete Econometric Models
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,08/31/2004
* Elie Tamer, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/2004
* USD 81,297.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO: 0348909&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION:
Princeton University&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: ECONOMICS&lt;br/&gt;PI: Tamer,
Elie&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: CAREER: Robust Inference in Incomplete Econometric
Models&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research studies identification and estimation
problems that arise in parametric models with minimal plausible assumptions.
Researchers commonly impose prior and sometimes untestable information
(assumptions). If these assumptions are wrong, inference will be misleading.
This research consists of four projects to study inference in incomplete models
without making strong assumptions. It will provide empirical researchers with a
richer menu of approaches to tackle a given problem using more robust methods.
These robust methods shed light on the effects of the various, routinely made
(point) identification assumptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Without making ad-hoc
assumptions, oftentimes parametric models do not point identify the parameters
of interest; rather, the identified feature of these partially identified models
is a robust set of parameter values. This research shows that robust inference
in partially identified models is practical, and of immediate relevance to
empirical work. The first project examines the effect of ignoring measurement
error in binary choice probit models. Without further assumptions, the binary
choice model is not identified in the presence of covariate measurement error.
This project will answer whether ignoring measurement error would lead to
estimates that are "far away" from the "truth". This approach to inference can
be used to answer similar questions in a wide variety of partially identified
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second project proposes a way to examine
robustness in a classic panel data&lt;br/&gt;problem. A problem in this class of
models is the need to make assumptions distribution of initial condition for
point identification. This research relaxes these assumptions by providing
methods to estimate the set of parameter values that is consistent with the
econometric model and the data, a parameter set that is robust to ad-hoc and
inconsistent assumptions on the initial conditions. The third project will
provide a general framework for inference in discrete K-player games and apply
it to study market structure in the airline industry. Inference is based on a
class of models that is defined as the set of utility functions that obey
necessary Nash equilibrium conditions. It will study the identified feature of
this class of models and will apply the methods to examine an important
empirical problem, thus showing the policy applicability of these models. The
fourth project describes an econometric methodology to obtain asymptotically
valid confidence regions that cover the identified set in a partially identified
model with a pre-specified probability. This research integrates teaching and
research through research experience for undergraduates as well the use of
graduate assistants and the integration of a graduate course on robust
inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;