* 0348076
* CAREER: Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Microscopy Studies of Microfluidic and Porous Media Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Joseph Seymour, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
*  Ashok S. Sangani
* 03/31/2010
* USD 428,304.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0348076&lt;br/&gt;J. Seymour, Montana State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modeling of colloidal suspension transport
in small channels is relevant to mixing in microfluidic devices for sensor
technology, to the sorption of microbial bacteria in medical implant infections
and earth formation bioremediation and to filtration devices and other porous
media used for separations. Improved models of such systems could have a broad
impact to society through design of medical sensors and filtration devices and
environmental bioremediation strategies. The hypothesis of the research is that
the nonequilibrium microstructure and dynamics of colloid suspension flows in
micro-channels, capillary networks and porous media can be characterized using
NMR microscopy. Dynamics of colloidal particles in channels of the order of 100
micrometers are relevant to microfluidic applications such as biosensors and
'lab on a chip' systems and are the basis of colloid transport in the network of
pore spaces in porous media. NMR microscopy methods allow noninvasive
measurement of time and length scale dependent displacements within opaque
systems such as colloidal suspensions and provide unique data for testing of
conceptual and numerical models. The research will begin with rectilinear flows
of model spherical colloidal particles in a Couette geometry and progress to
single capillaries, capillary bifurcations, capillary networks and porous media.
Cellular suspensions of blood and microbial bacteria will be studied in these
same flow systems to test the relevance of hard sphere colloid models to
transport of natural systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the
research are:&lt;br/&gt;1) To test computer models of colloid rheology by
measurement of the microstructure, velocity distribution and diffusion tensor of
model and cellular suspensions in Couette flows using NMR microscopy
methods&lt;br/&gt;2) To measure the concentration distribution, velocity and
hydrodynamic dispersion tensor of model and cellular colloid suspension flows in
straight capillary microchannels, capillary microchannel bifurcations and
networks in order to model mixing processes relevant to microfluidic and
physiological flows and incorporate rheological data from objective 1) into such
models&lt;br/&gt;3) To provide the first non-invasive measurements of
concentration distribution, velocity and hydrodynamic dispersion in model and
cellular colloidal suspension flows through porous media in order to incorporate
microhydrodynamics into models for colloid deposition and transport in porous
media&lt;br/&gt;4) To integrate multiphase transport in microfluidic devices and
porous media into the undergraduate and graduate curricula using NMR microscopy
flow visualization.&lt;br/&gt;These objectives will provide quantification of
the microscale hydrodynamics influencing colloid&lt;br/&gt;rheology, mixing in
microfluidic flows and colloid transport and deposition in porous media. The
significance of this work lies in the potential for new insight into existing
theory and experiments by providing data on opaque colloidal dispersion dynamics
not available by other techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prevalence of
colloid transport issues in industrial, biomedical and environmental
applications and the computer and digitizer upgrades of the campus NMR facility
DRX250 that will benefit all users, gives the project broader impacts to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exploration of the lower resolution limits of
NMR microscopy for measurement of&lt;br/&gt;nonequilibrium transport
coefficients in microfluidic transport, where these methods have yet to be
applied, will provide a key link between prior data on macroscopic system
behavior and&lt;br/&gt;microscale dynamics, lending insight into issues of scale
down engineering in microfluidics. The flow visualization aspects of NMR
microscopy will be used to integrate concepts from colloid&lt;br/&gt;rheology
with mixing in microfluidics and deposition in porous media into the
undergraduate curricula, providing a connection between core concepts in
transport phenomena like Taylor-Aris dispersion and advanced concepts such as
non deterministic chaotic mixing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;