* 0348855
* CAREER:  The Role of Turbulence Structure in Broadcast Spawning:  Exploring Physical-Biological Relationships Through an Integrated Research and Education Program
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2010
* John Crimaldi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2010
* USD 675,454.00

Crimaldi - 0348855: CAREER: The role of turbulence structure in broadcast
spawning: Exploring physical-biological relationships through an integrated
research and education program.&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER program is a combined
educational and research project that is anchored by the PIs training in fluid
mechanics, but whose application extends into interdisciplinary studies of
benthic ecology. Both the educational and research aspects of the project are
based on a foundation of three unifying objectives: (1) the study of physical-
biological interactions, (2) the development of an integrated teaching and
research laboratory, and (3) the use of visual laboratory techniques to promote
learning and knowledge. The objective is to investigate how turbulence impacts
the success of an external fertilization strategy commonly used by benthic
invertebrates, while simultaneously promoting an approach to teaching fluid
mechanics that emphasizes physical-biological relationships and makes use of
visual-based research techniques as learning tools. &lt;br/&gt;Many benthic
invertebrates reproduce by separately extruding gametes into the flow. For
fertilization to take place, individual gametes must subsequently come into
contact. The local fertilization rate depends on the product of co-occurring
gamete concentrations. Conventional thought has been that, since turbulence
rapidly dilutes the concentrations, it might ultimately hinder fertilization.
The central hypothesis in the proposed research is that turbulent stirring
promotes local coalescence of gametes at intermediate timescales, thus enhancing
fertilization rates. Several recent studies support this idea, but the problem
has not been investigated from a process-level approach. To test the hypothesis,
laboratory and numerical investigations will be performed. The laboratory
experiments will utilize a state-of-the-art, dual-color laser-induced
fluorescence technique to measure the instantaneous coalescence of gamete
surrogates within a turbulent boundary layer in a flume. The numerical
simulations will employ a particle-tracking algorithm to track several hundred
thousand gametes through a pseudo-turbulent field. The two approaches are
complimentary: the laboratory experiments use real turbulence, but the numerical
simulations enable studies of the relative importance of various physical and
biological processes not easily simulated in the flume experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;The research plan is in the context of a broader educational plan;
the plans share concepts, infrastructure, and techniques. Extensive curriculum
development will be performed, including the creation of three courses that
constitute a new area of study in Environmental Fluid Mechanics, with an
emphasis on dispersion processes in natural systems and physical-biological
interactions. The curriculum development will be enhanced by dedicated teaching
facilities in the proposed laboratory. A teaching flume that parallels the
research facility will be incorporated as a central feature of undergraduate and
graduate fluid mechanics courses. Finally, the laser-induced fluorescence flow
visualization techniques that are used quantitatively in the research project
will be adapted for both qualitative and quantitative use in the educational
component. The visual techniques provide extraordinary insight into both basic
fluid motion as well as the complex turbulent fluid processes that produce
dispersion of contaminants (e.g. gametes, nutrients, toxins). The technique will
be incorporated as an interactive feature on the teaching flume. The technique
will also be used to produce studio-quality digital movies of fluid mechanics
phenomena for inclusion in a NSF-sponsored Multi-Media Fluid Mechanics CD-ROM
series (intended for undergraduate education), and the on-line TeachEngineering
Digital Library (intended for K-12 education). &lt;br/&gt;The foregoing
activities will advance knowledge and understanding of fluid mechanics both
within the field, and at interdisciplinary levels. Within fluid mechanics, the
processes that govern stirring and mixing of multiple scalars are still poorly
understood. The research will investigate stirring processes that are common to
all turbulent flows. An understanding of the mixing and transport of
contaminants is becoming a priority in a world that, increasingly, sees
dispersive chemicals used as weapons. This program will have broad impacts
through synergistic blending of sophisticated research techniques as effective
visual learning tools, and a supportive combination of research and teaching
facilities in an enhanced laboratory. The educational CD-ROM series and on-line
Digital Library are both slated for national dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;[edited
20 Jan 04, J. Pawlik]&lt;br/&gt;