* 0348814
* The Mechanism of Gibberellin-Induced Proteolysis of RGA in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2004,10/31/2008
* Tai-ping Sun, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 10/31/2008
* USD 600,000.00

PROJECT ABSTRACT for IBN-0348814&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioactive gibberellins
(GAs) are important plant growth hormones, which promote seed germination, leaf
expansion, stem elongation and flower development in higher plants. The dwarf
cultivars of wheat and rice developed during the 'Green Revolution' in the 60s
and 70s remarkably increased grain yields. Recent studies revealed that these
cultivars are modified in their GA production or GA response, illustrating the
important role of GA in regulating plant development and in agriculture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RGA and GAI proteins are two major repressors of GA
signaling in the model plant Arabidopsis. Removing both RGA and GAI functions
allows for GA-independent stem and leaf growth and flowering. Previous studies
illustrated that GA activates its signaling pathway by causing degradation of
RGA and GAI and that SLY1, a positive regulator of GA signaling in Arabidopsis,
is likely to play a role in targeting RGA and GAI for degradation in response to
the GA signal. This proposal is aimed at elucidating the mechanism of GA-induced
proteolysis of RGA. A number of biochemical approaches will be taken to
determine whether RGA and SLY1 interact in planta. RGA activity is controlled by
proteolysis, and possibly by protein modification (e.g., phosphorylation and/or
glycosylation). A proteomic approach will be taken to identify the type(s) and
site(s) of modification in this protein. These sites will then be altered
individually to examine the role(s) of the modified sites in regulating RGA
activity and/or stability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The semidwarf wheat cultivars,
an essential component of the Green Revolution, contain mutations in the
functional ortholog of RGA/GAI (the Rht loci). Because the orthologs of RGA/GAI
are highly conserved in plants, the results from the proposed work will likely
to have a broad impact in improving quality of agricultural crops. Additional
broader impacts include the training of undergraduates, graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows, including minorities. The results of the project will also
be incorporated into undergraduate courses at Duke. &lt;br/&gt;