* 0348100
* Microbial Observatories:  Kilauea Volcano Observatory for Carbon Monoxide-Oxidizing Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Gary King, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2007
* USD 617,689.00

Volcanic activity regularly creates new landforms from deposits of tephra, ash
and lava. These initially sterile, pristine deposits undergo a range of
physical, chemical and biological transformations that lead in some cases to
diverse, complex ecosystems such as Hawaiian rainforests. Recent activity by the
Kilauea volcano has created unique opportunities to understand the timing and
controls of complex ecosystem development, and to analyze the roles of microbes
as pioneering colonists that contribute to plant development and succession. The
newly established Kilauea Volcano Microbial Observatory will compare the
diversity and activity of carbon monoxide-oxidizing bacteria colonizing two
different deposits currently 45 and 55 years old. CO-oxidizing bacteria are
important because they contribute to budgets of CO in the atmosphere and
participate in major biogeochemical cycles. Novel CO-oxidizing bacteria will be
isolated along gradients from unvegetated to vegetated deposits at each of the
Kilauea sites. Preliminary results indicate that many new species can be
anticipated, including symbiotic microbes that affect plant development. At each
of the sites a battery of biogeochemical analyses and molecular ecological
analyses will establish a framework for understanding the ecological
significance of CO oxidizers and their associations with developing plant
communities.

A postdoctoral researcher and two graduate students will receive advanced
research training as part of the project. In addition to its research efforts,
the Kilauea Volcano Microbial Observatory will support an educational outreach
program involving grade 5-8 students at South Bristol Elementary School in
Maine, and the Volcano School for Arts and Sciences in Hawai'i. Instructional
modules about the geology, biology and ecology of volcanic systems will be
prepared and presented to both groups. A web-based format will be used by the
two schools to facilitate exchanges on local culture and history. Students from
the Volcano School will also participate in field trips to the research sites.