* 0348375
* CAREER: Programmable Nanoscale Self-Assembly on Solid Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Wei Lu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 01/31/2010
* USD 406,000.00

The objective of this CAREER award is to develop a set of simulation and design
tools so that self-assembly can be engineered and systematically applied in
diverse material systems for patterning nanostructures on solid substrates.
Specifically, the effects of several forces and interactions present in diverse
material systems and significant in molding nanoscale structures will be
investigated, including 1) surface stress and epitaxial stress, 2) surface
electric charges and dipoles, and 3) electric double layers on semi-conductors.
By modeling and simulating the self-assembly process induced by these forces,
the research work will develop a class of methods to control the process based
on manipulation field design. Thus a self-assembly process can be programmed to
produce highly uniform nanostructures with desired size and spatial arrangement.
A critical challenge in nanotechnology has been to mass-produce the desired
nanoscale structures economically. The advancement of nanofabrication technology
calls for the exploration of innovative methods and the development of advanced
simulation and design tools. A long-term goal of the proposed work is to
establish nanoscale self-assembly, nanostructure design and nanofabrication as a
unified science-based discipline. As an enabling technology, the outcome of the
work will benefit a wide range of scientific disciplines and push the frontier
in nanoscale science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
education plan is to prepare the engineering student to meet the ever-increasing
educational demands of the rapidly-growing nanotechnology field. Using the on-
campus information technology resources, the proposed work integrates the
emerging nanostructure evolution and self-assembly research into the classroom.
The PI plans to establish an interactive virtual lab for nanoscale phenomena and
processes. Thus students, researchers or general public can perform numerical
experiments by simply adjusting various input parameters. The solution will be
visualized on the web browsers via a graphics interface, thereby allowing the
users to understand the underlying concepts while minimizing their learning
effort.&lt;br/&gt;