* 0348249
* CAREER: Relating Fundamental Viscoelastic Material Properties and Strengths Measured Using Various Testing Geometries
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Jo Sias, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2010
* USD 416,220.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Viscoelastic materials are widely used and characterizing the
material behavior and predicting damage growth are very important for effective
use of these materials. The creep compliance and tensile strength are properties
that are commonly measured for viscoelastic materials; they are expressed as a
function of time or rate of loading because of the inherent rate dependency of
the material. Most viscoelastic materials are also temperature dependent; to
fully characterize the material, testing must be performed at a range of loading
rates and temperatures. There are numerous types of tests that are used in the
laboratory to measure viscoelastic material behavior. At this time, there is no
way to link or tie together the knowledge of&lt;br/&gt;viscoelastic material
behavior gathered using these different test
geometries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
research and education offers an approach to&lt;br/&gt;developing constitutive
based relationships between the viscoelastic material properties measured using
various test geometries. It will focus on developing a relationship between
axial and indirect tension testing, two of the most widely used test methods.
The triaxial, beam bending, and semi-circular bending methods will also be
evaluated. The digital image correlation (DIC) method, a non-contact technique
for measuring full field displacements, will be used to capture the non-uniform
strain fields that are induced in each of the test geometries. Analysis of the
stress and strain fields and damage growth patterns will be performed on each of
the geometries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed educational and outreach
activities are intrinsically linked to the research plan to: (1) effectively
disseminate research results to government agencies, industries, and researchers
that evaluate viscoelastic materials as well as the general public that depend
upon the performance of these materials; (2) integrate technology and foster the
excitement of discovery in the engineering classroom to encourage lifelong
learning and support research activities; and (3) educate the general public on
the important roles engineers play in society and attract young people to the
engineering profession. Opportunities for the PI and students to present
research results in mass media outlets as well as technical meetings will be
explored. In the classroom, emphasis will be placed on developing hands-on
activities that allow the students to get a feel for engineering research while
measuring and analyzing actual test data related to the proposed project. The
integration of technology such as virtual laboratories and use of online
databases will be a key part of the proposed activities. A research team
approach will be implemented to include both undergraduate and graduate students
in a significant mentoring and research experience. Every student will
contribute to the overall team effort while conducting individual research. A
system of mentoring will be established to help build and enhance the team's
research program. A significant effort will be made to recruit students from
underrepresented groups at both the undergraduate and graduate levels and
incorporate them into the research team. &lt;br/&gt;