* 0348605
* CAREER: Vibration and Stability of Distributed Structures with Industrial Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2011
* Weidong Zhu, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 05/31/2011
* USD 411,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives are to develop: 1) a new dynamic
stability theory for a class of systems with time-varying length, speed, and/or
cross-section, 2) a novel method to design a vibration damper or controller that
can stabilize the largest number of modes of a distributed structure, and 3) a
semi-analytical method to analyze the vibration and stability of high-
dimensional models of distributed structures with strong and/or complex
nonlinearities. A new wave method is developed to analyze the dynamic stability
of several distributed systems with periodically varying parameters. It is
remarkable to find that the condition for parametric resonance is similar to
that for classical resonance. This instability condition will be investigated
theoretically and experimentally. The dynamic response and stability of elevator
systems will be analyzed and methods to dissipate their longitudinal vibration
will be developed. The optimal damping location and constant for a tensioned
beam will be identified by combining an asymptotic analysis for all the higher
modes and a numerical analysis for the lower modes and validated experimentally.
The methodology will be applied to the design of spacer dampers of bundled
conductors in the electric power industry to dissipate high-frequency modes. The
Incremental Harmonic Balance method will be extended for distributed gyroscopic
systems and a robust algorithm will be developed to automate the solution
procedure. The methodology is demonstrated on a friction-guided translating beam
with small bending stiffness. The intellectual merit lies in the development of
several new methodologies to analyze the vibration and stability of distributed
structures and their applications to important industrial problems. The success
of this research will advance the knowledge base in the general field of dynamic
systems and lead to new designs of elevators, belt and tape drives, and power
transmission lines. &lt;br/&gt; The educational plan includes the development of
1) a unique Future Engineers in Dynamic Systems (FEDS) Academy to immerse the
underrepresented high school youth in two weeks of classroom-based, theory-
driven learning, laboratory-based application of theoretical content, and hands-
on inquiry-based experimentation to develop team-building and communication
skills, and 2) innovative multimedia educational materials for students at all
levels and practicing engineers. The establishment of the FEDS Academy will
enhance the high school students' understanding of engineering education and
promote the research and educational programs in dynamic systems. The use of
multimedia educational materials will actively involve all students in the
educational process and facilitate the technology transfer to the
workplace.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;