* 0348818
* CAREER:      In-Situ Visualization of Metallurgical Processes
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Sridhar Seetharaman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Ardell
* 12/31/2008
* USD 575,000.00

This CAREER award to Carnegie Mellon University is to carry out research and
educational activities in the field of high temperature metallurgy by utilizing
direct visualization of processes that are critical for producing metals and
alloys. With this award, the PI will study the separation of non-metallic
inclusions from molten metals into molten oxide slags by viewing the interface
area and cross section with Confocal Scanning Laser Microscopy (CSLM) and X-ray
fluoroscopy respectively. A model will be developed to predict the separation
rates, inclusion of size and shape changes during the process, and comparing
this model to the experimental observations. The effects of liquid film drainage
and rupture, and changes in the inclusion due to deformation, and chemical
reaction with the slag will be studied. Understanding and predicting the
separation of non-metallic inclusions across steel/slag interfaces will enable
industries to design slag and inclusion chemistries to achieve cleaner melts and
thus produce more predictable micro-structures, which would result in increased
product quality, process control and less waste. A web-based package will be
developed for visualizing phase transformations, solidification and melting of
various selected compositions across the iron-carbon binary systems for
demonstrations in lectures or as "virtual experiments". In terms of outreach, a
module will be developed for Summer Academic Minority Students in an effort to
expose them to opportunities and challenges in Materials Science and Engineering
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spectroscopic methods will be developed for the
visualization of metallurgical processes such as the separation of non-metallic
inclusions from molten metals into molten oxide slags by viewing the interface
area and cross section. A modeling and computer simulations will be carried out
to predict the separation rates between molten metals from nonmetallic oxide
slags, and to control changes in the size and shape of inclusions during the
metallurgical processes. These studies would be of potential benefit to
industrial applications in alloy refinements and processing. The planned web-
based program would be of benefit to a wider community interested in
metallurgical processes. The proposed outreach program to develop a module for
Summer Academic Minority Students would create interest in and provide
opportunities for these students in Materials Science and Engineering fields.