* 0348649
* CAREER:      Theoretical Analysis of Molecular Oxygen Chemistry in Biological Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Qiang Cui, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2009
* USD 510,000.00

Qiang Cui of the University of Wisconsin is supported by the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program through a CAREER award to develop and apply
hybrid quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical methods to explore details of
flavin-oxygen chemistry in flavoproteins. Specifically, a constrained density
functional theory will be used to construct diabatic states relevant to electron
transfer between flavin and molecular oxygen. Ensemble-averaged density
functional theory will be used to achieve a balanced description of both triplet
and singlet electronic states of the flavin-superoxide radical pair undergoing a
spin-forbidden transition. These methods can be extended to the energetics and
kinetic properties associated with other chemical processes involving molecular
oxygen. In addition, fully interactive, multimedia material will be developed
for computational biophysics courses, along with a web-based database of classic
research papers with great pedagogical value.

Theoretical analysis is very valuable in identifying detailed mechanisms and
providing insights into the structural and dynamical properites of protein
active site environments, especially when experiments alone are inconclusive.
This research project will expand the scope and level of detail for enzyme
simulations beyond what conventional computational methods offer. In addition,
new multimedia course material and a web-based database will improve the student
learning experience by incorporating a balance of modern developments and
fundamental concepts.