* 0348274
* CAREER: Tracing Antarctic Sediment Transport Pathways and Antarctic Ice Sheet Stability Using Iron-titanium Oxide Magnetic and Chemical fingerprints
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2004,11/30/2011
* Stefanie Brachfeld, Montclair State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra Isern
* 11/30/2011
* USD 403,301.00

This project will develop a suite of tracers to understand sediment transport in
the Antarctic margin. These sediments are glacially derived and understanding
their origin will provide insight into the controls on the stability of the
Antarctic Ice Sheet. The method exploits the distinctive elemental fingerprints
in iron-titanium oxides to characterize source regions. Iron titanium oxides
contain an array of major, minor and trace elements. These elemental profiles
will be quantified via electron microprobe and used to define a geochemical
fingerprint for each source area. Unknown samples will be traced to their
sources using discriminant function analysis. The ability to trace Antarctic
glacial marine sediment deposited along the continental margin and in the
Southern Ocean will provide a means of tracking advances and retreats of the
West Antarctic Ice Sheet, East Antarctic Ice Sheet, and the Antarctic Peninsula
glaciers and ice shelves. Source area fingerprints will be derived from existing
circum-Antarctic samples of glacial till and ice-proximal sand. These samples
will also be studied to determine their magnetic parameters, sediment
geochemistry, and radioisotope signatures to track their dispersal through the
world's oceans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves substantial
undergraduate and graduate student training in mineralogy, petrology,
sedimentology, geochemistry, microscopy, magnetism and statistics. Montclair
State University has a diverse student body that will permit the PI to work
towards recruitment and retention of women in science. Students will also work
at a diverse array of state of the art research facilities including the
Antarctic Research Facility, the Polar Rock Repository, the Institute for Rock
Magnetism, Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory, and core repositories of the Ocean
Drilling Program. Major themes of this project will be crafted into Antarctic
and global change lessons for elementary school teachers. &lt;br/&gt;