* 0348778
* CAREER: Investigation of Regional Land-Atmosphere Interactions Using a Hierarchical Modeling and Data Assimilation Approach
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2011
* Steven Margulis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 02/28/2011
* USD 421,022.00

Margulis 0348778

Improved understanding and better representation of land surface heterogeneity,
diurnal mixed-layer growth, and entrainment at the top of the atmospheric
boundary layer is necessary for accurately capturing diurnal land-atmosphere
interactions in large-scale models. In this project, we will apply an advanced
data assimilation scheme to estimate high-resolution rootzone soil moisture
fields over regional domains. This new database will provide the ability to
extend previous studies that analyzed the variability and scaling of surface
soil moisture fields. The rootzone soil moisture fields will then be used to
initialize large-eddy simulations in order to investigate the importance of
observed surface heterogeneity and provide insight into feedbacks in the coupled
land-atmosphere system under a variety of surface and synoptic conditions. The
knowledge gained from these efforts will be used to investigate the
representation of the complex interactions using low-dimensional models in an
ensemble data assimilation framework.

The education component of the project is centered around providing broad-based
environmental education to not only engineering undergraduates, but to those not
sufficiently exposed to science, in an effort to increase awareness of
environmental issues that are important to our society. Based on this goal, the
proposed education plan has three main components: 1) hands-on environmental
education outreach to underrepresented minority and women students in Los
Angeles high schools; 2) environmental awareness education for non-science and
engineering freshman at UCLA; and 3) incorporating effective educational
techniques, with a focus on better integration of research, into undergraduate
engineering courses.

The proposed project aims to make a significant contribution by furthering
environmental knowledge and understanding through research and education. Broad
impacts from the research plan will ultimately include better estimates of
regional water and energy budgets and improved numerical weather and climate
prediction, while the education plan will ultimately produce more
environmentally aware citizens as well as scientists and engineers that are
better equipped to solve future environmental problems.