* 0348895
* CAREER: Equilibrium Thermodynamics and Thermodynamic Metastability in Polymer Blends with Coexisting Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation and Crystallization
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Howard (Hao) Wang, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2007
* USD 265,000.00

This project will explore the thermodynamics of binary polymer blends that
exhibit both crystallization and liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS). A model
blend system of atactic poly(styrene-co-4-bromostyrene) and deuterated isotactic
polystyrene will be used for this study. Taking advantage of the polymer system,
the PI will tune the phase transitions (LLPS, crystallization, and glass
transition) by systematically varying molecular weight, bromination level,
tacticity and blend composition. By applying primarily structural
characterization techniques including both scattering (neutron, X-ray and laser
light) and imaging tools (optical, electron, and atomic force microscopy) to
polymer blends with well-positioned phase transitions, the PI will (1) determine
the equilibrium phase diagrams of polymer blends and reveal the mutual influence
of LLPS and crystallization, (2) understand thermodynamic metastability by
measuring non-equilibrium phase diagrams and the kinetics of one phase
transition occurring in a metastable state of another transition, and (3)
measure the early stage structure development during simultaneous LLPS and
crystallization and understand the intricate balance between the thermodynamic
driving forces for individual transitions and the metastability-mediated
transition kinetics. The intellectual merits of this project manifest mainly in
three areas. (1) Plastics Technology: This program will lead to a better
understanding of how non-equilibrium structures develop due to coexisting phase
transitions in polymer blends, which could results in better material and
process designs for engineering plastics. (2) Phase Transition Fundamentals:
Although individual phase transitions in polymers are relatively well
understood, the fundamental understanding of the interplay between two or more
coexisting transitions in polymers is still rather limited. This program will
address several aspects of the fundamental thermodynamics of coexisting
transitions in polymers, bridging the knowledge gap in the length-scale spectrum
of phase transitions spanned by the relatively well-studied small molecular and
colloidal systems. (3) Other Frontiers: Coexisting transitions and competing
forces as a means of self-assembly have profound implications in hierarchical
ordering in soft matter, such as in protein aggregation and misfolding, one of
the major topics in biomedical research. A thorough understanding of model
polymers is an important step toward revealing complexities in biological and
other soft materials systems. %%% The broad impacts of this project are a
natural outcome of highly integrated innovative research and dynamic education
programs. The knowledge from the research involving
university/industry/national-laboratory collaborations will be disseminated
through publications and presentations, and implemented in novel technologies.
To establish an effective education program in polymer materials and
engineering, the PI will develop both undergraduate and graduate courses that
emphasize rocessing-structure-property-performance relationships in polymers. In
light of the increasing demands for plastics in automobiles, the PI will forge a
strong coalition with Michigan's plastic and automotive companies to address the
challenge through both collaborative research and object-oriented education.
Senior Design projects targeting real problems in polymer applications in
automobiles will be developed with industrial partners including Visteon and
Dow. Outreach to K-12 education includes: (1) Participating in education
programs with the local school district through regular lectures on topics of
materials and nanotechnology and involving high school students and teachers in
researches in this project. (2) Providing key new leadership in the area of
polymers for Michigan Tech's Youth Programs, which include special programs for
encouraging women and underrepresented populations to pursue engineering and
technical careers. ***