* 0348941
* CAREER:     New Vistas in Early-Transition Metal Complexes Containing Metal-Ligand Multiple Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Daniel Mindiola, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 12/31/2008
* USD 500,000.00

This CAREER award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports work by Professor Daniel J. Mindiola at Indiana University to
explore the chemistry of three- and four-coordinate titanium complexes having
metal-ligand multiple bonds. The research involves the synthesis, structure,
reactivity, and kinetic studies of a four-coordinate titanium(IV) alkylidene,
imide, and phosphinidene complexes. Topics addressed include bonding
considerations and mechanistic and reactivity studies of titanium alkylidene,
imide, and phosphinidene systems. Investigations extend to group 5 complexes and
redox studies stemming from vanadium complexes containing metal-ligand multiple
bonds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific targets of the project are to: i) Prepare
low-coordinate and high-oxidation state early-transition metal complexes
containing metal-ligand multiple bonds. ii) Explore the reactivity of these
unique systems and compare catalytic activity with well-established systems.
iii) Expand this synthetic methodology to the preparation of low-coordinate
group 3 and 5 transition metals. iv) Through retro-analytical concept mapping
and self-assessment techniques, recruit undergraduate students in basic science-
oriented research. v) Implement two student-based chapters at Indiana University
for the recruitment of minority groups into the physical sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work aims toward new catalysts by exploring new
transition metal complexes with multiple bonds. The education plan is to develop
undergraduate research awareness and implementation of student-based chapters
for the recruitment of undergraduates (especially from underrepresented groups)
into the physical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;