* 0348251
* CAREER:     Feedback Control of Micro-Fluidic Systems and the Bio-Chemical Particles Inside Them
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Benjamin Shapiro, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Research will focus on feedback control of bio-
molecules and of liquid packets inside micro-fluidic&lt;br/&gt;systems. The goal
is to control the path and shape of micro-fluidic packets, and the trajectories
and&lt;br/&gt;chemical reactions of bio/chem particles inside the packets. This
will facilitate new micro-fluidic systems&lt;br/&gt;such as miniaturized drug
delivery systems, and it will allow existing systems to function in noisy
real&lt;br/&gt;world conditions. Specific control tasks will include: steering
of many particles at once for targeted&lt;br/&gt;collisions between different
cells, viruses, and bacteria; precision moving, splitting, and joining
of&lt;br/&gt;droplets by electrically induced surface tension forces; and shape
control of individual particles. For example, it is known that fluid flow can
straighten DNA chains. Our grand challenge is to create a flow field that only
unwraps a small portion of the DNA chain and makes a specific protein hit the
start of that unwrapped section. Feedback control requires the integration of
devices, sensing, control algorithms, and actuation. Such system integration
raises fundamental research challenges. We will address four key areas that are
open and which match our core expertise in fluid dynamics and control. 1) Real
time sensor processing: Infer the position, type, shape, and properties of fluid
packets and bio particles from the sensor data in real time. For example, we
will infer the shape of cells down to tens of nanometers resolution by measuring
the surrounding fluid flow using PIV (particle image velocimetry) and by
efficiently solving an inverse inflow-to-shapel mathematics problem. 2) Control
algorithm design: Based on the sensor data, compute the appropriate actuator
response. For observed particle positions, find the electrode voltages to move
the particles in the desired directions. 3) Control implementation: Our
controllers must function in real time. This raises significant computational
issues including controller reduction and state estimation from limited sensing.
4) Modeling: All three steps above rely on a quantifiable understanding of the
systems at hand.&lt;br/&gt;These four steps will be implemented on micro fluidic
systems in our lab and on systems in the labs of&lt;br/&gt;our collaborators.
The research will focus primarily on topic two: control algorithm
design.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to unite research
from different disciplines. The outreach plan reflects this aim:&lt;br/&gt;1)
Micro fluidics design competition supported by the Hinman undergraduate
entrepreneurship CEO&lt;br/&gt;program: Each team in the competition will
consist of students from engineering, physics, chemistry,&lt;br/&gt;biology, and
the business school. Undergraduate teams will design and fabricate micro systems
after&lt;br/&gt;taking pre-requisite micro fabrication courses. Successful teams
will transition their ideas into&lt;br/&gt;business plans through the CEO
program (the program provides undergraduates with the tools&lt;br/&gt;required
to start and manage a business, see www.hinmanceos.umd.edu). In collaboration
with the&lt;br/&gt;Women In Engineering (WIE) program, the competition will be
used as a recruiting tool to attract&lt;br/&gt;women and under-represented
minorities to science, systems research, and entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;2)
Strong focus on multi-disciplinary undergraduate research: Undergraduate
students will be involved&lt;br/&gt;in creating the experiments, developing the
control algorithms, and testing the devices, and they will&lt;br/&gt;undertake
internships at the companies and government labs with which my group
collaborates.&lt;br/&gt;3) Integrating the languages of control and micro/nano:
The controls and micro/nano community speak&lt;br/&gt;different technical
languages. For example, existing micro fluidic models are not suitable for
control&lt;br/&gt;design. I will chair a micro fluidic ilmodeling versus
designli workshop at the next AIAA Aerospace&lt;br/&gt;Sciences Meeting and
Exhibit which will bring together researchers from these two
communities.&lt;br/&gt;Future workshops will be organized at micro-systems and
control conference. These workshops will&lt;br/&gt;focus on translating physical
micro-systems control challenges into tractable control theory questions.