* 0348869
* CAREER: Model Selection for Semiparametric Regression Models in High Dimensional Modeling and its Oracle Properties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2011
* Runze Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2011
* USD 440,000.00

proposal: DMS 0348869&lt;br/&gt;PI: Runze Li&lt;br/&gt;institution: The
Pennsylvania State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Model Selection for
Semiparametric Regression Models in High&lt;br/&gt;Dimensional Modeling and its
Oracle Properties&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Model
selection is fundamental to high-dimensional data analysis,
and&lt;br/&gt;semiparametric regression models are potentially useful for
analysis of&lt;br/&gt;high-dimensional data. Model selection for semiparametric
regression&lt;br/&gt;models consists of two components: model selection (such as
choice of&lt;br/&gt;smoothing parameters) for the nonparametric component, and
variable selection&lt;br/&gt;for the parametric portion. Traditional variable
selection&lt;br/&gt;schemes, such as the stepwise deletion and the best subset
variable&lt;br/&gt;selection, could be extended to semiparametric modeling, but
they are&lt;br/&gt;expensive in computation since they require the smoothing
parameters to&lt;br/&gt;be selected for each submodel. The objectives of this
proposal are to&lt;br/&gt;develop new widely applicable model selection
procedures for three&lt;br/&gt;classes of semiparametric models which provide a
unified framework for&lt;br/&gt;many existing semiparametric regression models
in the literature. In this&lt;br/&gt;proposal, the PI (a) studies the asymptotic
behaviors of the proposed&lt;br/&gt;estimators, (b) demonstrates how the rate of
convergence of the resulting&lt;br/&gt;estimator depends on the regularization
parameter, (c) shows that the proposed&lt;br/&gt;procedures perform as well as
the oracle procedure in variable selection&lt;br/&gt;for semiparametric
regression models, and (d) addresses issues related to&lt;br/&gt;implementation
of the proposed procedures. The PI also examines finite&lt;br/&gt;sample
performance via extensive Monte Carlo simulation studies and&lt;br/&gt;applies
the proposed procedures to analysis of real
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With modern data collection devices and
vast data storage space, one can&lt;br/&gt;easily collect high-dimensional data,
such as biotech data, financial data,&lt;br/&gt;satellite imagery and
hyperspectral imagery. Analysis of high-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;data poses many
challenges for statisticians and is becoming the most&lt;br/&gt;important
research topic in statistics. This proposal (a) lays down&lt;br/&gt;a well-
grounded and comprehensive framework for model selection
for&lt;br/&gt;semiparametric regression modeling in high-dimensional data
analysis,&lt;br/&gt;(b) has significant impact on the future research of high-
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;statistical modeling, and (c) enhances significantly the
availability&lt;br/&gt;of statistical tools and software for high-dimensional
statistical modeling.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is incorporated into a new
topic course from which&lt;br/&gt;graduate students may directly benefit. The
proposed work also&lt;br/&gt;benefits a broad range of scientists and
researchers in various fields, including&lt;br/&gt;automotive engineering,
medical studies, prevention studies, public health&lt;br/&gt;and social
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;