* 0348910
* CAREER:  Dynamic and Quenched Disorder in Non-Equilibrium Reaction-Diffusion Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2004,12/31/2007
* Anna Lin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 12/31/2007
* USD 206,579.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project at Duke
University is to experimentally investigate dynamic and quenched disorder in
non-equilibrium reaction-diffusion processes, and to further incorporate
research experience into the graduate and undergraduate physics curriculum.
Despite the ubiquity and importance of processes involving interaction and
transport: e.g. the weather, plasmas, industrial chemical reactions and surface
reactions, a quantitative understanding of non-equilibrium processes is
fundamentally lacking. The proposed experiments address open questions in non-
equilibrium physics, including studies of the validity of the Kardar-Parisi-
Zhang model of rough growing interfaces, and tests of whether a critical amount
of disorder smooths out a non-equilibrium transition that is otherwise sharp.
These studies will contribute to the development of a predictive theory for non-
equilibrium physics. Training of students will focus on their preparation for
scientific and non-scientific multidisciplinary careers, while still maintaining
the useful perspective and skills provided by a physics
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) project at Duke University is to experimentally investigate dynamic and
static disorder in non-equilibrium processes involving interaction and
transport, and to further incorporate research experience into the graduate and
undergraduate physics curriculum. Despite the ubiquity and importance of
interaction-transport processes: e.g. the weather, plasmas, industrial chemical
reactions and surface reactions, a theoretical understanding, i.e. predictive
power, of these processes is fundamentally lacking. The proposed experiments
address open questions in non-equilibrium physics, including studies of the
validity of the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang model of rough growing interfaces, and tests
of whether a precise amount of disorder smooths out an otherwise sharp
transition between two different system behaviors. The results of these
experiments will contribute to the development of a predictive theory of non-
equilibrium systems which will ultimately apply to the research of liquid and
solid rocket propellant and other combustion processes; electronic, magnetic,
and optical materials fabrication; and bio-geophysical processes; and is likely
to apply to a broad range of related phenomena. Training of students will focus
on their preparation for scientific and non-scientific multidisciplinary
careers, while still maintaining the useful perspective and skills provided by a
physics program.