* 0348327
* Collaborative Research: Analysis of a Protist Assemblage of the Coastal Ctenophore, Mnemiopsis leidyi
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Anthony Moss, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2009
* USD 301,193.00

Project summary&lt;br/&gt; This project focuses on the characterization,
phylogeny, and functional impact of a specific assemblage of epicommensal
protists associated with the lobate ctenophore, Mnemiopsis leidyi, a keystone
predator of marine coastal planktonic communities extending from the Gulf of
Mexico along the Atlantic Coast to New England. The species diversity, relative
species abundance of each member of the assemblage, geographic range and
infectivity of this assemblage is being documented by a team of collaborating
researchers from four institutions. &lt;br/&gt;The collaborative laboratories
have the specific knowledge of each of the local environments and the scientific
expertise in ecology, life history, cell biology, microscopy and molecular
biology and are making a comprehensive study of epibiotic microbial interactions
with a gelatinous predator. Salinity, temperature, dissolved oxygen, chlorophyll
and turbidity are being determined at each collection site in order to correlate
specific physical factors with the occurrence of the assemblage. This
information will determine to what degree the assemblage (or specific
components) is affected by environmental parameters; and conversely, to
establish whether this assemblage can be used as an environmental quality
marker. &lt;br/&gt;Understanding the range of the microbe-host interaction is
critical to a more complete understanding of the biology of Mnemiopsis.
Mnemiopsis alters community structure through voracious predation on zooplankton
populations to the point where this resource becomes limiting to other predator
species (i.e., fish). Mnemiopsis is also a globally invasive organism that has
demonstrated its capacity to disrupt the trophic structure of coastal
communities worldwide, with severe economic consequences. Dense protist
assemblages may alter reproductive capacity and feeding in Mnemiopsis, and could
be transferred to new hosts in new environments. As such, understanding the
biology of this assemblage, its impact on the host, and its capacity to infest
alternate species, could illuminate the mechanisms and effects of Mnemiopsis
invasion into a new environment. &lt;br/&gt;Comprehensive profiles of the
assemblage are being obtained by a combination of molecular phylogenetic
techniques, conventional protozoological identification methods and cellular
ultrastructural data to provide detailed information about each component
species. The source of the cells within the environment (i.e. whether derived
from the water column or benthic communities) is being studied and whether
individual species is being transferred to higher trophic level predators such
as larger gelatinous predatory ctenophores (e.g., Bero) or fish.
&lt;br/&gt;Results of this study are providing a database of the composition,
geographic range, origin and environmental parameters of this assemblage and are
forming the basis for establishing this assemblage as a model system for future
studies in areas as widely diverse as cell-cell interactions and mechanisms of
maintenance of aquatic community structure, including potential for effects on
the coastal environment and possible means of control. This study is requiring
undergraduate and graduate students at each investigator's location. The PIs are
attracting female and male African-American, Hispanic, Asian and Native American
students to their programs. &lt;br/&gt;