* 0348503
* CAREER: Computer Modeling of Short Pulse Laser Interaction with Metals
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2010
* Leonid Zhigilei, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 01/31/2010
* USD 458,402.00

The proposed research program is aimed at obtaining a better fundamental
understanding of the fast non-equilibrium processes induced by short pulse laser
irradiation of a metal target. A multiscale computational model combining
atomistic and continuum methods will be developed and applied for investigation
of the mechanisms of melting and resolidification occurring under extreme
superheating/undercooling conditions realized in short pulse laser processing.
The interplay of two competing processes, propagation of the melting front from
the surface and homogeneous melting of an overheated sub-surface region, which
occur simultaneously with relaxation of the laser-induced pressure, will be
analyzed for different irradiation conditions, materials, and crystal faces. The
nature of the structural correlations that develop as the liquid is undercooled
down to the glass transition temperature and the effect of the crystal-amorphous
interface on the structure and stability of the amorphous layer will be
investigated. The parameters that define the glass forming ability in laser
quenching will be identified based on the simulation results for several
representative metallic alloys. The mechanisms of laser ablation and cluster
formation under different irradiation conditions will be investigated and
suggestions on the optimum experimental conditions for size-selective cluster
generation will be made based on the simulation results.&lt;br/&gt; The
educational component of the proposed program includes incorporation of
computational methods and the results of computer modeling into the materials
science curriculum, design of a hypertext and educational modules on
computational materials science. The hypertext will include a discussion of the
major computational methods used in materials science and, at the same time,
will provide a stimulating learning environment through the use of interactive
on-line simulations and exercises.&lt;br/&gt;This research is being supported by
the Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing Program of the Chemical and
Transport Systems Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;