* 0348723
* CAREER: Process Engineering of Chemical Bath Deposition: A Soft Solution Route to Flexible Electronics
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2009
* Chih-hung Chang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 12/31/2009
* USD 439,317.00

This CAREER grant combines research and educational initiatives in the area of
microelectronics
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
program focuses on fabrication of compound semiconductor devices on flexible
polymeric substrates by low temperature processing technology. Most compound
semiconductors have the advantage of higher intrinsic carrier mobility over
amorphous silicon and organic semiconductors. Chemical bath deposition (CBD) is
an aqueous solution-based film deposition technique with the capability to
deposit epitaxial compound semiconductor layers at low temperatures. Fundamental
understanding of the CBD process is limited. This project involves the
development of experimental techniques for fundamental investigation of particle
nucleation, growth, deposition and molecular level heterogeneous thin film
growth mechanisms, and development of a n impinging flow CBD reactor to tailor
thin film micro- and nanostructures. The impinging flow reactor takes advantage
of the microreation technology to control nanoparticle size and distribution in
the impinging fluxes. Successful implementation of this project will not only
advance basic understanding of the CBD process for the fabrication of flexible
semiconductor devices, it will also establish a new research tool for the
fundamental investigation of particle formation and deposition characteristics
of many solution-based processes. In addition, the impinging flow CBD reactor
could lead to a new thin film deposition technique for
nanofabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complementing the research plan is the PI's plan to
develop laboratory modules based on the synthesis of the research literature and
the his own research activities. He plans to use modern technical applications
as example in learning the fundamentals - to this end he plans to develop a low
cost transistor lab based on CBD and microcontact printing; develop chemical
engineering educational modules based on microreaction technology; and continue
developing and disseminating unit operations modules on microelectronics
processing.&lt;br/&gt;