* 0348435
* CAREER: Generation of Sediment Heterogeneity by Macrophytes and Macrofauna and Consequences for Redox Chemistry and Trace Metal Speciation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2011
* Carla Koretsky, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2011
* USD 522,520.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Coastal and inland wetland areas are
enormously impacted by rapidly growing human populations. This typically leads
to increased metal and nutrient loading together with significant changes in
wetland hydrology, fauna and flora. Sustainable coastal and inland wetland
development (and remediation) strategies depend on the development of accurate,
predictive models of metal and nutrient speciation, bioavailability and mobility
and their dependence on wetland flora and fauna populations. This is
particularly true at the sensitive interface between saltmarshes and the coastal
ocean or between inland wetlands and freshwater aquifers. Macrophytes and
macrofauna inhabiting organic-rich saltmarsh and freshwater wetlands produce
significant three-dimensional, temporally varying, geochemical heterogeneity in
the surrounding sediments. This has a tremendous influence on benthic fluxes of
oxygen, metals and nutrients, internal cycling of redox sensitive chemical
species, and organic matter degradation kinetics. The following laboratory and
field investigations will be used to assess these influences and to advance the
development of sophisticated 3D mathematical models of sediment redox chemistry
and trace metal speciation, bioavailability and mobility. (1) Metal adsorption
experiments on mixed model mineral assemblages will be used to derive
thermodynamic surface complexation stability constants and to assess their
applicability to natural sediments. (2) Bulk sediment properties (mineralogy,
pore water chemistry, trace metal speciation) in adjacent vegetated and
&lt;br/&gt;unvegetated sediments will be measured as part of an innovative new
field course at WMU. (3) &lt;br/&gt;Microscale analyses of mineralogy and trace
metal speciation in sediments surrounding roots and burrows will be completed
using microelectrodes, SEM/TEM, and laser ablation ICP-MS. (4) Changes in trace
metal speciation resulting from chemically versus microbially mediated reductive
dissolution of trace-metal doped iron oxides will be quantified. (5) Controlled
laboratory mesocosm experiments with artificial roots will be used to assess
microscale 3D changes in mineralogy and trace metal speciation resulting from
root leakage of oxygen and labile organic compounds. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This study includes a fully integrated plan of
research and education. An innovative 6-week summer course is proposed in which
students will have the opportunity to participate in field research at Sapelo
Island, Georgia (an NSF-LTER site) and at field sites in Michigan. Students will
be recruited for this course from WMU and surrounding institutions, especially
those without graduate research programs and from colleges with significant
enrollments of traditionally underrepresented groups. In addition, a full week
of the course will coincide with a secondary education teacher workshop. The
teachers will have a hands-on opportunity to participate in an active scientific
research program and will be encouraged to disseminate curricula resulting from
this experience at the Michigan Science Teachers Annual &lt;br/&gt;Meeting.
Projects related to the laboratory portions of the study will be incorporated
into an undergraduate geochemistry course. In addition to traditional graduate
student mentoring, undergraduate students and highly motivated high school
students from the Kalamazoo Area &lt;br/&gt;Math and Science Academy will
participate in all aspects of the research, presenting results of individual
projects at national or international scientific conferences. Equipment funded
though this study will be a valuable addition to the research infrastructure
available to graduate and undergraduate students at WMU, a rapidly growing
doctoral research institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;