* 0348242
* PECASE:  Research and Education Plans for Modeling and Design of Fixtures and Six-Axis Manipulators for Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2009
* Martin Culpepper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Shaochen Chen
* 01/31/2009
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER award supports efforts to generate the knowledge required to create
low-cost, high-performance manipulators and fixtures capable of nanometer-level
alignment. The scholarly merit of the work is contained in the generation and
experimental validation of models which aim to predict the performance of: (1)
3D compliant mechanisms for monolithic Nanomanipulators: The PI will conduct
research on a new process that forms low-cost, high-performance six-axis
Nanomanipulators. In this process, forming and folding are used to transform a
2D sheet (template) into a 3D compliant mechanism. This process forms the
structure and bearings of a manipulator within one piece. Models will be
developed to link the topologies of the template and 3D mechanism to
Nanomanipulator alignment performance. (2) Detachable fixtures with nanometer-
level accuracy: This research aims to generate fixture technology for
Nanomanufacturing processes. The PI will model the influence of hard coatings on
the stability and repeatability of fixture contact interfaces. Models will also
be developed to aid in the synthesis of fixtures which automatically correct
misalignment via integrated actuation and sensing. If this work is successful,
the combination of improved stability and error correction will enable fixtures
with nanometer-level accuracy and repeatability.

The cost and quality of products based on Nanomanufacturing technology will be
influenced by the cost and performance of manipulation and fixturing equipment.
Present alignment technologies are at their practical cost-performance limits
and therefore not attractive options for next generation Nanomanufacturing
processes. If successful, this research will generate the knowledge required to
make monolithic machine tools and ultra-precision fixtures which are well-suited
to provide low-cost, nanometer-level alignment. This will enable: (1) Reduced
cost and improved quality of products or product components made via
Nanomanufacturing processes (2) Researchers to more accurately characterize
nano-scale devices and manufacturing processes. The broader impacts will be
further enabled through established connections to industry (e.g., Ford, GM) and
educational efforts such as innovative hands-on, discovery-based learning and
design courses, and mentoring of underrepresented minorities.