* 0349361
* CAREER:  Study of the Electronic and Spin Degrees of Freedom in Strongly Correlated Electron Materials:  A Novel Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Alessandra Lanzara, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 01/31/2009
* USD 450,000.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, is to
acquire fundamental understanding of the electronic properties of novel complex
materials, such as high temperature superconductors and colossal
magnetoresistance manganites. The goal is to study their elementary excitation
to understand how the subtle coupling and the competition between electron,
lattice, orbital and spin degrees of freedom, leads to new classes of materials
with exotic properties. The approach will: 1) Focus on novel materials, designed
and selected so as to enhance one of the relevant variables at a time, thus
providing an advantage of understanding step by step the strong interplay
between different degrees of freedom in complex materials. 2) Tackle directly
the spin degrees of freedom, one of the most important ingredients in
determining the ground state properties of correlated materials, through the
development of a novel spin-photoemission setup. The educational component of
this proposal includes substantial contributions to undergraduate and graduate
education and will naturally train future scientists to fully utilize the
nation's investment in synchrotron radiation facilities. The above research
efforts will also be integrated with the development of a new course and a new
series of seminars. The goal the course is to establish a link between academia
and industries, to facilitate contacts and joint research programs between the
two. The series of seminar aim to outreach for women that purse a scientific
career and to create positive role models for women graduate students.

Throughout history, the development of new technologies and ultimately
industries based on these technologies has been driven by the discovery of new
materials. Today, we face a similar opportunity based on the discovery of a new
class of materials known as strongly correlated systems. One of the unique
aspects of these systems is that one can tune their properties in a fashion
completely different than for conventional metal and insulators. For example, it
is now possible to make an insulator into a high temperature superconductor
simply by adding a very small percentage of charge. With the proper mastery of
these materials we can reach a point where these systems can revolutionize
industries like energy, transportation, telecom, and more. The goal of this
Faculty Early Career Development project is to provide deep insight on the
physics and properties of correlated materials. The unique advantage of the
proposed approach is to directly probe the dynamics of the electrons and spin,
which ultimately provide key insight on the properties of the materials. This
will be achieved by combining an experimental technique known as photoemission
spectroscopy with the development of a novel tool called spin-photoemission,
which will allow one to directly probe the spin. The educational component of
this proposal focuses on linking academic efforts with applications in industry.
On the academic side, there will be a focus on training future scientists to
fully utilize the nation's investment in synchrotron radiation facilities. In
addition, there will be a series of seminars designed to encourage women to
pursue scientific and engineering careers. An important component of these
seminars will be to connect women graduate students with positive role models in
both academia and industry.