* 0349189
* CAREER:  Computational Electronic Structure of Antiferromagnetic Diiron Proteins and Bioinorganic Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2010
* Jorge Rodriguez, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 12/31/2010
* USD 509,000.00

This CAREER award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program supports theoretical and computational research by Professor Jorge H.
Rodriguez at Purdue University to understand the electronic structure and
magnetic properties of diiron-oxo proteins and the relationship of these
properties with biological function. Computational methods based on spin density
functional theory (SDFT) will be used to study magnetically ordered transition
metal-containing polynuclear complexes which are of relevance to biology and/or
nanoscience. These methods will be used to make accurate predictions of magnetic
anisotropies on iron-based single-molecule magnets, which are of potential
application for molecular-level memory storage or as models for understanding
biomineralization in proteins. The scientific insight gained from this research
will also help to interpret a large body of spectroscopic data recorded for
magnetically ordered biological and bioinorganic complexes.

The educational component of this research includes developing graduate and
advanced undergraduate courses on computational biomolecular electronic
structure as well as disseminating basic knowledge and novel findings by
broadcasting to other universities and national laboratories live and
interactive workshops via the new technology known as the Access Grid.

This research develops a theoretical understanding of the magnetic properties of
iron-containing proteins and seeks to foster the academic formation of a new
generation of theoretical biophysicists able to investigate biomolecular
magnetic phenomena and complex biochemical processes.