* 0349019
* CAREER:  Invariant Theory, Algorithms and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Harm Derksen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2009
* USD 400,000.00

DMS-0349019&lt;br/&gt;Harm Derksen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a CAREER award
investigating Invariant Theory, Algorithms, &lt;br/&gt;and Applications. The PI
will build up a research group working &lt;br/&gt;on algorithms in algebra. He
will work on algorithms for various &lt;br/&gt;difficult problems in algebra and
the connection between complexity&lt;br/&gt;theory and Invariant Theory. The PI
will work with Jessica Sidman &lt;br/&gt;on Castelnuovo-Mumford regularity and
applications to various &lt;br/&gt;conjectures. The PI will work with Jerzy
Weyman on quiver &lt;br/&gt;representations, invariant theory and applications.
They also plan &lt;br/&gt;to write an introductory book on quiver
representations. A graduate&lt;br/&gt;student will work on the connection
between semi-invariants for &lt;br/&gt;quivers, combinatorics and exact
sequences of abelian p-groups. &lt;br/&gt;In addition, the PI will also work on
the new notion of &lt;br/&gt;"black box algebras". These algebras can be used to
describe &lt;br/&gt;classical invariant theory. There are many interesting
applications, &lt;br/&gt;such as PI-theory, and universal formulas for
decompositions of &lt;br/&gt;tensor products of representations of simple lie
algebras. Courses &lt;br/&gt;will be developed in the area of algorithms in
algebra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Invariant Theory one studies algebraic
quantities which remain &lt;br/&gt;unchanged after certain transformations. For
example, consider a &lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional space. Consider a point (x,y,z)
under rotation around &lt;br/&gt;the z-axis. Two fundamental invariants are the
distance to the z-axis, &lt;br/&gt;and the z-coordinate. These quantities remain
unchanged after any &lt;br/&gt;rotation around the z-axis. Every algebraic
invariant can be expressed &lt;br/&gt;in terms of these two fundamental
invariants. A famous theorem of Hilbert &lt;br/&gt;from 1890 tells us that given
a collection of transformations (satisfying &lt;br/&gt;certain hypotheses) of a
space of arbitrary dimension, there exists a &lt;br/&gt;finite set of
fundamental invariants such that every invariant&lt;br/&gt;can be expressed in
these fundamental invariants. This proposal&lt;br/&gt;supports the study of
applications of Invariant Theory to several areas&lt;br/&gt;in mathematics. It
also supports research on algorithms for&lt;br/&gt;various problems in Invariant
Theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;