* 0349512
* Planning Visit: The Human Ecology of Land-Use Land-Cover Change in the Toledo District Belize- A Remote Sensing Approach
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2005
* Michael Emch, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 04/30/2005
* USD 8,034.00

0349512&lt;br/&gt;Emch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Americas Program Planning Visit
award will provide funds to Dr. Michael Emch and Dr. Martha Works of Portland
State University to plan collaborative research with Dr. Robin Coleman and Mr.
William Maheia of the Toledo Institute for Development and Environment in Punta
Gorda, Belize. The researchers aim to investigate the reasons for land-use land-
cover (LULC) changes in the Toledo District of Belize. Using a remote sensing
approach, the investigators will randomly identify pixels that have changed
(i.e., deforested or reforested) and visit those locations to determine why they
changed; a questionnaire will be administered to the land users to obtain this
information. Proposed activities include: (1) a ground-truth field survey of
preliminary satellite image processing LULC change results, (2) the design and
pretest of a questionnaire that will be used to determine why LULC changes
occurred, and (3) meetings with the entire research team to discuss preliminary
findings and design and plan a larger project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding land-use land-cover (LULC) change in areas
with tropical forests can contribute to sustainable conservation planning and
management. Ultimately, the project will help to document LULC change in the
Toledo District, Belize during the past three decades and provide an assessment
of why these changes took place. The project has two primary objectives: one, to
measure changes in forest cover that occurred since 1975, and two, to begin to
understand why these changes took place. The human role in LULC change is
important for environmental conservation and management. By investigating LULC
change in southern Belize this project will build upon geographic human ecology
theories. There is a growing understanding that environmental change and its
causes are very different in different settings and thus understanding LULC
change must be multifaceted, multiscalar, and multitemporal. The Office of
International Science and Engineering (OISE) and the Division of Behavioral and
Cognitive Sciences are jointly supporting this planning visit.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;