* 0349558
* Collaborative Research: The Evolutionary Genetics of Invasiveness in Silene latifolia
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Douglas Taylor, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy J. Huntly
* 04/30/2008
* USD 447,997.00

Biological invasions represent one of the greatest threats to the preservation
of biodiversity. In addition, the economic costs to the USA resulting from
damage and control of alien organisms (e.g., zebra mussel, kudzu) amount to more
than $100 billion annually. Surprisingly, very little is known about why species
that are normally benign may suddenly become noxious pests following their
introduction to another country or continent. While the emphasis of previous
research recorded in the literature has been on ecological forces, the goal of
this research is to explore the role that genetic changes play in the invasion
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a combination of approaches, Taylor and
Wolfe propose to study the genetics and origin of invasiveness in Silene
latifolia, a plant that was introduced to North America from Europe. There are
three goals to this research: 1) To examine the history of the invasion process
and clarify the genetic consequences of the invasion process in terms of the
amount and distribution of genetic variation. 2) To experimentally test for
unique environmental patterns in North America that might promote the success of
weedy species. 3) To use replicated experimental populations to test whether
North American populations are genetically more invasive and the extent to which
natural enemies limit invasiveness in Europe. This research will have broad
significance for both understanding the origin of invasiveness and providing
opportunities for career development of undergraduate students, graduate
students and post-docs. &lt;br/&gt;