* 0349651
* Long Term Modulation of the Galactic Cosmic Radiation
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Frank McDonald, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 07/31/2008
* USD 246,304.00

The investigators will use the understanding gained from satellite and other
contemporary investigations of the cosmic radiation and its interaction with the
heliospheric magnetic field, to investigate the temporal variability of the
cosmic ray modulation over the past 10,000 years. Current evidence indicates
that solar activity exhibits a "long" periodicity of about 2200 years, and the
investigation is expected to yield important results regarding the origin of the
heliospheric magnetic field, and its quantitative variability over time. This
activity may have considerable impact upon cosmic ray theory, solar physics, and
aspects of space weather. The research will use cosmogenic data, and
mathematical solutions of the cosmic ray transport equation, to investigate the
long term modulation processes to infer the state of the heliosphere and of the
solar magnetic field. The investigation will (1) develop analytical techniques
to provide better resolution of the 11 year variation in beryllium-10 isotope
data, and to better remove geomagnetic effects from the carbon-14 record; (2)
use the cosmogenic data, and all available solar proxies, to study the
associations between the cosmic ray modulation, and solar activity throughout
the interval 850-1950 A.D.; (3) use the understanding gained in (1) and (2) to
study the modulation processes for the past 10,000 years; and (4) assess the
feasibility of making high precision measurements of the beryllium-10 production
since 1951, to allow detailed comparison with the neutron monitor record and to
better understand the coupling between beryllium-10, carbon-14, and galactic
cosmic ray observations. A major outcome will be strengthened collaboration
among the cosmic ray, solar, and cosmogenic research communities. The cosmogenic
data are one of the few quantitative measurements available to study solar
processes in the past, and their effects at Earth, and the quantitative
information that will be obtained on the heliospheric magnetic fields is
expected to be of interest to disciplines concerned with climatic, geological,
and biological changes during the Holocene. Quantifying the heliospheric effects
in the past will assist the prediction of the solar effects upon our
technological infrastructure in the future.