* 0349851
* Introducing Science Faculty from Historically Black Colleges and Universities to Materials Science and Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2009
* Viola Acoff, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas P. Rieker
* 05/31/2009
* USD 980,000.00

This program, taking place at the University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa, is
designed to acquaint minority undergraduate students with the field of Materials
Science and Engineering by introducing their teachers to this field. The
teachers are faculty and educators from Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU.s) from across the nation with varied backgrounds (e.g.,
physics, chemistry, biology, mathematics, etc.) who have limited or no previous
exposure to the field of materials science and engineering. A Gordon Conference
style program setting is used. An additional component to further develop a
long-term relationship with some of the institutions consists of inviting some
of the faculty participants to a 6-10 week summer research opportunity. The
proposed activity is extremely important to advancing knowledge and
understanding within the field of materials science and engineering and across
different fields. The activity is unique in that it is the only known program of
its type that provides an intensive introduction to the field of Materials
Science and Engineering to faculty who may not receive such an opportunity
otherwise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity advances discovery and
understanding while promoting teaching, training and learning. The program
consists of lectures by invited outside experts, laboratory activities, and
tours to nearby industrial settings. Dissemination of the results of the program
is accomplished by mailing brochures, postings on the program website, and
submission of articles to education-related journals such as the ASEE Prism.
Benefits of the proposed activity to society consist of increasing the diversity
of the field of Materials Science &amp; Engineering by acquainting students from
underrespresented groups with the field with a result of increased awareness of
materials science as a career opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;