* 0349069
* CAREER: Integrated Studies of Recurring, Non-Traditional Mesoscale Convective Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2004,11/30/2005
* Matthew Parker, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 11/30/2005
* USD 216,437.00

The goal of this research is to determine the mechanisms governing the
organization and maintenance of recurring, non-traditional mesoscale convective
systems (MCSs) by using numerical simulations, observational analyses, and an
integrated educational program -- Meteorological Education and Secondary School
Outreach ("MESO"). MCSs produce much of the warm season rainfall in the
agriculturally vital Great Plains, as well as widespread hazardous weather.
Recent work has revealed two recurring MCS structures that are poorly understood
-convective lines with leading stratiform ("LS") and with parallel stratiform
("PS") precipitation -both of which frequently produce flash flooding. Although
the elemental mechanisms for development and maintenance of LS systems have been
investigated, they are still unclear for PS systems as well as for elevated (not
surface-based) MCSs. This lack of knowledge is important because, without it,
the ability to forecast precipitation and hazardous weather from these recurring
organizational modes is unlikely to improve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit of the Proposed Activity: The work is innovative because it provides an
integrated approach to a problem that has received insufficient attention, and
in doing so seeks to train enrolled and prospective scientists through the MESO
program. The outcomes of this work will be: 1) explanation of the key
environmental and storm-scale processes that lead to PS MCSs, 2) explanation of
how the fundamental processes in LS and PS MCSs change when convection is
elevated, 3) explanation of the role of three-dimensionality in convective
organization, and 4) improved skills and scientific abilities among both
enrolled and college-bound future scientists. Collectively, these outcomes will
improve the predictability of convective organization and will strengthen the
next generation of scientists who work on these problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration of Research and Education: The MESO program
will generate web-based outreach tools, providing a long-term means for
meteorological education. The MESO program will require enrolled students to
understand the funded research and to use it as a tool for outreach to non-
meteorologists, both educating the outreach audience and honing the scientific
communication and computing skills of the enrolled students. Local secondary
students will learn about scientific thinking, research, and careers, in
addition to useful information about local mesoscale weather. The PI will
incorporate research results into his undergraduate and graduate courses.
Additionally, the MESO recruitment materials will specifically target women and
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Dissemination of Results: MESO will
create public news releases of findings in lay terms, accompanied by web-based
modules. The secondary school component of MESO will disseminate results in a
rigorous yet understandable way to students who will be recruited to enter the
science fields. Finally, in addition to publishing results in high quality
journals, the PI strongly encourages his graduate students to present results at
conferences and to forecast offices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benefits to Society:
Society will benefit from improved forecasts of hazardous weather and
precipitation associated with non-traditional MCSs, as well as from a stronger,
more diverse population of college scientists with enhanced communication
abilities. Nebraskans will also benefit from enhanced understanding of weather
information owing to MESO.