* 0349582
* The Role of Auditory Cortex in Speech Motor Control
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2006
* John Houde, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Douglas H. Whalen
* 07/31/2006
* USD 150,000.00

How do we hear ourselves while we're speaking? Understanding how speech
perception interacts with speech production is a longstanding issue that has
classically been investigated by looking at how altering auditory feedback
affects speech. Recently, however, the advent of functional neuroimaging methods
has allowed a new approach to the issue: examining how producing speech affects
the neural processes serving auditory perception. Several studies have shown
that the act of speaking suppresses the normal response to speech sounds in
auditory cortex and associated regions. Previous studies by Dr. John F. Houde
suggest that this suppression reflects a comparison between actual auditory
input and a prediction of that auditory input. Based on these initial studies,
Dr. Houde and colleagues developed a model, derived from modern control theory,
for how auditory feedback is processed during speech production. With support of
NSF, Dr. Houde is testing this model by using whole-head magnetic source imaging
(MSI) to monitor activity in auditory cortex as speakers respond to brief
perturbations of their auditory feedback. Prior studies have shown that such
speech perturbations cause compensatory responses in speech motor output. In
this project, researchers are first determining whether auditory cortex is part
of the neural circuitry mediating these compensatory responses by examining how
variations in speaker's perturbation responses are correlated with activity in
auditory cortex. Their next step is determining if their model of feedback
processing explains the responses previously observed in auditory cortex. A key
concept of the model is that auditory feedback does not directly affect speech
motor output. Instead, incoming feedback is compared with an internally-
generated prediction of the expected feedback, with the resulting feedback
prediction error used to control speech output. The research tests whether the
responses of auditory cortex to feedback perturbations are consistent with this
model.

This project is important not only for understanding the neural circuits linking
speech perception and production. This project involves using state-of-the art
MSI methods to test predictions of an engineering control theory model of speech
feedback processing. The research team is trained in the speech research,
engineering control theory, signal processing, neuroscience and magnetic source
imaging methods needed to conduct this research. The project will enable
students and postdocs involved to gain experience in functional neuroimaging as
well as learn about control theory concepts - an area of knowledge important for
understanding motor control but usually neglected in the education of
neuroscience, bioengineering and cognitive science students. And although this
research is focused on speech motor control, its research emphasizes the
importance of studying perception in conjunction with production to understand
general problems in motor control and motor dysfunctions.