* 0349121
* CAREER: Novel Conjugated Macromolecules from Fused Heterocyclics and from Oxidative Solid-state Crosslinking
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Gregory Sotzing, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 02/28/2009
* USD 480,000.00

Professor Gregory A. Sotzing of the Institute of Materials Science at the
University of Connecticut is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program to study the polymerization of fused five-membered bicyclics
for the preparation of conjugated polymers. Having three sites of polymerization
within these monomers allows a rigorous study of differently linked linear
conjugated polymers. Professor Sotzing proposes to separately block each one of
the alpha sites of the fused bicyclics in order to prepare regio-irregular and
regio-regular polymers. Of significant merit will be a study of the differences
in conjugation. For example, polymerization through two positions of the fused
five-membered bicyclics will produce linear conjugated polymers containing a
locked cisoid conformation whereas polymerization through two different
positions on the same monomer will produce linear conjugated polymers containing
unique locked transoid conformations. The effect of regioregularity on the
optical and electronic properties of the polymers will also be probed. Due to
multiple conjugation pathways and the geometric locations of the three alpha
sites, these fused bicyclics will be used for the preparation of novel
conjugated macrocycles for possible use as molecular conductors, molecular
ordering on gold, and metal binding applications. In a separate study, Professor
Sotzing will explore the use of electrochemical atomic force microscopy (ECAFM)
coupled to his solid-state crosslinking procedure as a method to generate
conjugated polymer nanowires. This study will involve a fundamental examination
of the coupling process as it pertains to precursor polymer structure, polymer
swelling, and oxidation potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the
Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program Professor Sotzing will contribute
to an understanding of different pathways for conjugation in the materials
studied and determine if intrinsic conductivity can exist through multiple
pathways of a branch point. This could lead to future developments and a better
understanding of molecular electronics. By writing conductive polymer nanowires
and understanding this new writing technique, the research could, in the future,
lead toward tools to nanopattern optoelectronics and other nanoscale devices
such as transistors and sensors. Collaborative research will be performed at the
Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) studying the above-mentioned materials in
photovoltaic devices. This highly interdisciplinary research tied to a center of
excellence for applications, AFRL, will foster an environment of learning and
creativity for both graduate and undergraduate students. Within the proposed
period, electronic nose experiments will be incorporated into the high school
laboratory curriculum in order to educate secondary level students in the field
of electronic devices and how sensors are an essential component of homeland
security. This project will give the high school students a broader
understanding of how chemistry is intimately connected to technology on a
fundamental level.&lt;br/&gt;