* 0349451
* Oyate Consortium MIE Phase III
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2010
* Stacy Phelps, Oglala Lakota College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2010
* USD 3,362,831.00

The goal of the first two phases of the Model Institutions for Excellence
program was to develop and refine models for increasing graduates from
underrepresented groups in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) disciplines. To meet this goal, Oglala Lakota College served as the lead
institution of the Oyate Consortium, a group of five tribal colleges located in
South and North Dakota, which focused on developing STEM degree programs
targeting a Native American student base. Considering the Consortium started
from ground zero in terms of facilities, degrees offered, and qualified faculty,
the three remaining partner schools, OLC, Sitting Bull College and Sisseton-
Wahpeton Community College have been very successful in building strong science,
math and technology programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 1995 there were no STEM
degree programs at any of the Consortium schools. Today there are 112 degree
seeking students enrolled in Interdisciplinary Environmental Science,
Information Technology, Natural Science, SEM, and Computer Science. To date, the
schools have graduated 12 students with Bachelor degrees in Interdisciplinary
Environmental Science, and three transfer students have received their degrees
from other four-year institutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;During Phase III, OLC
plans to offer STEM Bachelor degree programs to 8 more two-year tribal
institutions via distance education. The objective is to expand the at-distance
student base from the current number of 16 at the two other Consortium schools
to a total of 91 and make an even broader impact in Native American science
education. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the program will be demonstrated
through the model developed by OLC for increasing STEM students from tribal
colleges. The broader impacts are the increased production of Native American
scientists. At the conclusion of Phase III, this model will be available for
distribution to other tribal schools that wish to either begin, or expand, STEM
programs. The MIE program has allowed OLC to meet and solve the problems
associated with developing a successful STEM initiative at a tribal college.
This includes administration buy-in, needs analysis, infrastructure development,
faculty recruitment, student support, and building regional partnerships to
expand undergraduate research project opportunities and collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Phase III will allow the MIE program to wind down and
become institutionalized. The &lt;br/&gt;OLC administration has committed funds
to support its MIE faculty members after three years. Partnerships are in place
with other colleges and universities, and tribal and federal agencies to sustain
program projects. The foundation that was set during Phase I and II will
continue to support STEM degree programs and students through graduation. The
Oyate Consortium will continue to work together to keep each college a Model
Institution for Excellence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;