* 0349610
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultra-Broadband Ferrite Circulators/Isolators
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Hoton How, HOTECH INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2006
* USD 500,000.00

0349610&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovative Research Phase II
project addresses the development of&lt;br/&gt;Innovative Ultra-Broadband
Ferrite Circulators/Isolators. A conventional 3-port ferrite&lt;br/&gt;stripline
junction circulator involves a low-Q ferrite stripline resonator so that at
the&lt;br/&gt;circulation frequencies standing-wave resonant modes are excited
dumping microwave &lt;br/&gt;energy from the input port to the output port but
not the isolation port. Operation of a &lt;br/&gt;conventional ferrite
circulator is nonreciprocal, and the transmission bandwidth is
&lt;br/&gt;roughly proportional to the inverse of the Q-factor of the resonator,
due to the&lt;br/&gt;standing-wave nature of the excited resonant modes. A new
picture of ferrite-circulator&lt;br/&gt;operation utilizing traveling-wave
coupling of microwave signals at the circulation &lt;br/&gt;frequencies haa been
discovered. This is in contrast to the operation of the
conventional&lt;br/&gt;circulators employing standing waves for coupling. As
such, ultra-broadband operation of&lt;br/&gt;the circulators results, whose
bandwidth has been measured in Phase I to cover from 1.6 to&lt;br/&gt;16 GHz for
a prototype device. It is not possible to acheive this bandwidth with a
conventional&lt;br/&gt;circulator. This leads to a new generation of ferrite
circulators or isolators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the LTCC technology
facilitates mass production in large quantities. As such, generic
&lt;br/&gt;microwave circulators and isolators can be fabricated at low costs
suitable for universal&lt;br/&gt;applications covering across many frequency
bands. Ferrite-circulator operation does not &lt;br/&gt;require a ferrite
resonator anymore. This requirement has been constantly enforced by
the&lt;br/&gt;operation of a conventional circulator for more than 50 years.
There is always a tremendous&lt;br/&gt;need for circulators or isolators which
are able to provide signal-path separation or protection&lt;br/&gt;over many
frequency bands, as demanded by the measurement of a broadband signal and by
a&lt;br/&gt;narrow electromagnetic pulse.