* 0349609
* SBIR Phase II:    Nanoporous Silica Slurries  for Enhanced Chemical Mechanical Planarization (CMP) of Low k Dielectrics
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Deepika Singh, SINMAT, INC.
* Standard Grant
* William Haines
* 08/31/2006
* USD 636,889.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to develop unique
chemical mechanical planarization (CMP) slurries based on nanoporous silica
particles that will meet or exceed CMP needs of low k dielectrics for the 80 nm
and beyond semiconductor manufacturing nodes. The integration of low k
dielectrics (dielectric constant 2.2 < k < 3.3) with copper metal lines is
expected to considerably reduce RC (resistance x capacitance) delay for > 10 GHz
CMOS expected devices in the next 3-5 years. One of the key issues plaguing the
semiconductor industry is the chemical mechanical planarization (CMP) of
copper/tantalum/low k dielectric materials. The low k dielectrics are fragile
and are susceptible to both delamination and scratching (increased defectivity).
Standard slurries employing hard abrasives may not meet the requirements for
sub-80 nm CMOS devices which are expected to employ low k dielectric materials.
The program proposes to develop & commercialize gentle CMP slurries based on
nanoporous silica particles which exhibit reduced hardness and better stability.
Combined with unique chemical formulations, these slurries are expected to
achieve lower defectivity (surface scratching) and lower stress polishing than
standard slurries. In this Phase II project extensive experiments will be
conducted both in-house and with our partners (semiconductor chip manufacturers)
to optimize performance and integration issues.

Commercially this research activity has significant impact not only in the
semiconductor manufacturing areas, but also in may other areas such as
biotechnology and nanotechnology, which are the key areas identified by the
government for the future viability of US business. First and foremost it will
ensure US can maintain its lead in CMP, even though semiconductor manufacturing
jobs have been migrating overseas. As CMP slurries is the largest value added
application of the nanoparticle technology (> 50%) excellence in this area will
provide employment to nanotechnology graduates in the near future and could be a
direct application of the skills they have acquired. This research will lead to
the creation of faster electronic devices, which will in turn benefit the
society to become more economically productive. The development of nanoporous
particle technology can have applications in several other areas including
controlled drug delivery systems.



