* 0349845
* Human Heredity, Genetics, and Politics During the Third Reich
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Sheila Weiss, Clarkson University
* Fixed Amount Award
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2007
* USD 86,248.00

Despite an ever-growing scholarly industry on the biomedical sciences as
practiced in Nazi Germany, most of the studies are either highly specialized,
written in German, or have focused almost exclusively on medicine and medical
crimes under National Socialism. There has been a decided lack of secondary
literature dealing with the investigation of human genetics under the swastika-
the science that informed much of the medical work and medical crimes that have
forever tarnished the reputation of the "healing profession" during the Third
Reich.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed book-length project will provide a corrective to
this current historiographical lacuna. It should simultaneously contribute to
the scholarly development of the history of the biomedical sciences during the
Third Reich and be accessible to a lay audience -especially upper division
undergraduates-without compromising intellectual content. The hope is that it
will be employed in the university classroom in a wide variety of
courses.&lt;br/&gt;The volume's scholarly value lies especially in its
overarching framework: the interface of human heredity and politics under
National Socialism. This is a non-moralizing and non-reductionist paradigm that
holds great promise for clarifying the treatment of human heredity under the
swastika. The topic is also a timely one, especially given 1) the recent
research conducted on the subject in Germany and 2) the perceived links between
Nazi human genetics, pre-1945 eugenics, and various contemporary genetic
technologies. No less a prominent molecular biologist than James Watson has
recently commented on this very issue.&lt;br/&gt;Given the concern over social
and ethical policy issues surrounding current biotechnological practices, the
proposed volume should serve an important social function. It will demonstrate
the role of historical contingency in scientific practice. If lay people can be
made to understand the historically specific conditions that structured human
heredity and eugenics under the swastika, superficial analyses, which
unfortunately still color debates over the implementation of current genetic
technologies should become less frequent. The volume will thus contribute both
to a widening of genetic literacy as well as aid those interested in
articulating an informed opinion on current debates surrounding contemporary
genetic technologies.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the volume should address an important
pedagogical need: educators have argued that students, especially those in the
fields of science and engineering, are ill-prepared for the ethical decisions
they will confront as professionals. Classroom experience shows that
technically-oriented students are not taken in by simplistic historical accounts
of ethical problems pertaining to their field. The collection of essays will
demonstrate the range of ethical issues stemming from dilemmas that real human
geneticists were forced to confront under a dictatorship-many of which are
applicable in democratic societies as well. As such, the articles contained in
this volume will be relevant to students' own professional lives and to those of
other lay people who read the volume.&lt;br/&gt;