* 0349255
* CAREER: Development Plan for Optical / Nuclear Double Resonance Studies of Proteins and Inclusion Complexes Oriented in Liquid Crystalline Matrices
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2010
* Boyd Goodson, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 01/31/2010
* USD 552,000.00

In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Prof. Boyd Goodson of Southern Illinois University at
Carbondale will engage in NMR and optical/nuclear double resonance (ONDR)
studies of the structure and dynamics of molecular and (bio)macromolecular
complexes in liquid-crystalline matrices. The goal is to bring about an improved
understanding of host-guest interactions, protein-ligand binding events, and
other biological phenomena involving weak but specific interactions. In a second
part of this project he will incorporate these research initiatives into the
undergraduate physical chemistry curriculum while mentoring undergraduate
students in independent research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research part
consists of three related components: 1) the preparation and NMR investigation
of inclusion complexes and xenon-protein complexes oriented in various
crystalline matrices; 2) the use of laser-polarized xenon to probe interactions
with complex-forming molecules and proteins via spin-spin cross-relaxation; and
3) the combination of these two components, whereby the interactions will be
amplified by both the optical enhancement of xenon nuclear magnetization and the
restoration of dipolar couplings between xenon and host molecules using liquid
crystals. The research will be conducted with graduate and undergraduate
students. The integration of research into the undergraduate curriculum will
emphasize depth over breadth, inquiry-based learning, and exposure to state-of-
the-art methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;