* 0349436
* Microlayer and Nanolayer Polymeric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Eric Baer, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2006
* USD 350,500.00

Layer-multiplying technology will be used to fabricate unique structures of
otherwise incompatible polymers. In contrast to the well-known concept of self-
assembly, layer multiplication uses forced-assembly to create thousands of
alternating nanolayers of two polymers with individual layer thickness less than
10 nm. The assemblies of thousands of continuous polymer nanolayers fabricated
by this method are easily handled and are amenable to characterization by
conventional methods of polymer analysis. This allows us to probe phenomena that
occur only on the size scale of the macromolecule, and to fabricate new
materials that incorporate the unique properties of this size scale. The
proposed research intends to: (1) Explore the polymer "interphase" that forms
when two immiscible polymers are brought into intimate contact, and create new
materials based on the unique properties of the "interphase"; (2) Explore
crystallization of polymers in confined nanolayer spaces; (3) Investigate melt
breakup of nanolayers into nanodroplets, and subsequent fractionated nucleation
and crystallization of nanodroplets; and (4) Create nanofibers and nonoporous
membranes by orientation of nanolayered films.

Motivated by the need for new processing technologies to develop the engineered
nanstructures of the future, a facility for layer-multiplying coextrusion was
developed at Case Western Reserve University. The laboratory at CWRU is the only
facility at a public institution with the processing flexibility needed to
explore the wide range of new materials systems possible with this technology.
The graduate and undergraduate students that participate in the research will
have the opportunity to use a unique coextrusion process, to address fundamental
problems related to the behavior of polymers at the nanoscale, and to design and
realize materials systems that were not possible previously. Through written and
oral communications, the fundamental insights and the unique opportunities
provided by this versatile technology will be translated to the field at large,
including the industrial sector. Ultimately, nanoprocessing, as exemplified by
nanolayer coextrusion, can be the basis for creating "smart" materials with
multiple functions. Fabrication of tough films and sheet that possess specific
optical properties, and additionally exhibit barrier characteristics or unusual
electronic properties, seems possible.

