* 0349856
* The Genetic Basis of Reproductive Senescence and Longevity in Drosophila melanogaster
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Jeffery Leips, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2007
* USD 265,998.00

Most organisms exhibit senescence, the physiological deterioration with age that
ultimately limits life span. The rate of senescence and life span are highly
variable among species, populations, and individuals, and a large body of data
suggests that these traits are under some level of genetic control.
Identification of the genes that produce this variation is important for
understanding both the causes and evolution of aging. A series of gene mapping
experiments is proposed to identify and characterize the effects of candidate
genes for these traits, using the fruitfly, Drosophila melanogaster, as a model
system. The flies used for mapping will be derived from a natural population.
The effects of natural genetic variation on these traits will reveal the extent
to which they are influenced by similar genetic
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make several contributions to
the broader scientific community. Identification of genes involved in senescence
in Drosophila could implicate new gene networks in human aging, and thus have
important medical implications. All fly stocks and sequence data will be made
freely available to other scientists. Students will be educated about the
mechanistic and evolutionary theories of aging while gaining hands-on experience
in quantitative and molecular genetics, experimental design and data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;