* 0349183
* CAREER: Infant Spatial Cognition and the Acquisition of Spatial Language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Marianella Casasola, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 07/31/2010
* USD 400,000.00

The research supported by the CAREER award to Dr. Casasola will examine the
cognitive and linguistic abilities that guide infants' and toddlers' acquisition
of spatial language. Although languages differ in how they describe spatial
events, young children display little difficulty acquiring the semantic
categories that are specific to their language. For example, English-learning
toddlers learn to map the English preposition "in" onto all types of containment
events, for example, placing a peg in a block. Korean-learning toddlers
correctly learn to map the Korean spatial verb, "kkita," onto tight-fit
containment as well as tight-fit support events, for example, putting a peg in a
block made to fit and a Lego block on another Lego block. Hence, by their second
birthday, toddlers have begun to acquire language-specific semantic spatial
categories, attending to those spatial relations (e.g., tight-fit) that are
lexically are relevant to their language. When and how do infants and toddlers
acquire the concept of containment described in the English term "in" or the
concept of tight-fit described in the Korean term "kkita"? Are language-specific
semantic categories drawn from infants' nonlinguistic spatial categories, for
example, the result of infants' nonlinguistic processing of their spatial world?
Or are the concepts expressed in semantic spatial categories instead acquired as
the result of experience with a particular language? The current research
project is designed to address these questions. A multifaceted, multi-
methodological approach is taken to explore aspects of infants' and toddlers'
perceptual, cognitive, and linguistic development. Specifically, the research
program explores the role of nonlinguistic spatial cognition in the acquisition
of language-specific semantic spatial categories by exploring the types of
spatial categories formed by infants within different linguistic environments.
The research program explores the possible role of linguistic input in the
formation of language-specific semantic categories by documenting whether
language can motivate infants to form nonlinguistic and semantic spatial
categories. The research also examines the early acquisition of spatial language
in infants and toddlers from different linguistic environments. The results are
expected to advance our understanding of the processes guiding infant
categorization and toddlers' early linguistic development. The results also will
address how development may vary in infants and toddlers raised with languages
other than English. The research program is integrated with an educational
program in which students from underrepresented minorities will be recruited to
help conduct the research, especially those who have first-hand experience
negotiating two languages and who can provide an insider's perspective on the
language-thought issues being explored. Because a number of different
methodologies will be employed, students will gain expertise in the use of a
diverse array of methods, such as visual habituation, preferential-looking,
action-imitation tasks, and act-out comprehension, as well as an understanding
of the different data yielded by each methodology. The goal of this education
program is to provide the field with independent researchers from
underrepresented minorities who will seek academic positions, contribute to the
field as scientists and educators, and function as mentors and role models for
other students from underrepresented minorities.