* 0349724
* SBIR Phase II:  Automatic Information Awareness
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2007
* Yves Schabes, Teragram Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ian M. Bennett
* 12/31/2007
* USD 998,080.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
study and implement a large-scale information awareness system which will fuse,
present and provide an alert as to the existence of newly available information
from large bodies of documents based on each user's profile. The amount of
information available electronically has been growing at such a rate that it is
not only impossible for people to identify the nature of the information content
as it is made available, but it is even more out of the question for people to
absorb the actual information content. Thus, awareness of and synthesis of the
content of information has now become the real challenge. This project will
enable users to specify their interests and to detect new information trends
matching each individual user's interests, based on the relevance and importance
of newly available information. By extracting information from unstructured
texts, categorizing it, and fusing it, each user will be presented with a unique
view of the content.

Teragram profiler technology allows users to specify information needs for the
future. It will provide an alert mechanism based on user specified interests
contained in user profiles, measurement and formulation of information speed,
volume, decay; and fusion of information found in multiple documents. Such
techniques will enable the next generations of information retrieval systems in
which information will be tailored to the users' interests thus enabling easy
access to relevant information found in large repositories.