* 0349632
* NSF-Europe:  Atomic Defects and Their Dramatic Influence on Nanoscale Electrical, Elastic, and Optical Properties in Ferroelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Venkatraman Gopalan, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2007
* USD 342,425.00

The central goal of this proposal is to probe the static and dynamic
interactions between domain walls and atomic defects structure, and their
influence on the nanoscale electrical, elastic and optical properties of
ferroelectrics. Ferroelectrics have built-in electrical polarization in their
crystal structure that can be switched by an external field. In classic
ferroelectrics lithium niobate, LiNbO3 and lithium tantalate, LiTaO3, the PIs
have recently discovered dramatic order-of-magnitude changes in the macroscale
properties (such as coercive fields, internal fields, domain structure, lattice
strain and optical properties) with small amounts of non-stoichiometry in the
crystals. The nanoscale local structure of a single ferroelectric domain wall
also exhibits wide regions of strain, electric fields and optical birefringence
(over micrometers) that are contrary to the theoretical expectations from an
atomically sharp antiparallel wall (nanometer). Experimental evidence suggests
point defect complexes as the main reason for this discrepancy. These
discoveries open up a host of fundamental questions about the interaction
between atomic defects and ferroelectric lattice from nano-to-macro scales. A
focused multifaceted approach is used combining experimental and theoretical
tools. This approach consists of experimentally probing defects using optical
and magnetic spectroscopy of "designer" probe ions, combined with probing the
local structure of domain walls such as strains, local electric fields,
polarization gradient, and nanoscale optical properties using X-ray synchrotron
imaging, and near-field optical and scanning probe microscopies. These
experimental studies will be closely coupled with atomistic modeling of point
defect complexes, domain walls, and their interactions using electronic-
structure and atomic-level approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; There are many
applications of ferroelectric materials, such as micro-drills used in eye
surgery, high speed optical modulators for a fast internet, underwater pressure
sensors in submarines, and bar-code readers at grocery checkout counters. In
these applications, the material is manipulated by adding small amounts of
dopants that can dramatically alter the macroscopic properties. This largely
empirical body of knowledge is exploited in industry today but lacks a
fundamental grounding in precisely how these point defects function on a
nanoscale and how these interactions scale up to influence macroscale
properties. This work aims at a level of understanding that would enable
science-based strategies to "design" materials with desired
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This NSF project is co-funded by the Division
of Materials Research (Ceramics) and the International Office (Western Europe)
as a Cooperative Activity in Materials Research between the NSF and Europe (NSF
02-135). This project is being carried out in collaboration with the Applied
Physics and Optical Communications groups (Profs. Sohler, Zrenner, and Noe) at
the University of Paderborn, Germany and the Applied Optics Group (Prof. Buse)
at the University of Bonn, Germany. &lt;br/&gt;