* 0349326
* CAREER: Multifunctional Materials from Organic-Free Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2009
* Pingyun Feng, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 01/31/2009
* USD 570,000.00

The proposed research integrates synthesis and structural characterization with
electrochemical and photocatalytic measurements to develop multifunctional
inorganic chalcogenides from organic-free systems. New materials prepared from
this project will mimic natural zeolites with porous architecture encapsulating
mobile inorganic cations. By combining nanoporosity with fast-ion conductivity
or photocatalytic activity, these materials can be used as crystalline solid
electrolytes, size- or shape-selective photocatalysts, or high-surface-area
photo-electrodes and have great potential for applications in a range of
economically important technologies such as batteries, electrochemical sensors,
solar energy conversion, and fuel cells. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This project
is directly related to both short- and long-term National interests of the
general public because of its relevance to energy and environmental sciences. In
addition, it serves to increase students' exposure and stimulate their interest
in frontier areas of solid state and materials chemistry. It will provide
excellent training opportunities in the latest experimental techniques for both
undergraduate and graduate students. The project will encourage diverse
participation of students since the University of California - Riverside campus
that has the highest African-American and highest Hispanic enrollment of any of
the nine University of California campuses. The type of outreach programs under
development include the PI's summer 10-week training sessions in materials
chemistry offered to both high-school teachers and students.