* 0349497
* SBIR Phase II:     Relational Bayesian Modeling for Electronic Commerce
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2004,01/31/2007
* Bruce D'Ambrosio, ESHOPPERTOOLS.COM INC
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 01/31/2007
* USD 949,894.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will focus on scale-up
and validation of the company's relational model discovery technology, with
specific application focus on web-visitor behavior modeling. In Phase I research
the company developed a modeling paradigm based a synthetic variable language
for relational Bayesian modeling. Its synthetic variable language is the first
comprehensive effort to develop a principled way to represent, discover, and
perform probabilistic inference with mixed intra-table, cross-table, and multi-
table relational features. This capability provides the basis for construction
of comprehensive, integrated models of relational data. Models constructed
capture the rich detail of web visitor behavior and can be used to make
inferences about web visitor intent (e.g., whether or not a purchase in planned)
in real- time. These results are not obtainable by any other modeling
technology. The technical objectives for the Phase II project are to: (1)
develop a complete language to establish solutions to outstanding issues in our
synthetic variable capability, (2) engineer the infrastructure needed for
commercial deployment, (3) construct deployable models of web visitor behavior
to identify opportunities for intervention, and (4) conduct field-trials of
model-based interventions to establish the business value of our approach. A
paradox of modern society is that we possess so little knowledge relative to the
amount of data we collect and store. E-commerce provides a paradigmatic example
of this paradox. E-Commerce platforms collect unprecedented amounts of
information about customer interactions, yet today's E-commerce applications do
not provide the service expected by customers or the performance demanded by
online retailers. Online retailers are demanding increasingly sophisticated
marketing and merchandising technologies. The proposed product will empower
online merchants and service providers by enabling efficient and integrated
understanding of online consumer behavior.

The proposed product will bring in a new class of customer centric (instead of
page-centric) web-based interactions that will contribute to the evolution of
the World Wide Web as a communication medium. The company's technology also
applies to offline scientific analysis as a method for hypothesis generation in
complex relational data as in the E-commerce domain. This technology enables
scientists to make better use of the data at their disposal.