* 0349078
* CAREER:  Adhesion of Patterned Polymer Interfaces
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2009
* Alfred Crosby, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Andrew J. Lovinger
* 09/30/2009
* USD 424,800.00

The adhesion of polymers underpins numerous applications ranging from MEMS to
tissue engineering. The complex relationships between surface chemistry,
viscoeleastic properties, and spatial heterogeneities create unique challenges
in developing fundamental principles to actively guide surface-driven phenomena,
such as directed cell growth. This career program aims to develop novel, yet
practical, patterns of surface chemistry, molecular architecture, and topography
to not only control, but also understand, the fundamental principles of polymer
adhesion.

This research will impact future technologies while also advancing the
fundamental knowledge of polymer adhesion. Specifically, the systematic control
of patterns will be used to determine the physical relationship between the
spatial frequency of heterogeneities and the activated mechanism of molecular
dissipation in the near-surface material. The length scale of the surface
patterns will provide insight into the primary length scales for the controlling
mechanism of adhesion for soft-polymer architectures. The use of surface
chemical and compositional patterns will probe the influence of neighboring
polymer domains on the screening, or confinement, of the adhesion of local
polymer molecules. The overall program will work toward the development of a
unifying relationship between topography, surface chemistry, and polymer
rheological properties in the context of polymer adhesion and tribology. %%%
This Career Program is designed to have a broad impact on the education and
future careers of high school students, undergraduates and graduate students, as
well as on the success of future important technologies. The balance of
practical purpose with fundamental science provides a stimulating environment
for undergraduate and graduate research. This environment will be augmented with
formal collaborations with industry and national laboratories, such as the
National Institute of Standards and Technology. Specifically, the educational
program will teach students the skills of project management, leadership, and
mentoring through a dedicated program build around polymer science research.
This program serves to strengthen industry and academia, while equalizing the
opportunity for success for all populations, most importantly women and
minorities. This equalization is targeted through the training of "soft" skills
which often define career-advancement in both industry and academia.
Furthermore, the incorporation of an outreach program as a training device for
these "soft" skills will impact local underrepresented high school students by
encouraging them to pursue science-related careers through an extended research
experience. The technical research program will benefit society through the
development of environmentally-friendly "smart" adhesives and anti-fouling
coatings. Additionally, the power of combinatorial methodologies will be
communicated to industry, academia, and most importantly future scientists
through combinatorial-based research experiences for graduate and undergraduate
students.

