* 0349013
* CAREER: Peptidoconjugates as Models of Protein and DNA Damage
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2004,12/31/2008
* Shana Kelley, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 12/31/2008
* USD 597,000.00

Professor Shana Kelley of the Department of Chemistry at Boston College is
supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry and the Biomolecular Systems Program in the Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences Division to understand a previously unexplored pathway for DNA
damage: the scission of the DNA backbone by oxidized protein residues. Oxidative
damage to DNA and proteins is known to be highly deleterious to cellular
function, but the interrelationship between the two types of damage events has
not been considered. A family of peptide conjugates is under study that models
reactions occurring between oxidized protein residues and DNA. A photoactive
intercalator contained within the conjugate produces singlet oxygen upon
photoexcitation, which reacts with appended residues to generate reactive
peroxides that cleave DNA. Professor Kelley studies will identify the amino
acids that are most reactive with DNA and will elucidate the chemical mechanism
of strand cleavage. She will also investigate how the chemical structures of
amino acids impact their reactivities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from
the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program and the Biomolecular Systems
Program Professor Kelley will contribute to the fundamental knowledge about
mechanisms of biomolecular deactivation in vivo, an issue of importance to
chemists and biologists. The project will also provide interdisciplinary
training to graduate, undergraduate, and high school students with diverse
backgrounds. The broader impact of the research program will be extended through
efforts to actively mentor and recruit talented young women studying the
chemical sciences at all levels. A plan is proposed that will provide outreach
to women in the Boston area who are considering and pursuing careers in
chemistry. The aim of this effort is to prevent attrition and promote an influx
of women into high-level positions within academia, industry, and other
organizations. Outreach to high school students and teachers is also in progress
to increase awareness of the exciting possibilities for careers in chemical
research. In addition, continued active mentoring of graduate and undergraduate
students will be pursued to ensure that talented young scientists obtain
fulfilling and stimulating educational experiences.&lt;br/&gt;