* 0349232
* CAREER: Mesoscopic Thermal and Thermoelectric Transport in Low Dimensional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Philip Kim, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2009
* USD 450,000.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project at Columbia
University is to investigate mesoscopic thermal and thermoelectrical transport
properties in nanoscale materials. In this research, innovative experimental
techniques based on microfabrication, microelectromechanical systems techniques,
and thermal imaging scanning probe microscopy will be employed to explore new
physical phenomena in these materials at quantum transport limit. Specifically,
electrical conductance, thermal conductance, and thermoelectric power will be
measured in carbon nanotubes and various nanowires using specially designed
submicron scale devices. This investigation will unveil the relationship between
reversible and irreversible transport processes of quantum mechanics and
thermodynamics at mesoscopic scales. In addition, the proposed research will
help to search for thermoelectric applications of nanoscale materials in the
quantum transport regime. The educational component of this proposal is intended
to enhance synergetic effects in both research and education. In particular, an
interactive physics demonstration laboratory for local high school science class
with the aid of the web page based internet communications is planned. This
activity is designed to foster interests of local underrepresented student group
in science and technology.

Although the electrical transport in nanometer scaled systems has been studied
extensively, the investigation of the thermal and thermoelectric transport has
received much less attention. The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) project at Columbia University is to explore new thermal transport and
thermoelectric phenomena in low-dimensional materials, particularly when the
quantum mechanical coherence length of the energy-carrying particles is
comparable to the sample dimensions. This investigation will unveil the
relationship between reversible and irreversible transport processes of quantum
mechanics and thermodynamics in nanometer scaled materials. Furthermore, the
unique thermoelectric properties of the low-dimensional nanometer scaled
materials make them potential candidates for replacing century old technologies
of refrigeration and electricity generation. This proposal seeks to find
applications of these materials for thermoelectric cooling and generation, which
lays the bases for a clean future energy technology using nanoscience. The
educational component of this proposal emphasizes interactively integrated
educational/research programs for local high school and undergraduate science
education. The proposed internet based program will promote understanding of
science among students, and also will help to encourage the participation of
underrepresented groups in science and technology progress.