* 0349433
* Planning of NEES/E-Defense International Collaboration
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2003,01/31/2005
* David Rosowsky, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 01/31/2005
* USD 50,000.00

PI: John van de Lindt, Michigan Tech

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) proposal is requesting funding
to support the development of collaborative linkages with the E-Defense large
shake table facility being constructed in Japan. The SGER grant also will
support the development of a full proposal to NSF through the NEESR (Network for
Earthquake Engineering Simulation / Research Phase) program. The dual objectives
of this larger proposal will be (1) to partially tie the large shake table
facility in Japan into the NEES grid, and (2) address the seismic performance of
woodframe structures in the overall NEES framework. Wood structures are the most
common structures in the United States, comprising more than 80% of the building
inventory. They further represent the largest segment of the inventory at
regions of the highest seismic risk. Wood will remain a widely used building
material for low-rise structures, in both dimension lumber form and new wood-
based materials. The performance of woodframe structures in the Northridge
earthquake further underscored the need for improved methods for (a) assessing
the vulnerability of the existing building stock, and (b) design of new
structures to better withstand earthquakes with acceptably small amounts of
damage to both structural and nonstructural elements. The funds requested for
this SGER grant will primarily be used to (1) travel to Japan to further develop
collaborative testing plans, (2) travel to 2-3 NEES facility sites (and possibly
the University of British Columbia, Canada) to identify suitable assembly
testing facilities, (3) travel to Washington, DC to meet with the cognizant NSF
personnel. A small amount of support costs also will be requested. If possible,
and if deemed to be appropriate, the PI.s will schedule their visit to Japan to
coincide with the .2003 Pan-Pacific Symposium for Earthquake Engineering
Collaboration. being held by Japan.s National Research Institute for Earth
Science and Disaster Prevention (NIED) Sept. 30 - Oct. 3. It is anticipated that
2-3 additional researchers from the US as well as collaborating researchers from
New Zealand (Bruce Deam, University of Canterbury), Canada (Frank Lam,
University of British Columbia), Italy (Ario Ceccotti, University of Florence),
will join this project and be part of the larger proposal to NSF. The lead
investigators from Japan will be Dr. Chikahiro Minowa (NIED) and Professor Isao
Sakamoto (University of Tokyo). Although the project will involve five countries
the NEESR proposal will be written so that the US-Japan collaboration is self-
contained. It is anticipated that the collaborating researchers will apply for
funding from their countries. Thus, the success of the US-Japanese collaboration
will not be dependent on their ability to secure funding to support their
activities. The international collaborative effort will be led by the PI.s of
this proposal (van de Lindt and Rosowsky). The intellectual merit of the
proposed SGER project is in the development of a collaborative research program
between NEES and E-Defense in Japan. The broad objective of this collaboration,
which will be fully developed in the anticipated NEESR proposal at the end of
this year, is the development of system-level performance information necessary
to more fully develop performance-based seismic design procedures for woodframe
structures. The proposed SGER project will have a broader impact on both the
scientific community and society at large. The earthquake engineering community
will benefit from having the E-Defense shake table tied into the NEES grid. This
linkage will provide six-DOF system level knowledge for researchers, thus
allowing critical understanding of the relationship between assembly damage and
damage at the system level. The broader impact for society will be the
development of more effective seismic design codes and a building inventory that
is less susceptible to earthquake damage under moderate events.