* 0349315
* CAREER: Nanothin Films with Selective Pores - Synthesis and Application in Nanobioreactors
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Evgueni Pinkhassik, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2010
* USD 506,683.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Pinkhassic, of the Chemistry department at the University of Memphis,
will construct thin-film nanocapsules for use as nano-bioreactors in which
enzymes will be immobilized. These nano-reactors will be constructed by
photochemical polymerization and cross-linking of various olefinic monomers
dissolved in the hydrophobic interior of the membrane bilayers of liposomes
leading to thin polymer shells. These shells will be released from the membrane
by dissolution in detergent solution. By including globular hydrolyzable
hydrophobic molecules, the author plans to create pores in the polymer films
with the flexibility to line the channels with hydrophobic or hydrophilic
interiors. The construction of new porous polymerized lipsome-like materials
will open up a range of new possibilities in many areas including biotechnology,
separation science, and drug transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of
the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division, Professor Pinkhassic
will pursue an educational strategy designed to expand the horizons of
undergraduate students to the richness of interdisciplinary research. To this
end he will develop several interdisciplinary courses at the undergraduate level
and involve undergraduates in the interdisciplinary research in his laboratory.
Researchers and educators from Rhodes College and Oak Ridge National Laboratory
will also be included in these efforts. Outreach to pre-college students in the
Memphis area, which is rich in underrepresented minorities, will be accomplished
by demonstrations of nanotechnology/supramolecular chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;