* 0349860
* Workshop on the Combined Modeling of Social and Physical Infrastructure Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Terry Friesz, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/2005
* USD 83,000.00

Abstract: Workshop on the Emergence of the Field of Network Science and Its
Application to the Study of Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;In the past five years a
number of physicists, Internet theorists, social scientists and specialists in
dynamic systems and complexity have made major strides in the development of a
general theory of networks. This theory and its empirical foundation, which some
have called network science, seeks to explain why networks appear and how they
grow and evolve. A recent book by Albert-Laszlo Barabasi (2002) marks the
coalescence and emergence of network science as a field of scientific inquiry.
The agreement of other scholars with Barabasi's assertion that a new science of
networks is emerging is documented in the recent comprehensive review of complex
networks by M. E. J. Newman (2003). &lt;br/&gt;Some of the most important
contributions to network science have been made by social scientists studying
human activities expressed as so-called social networks. Many of the same
general properties identified for physical networks, such as small worldness and
scale freeness, have been discovered within social networks. The review by
Newman explicitly recognizes the interdisciplinary nature of network science
research and the major contributions to it made by social
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;An unanswered question is whether the results of network
science will prove useful in engineering applications. A specific version of
this question is whether network science can be applied to the study of
infrastructure networks. Especially interesting is the potential of fusing
social network models which describe human activity patterns in great detail
with traditional operations research network models to create a new generation
of network models for better understanding the interaction of social and
infrastructure networks. &lt;br/&gt;In fact the main theme of the workshop will
be the fusion of social and physical networks. Consistent with this general
theme, the workshop will explore how best to construct models that combine
detailed social networks with network flow models traditionally used to study
physical infrastructure. The dominant physical infrastructure to be considered
will be transportation, although participants with backgrounds in
telecommunication networks, financial networks and water resource networks will
also be sought.&lt;br/&gt;The broad impacts of this workshop include 1) engaging
diverse communities of researchers (specifically social scientists and physical
infrastructure engineers) in areas linked by a common science; 2) published
proceedings and complete audio-visual recording of the workshop documenting the
exchange; and 3) the potential to understand the link between network topology
robustness and exposure to attack as well as network resilience and self
organization.&lt;br/&gt;