* 0350626
* Biophotonics:  Collaborative Research:  Photoactivated Coupling of Nanoparticle Multilayers and Nerve Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2003,08/31/2005
* Nicholas Kotov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2005
* USD 239,082.00

0119483&lt;br/&gt;Kotov&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in nanotechnology and
bioengineering have opened the exciting prospect for promoting direct
interaction of electronics, optics and biological systems. The primary obstacle
to realizing this goal in the fields of neuroscience and medical devices such as
prostheses is the inadequate understanding of the molecular processes involved
in coupling between living neurons and nanomaterials, and how to optimize the
coupling between man made materials and living systems. In this project, the
intent is to investigate the dynamics and mechanisms of the live/lifeless matter
interaction in a model system consisting of a thin film composed of
nanoparticles and cultured nerve cells. The multi-disciplinary and multi-
institutional "Linked Collaborative Proposals " bring together several research
groups with broad expertise and research interest to conduct experimental and
theoretical studies aimed at characterizing the interaction that occur at the
interface of nanomaterials and neurons and optimizing the interface for
effective photon-activation of neurons following photonic probing of the
interface of nanomaterials that are attached to the cells. The partners at
Oklahoma State University lead by Dr. Kotov will carry out the materials science
aspect of this project, while the investigation at the University of Texas
Medical Branch lead by Dr. Motamedi will concentrate on the bioengineering and
electrophysiological components of this work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the objectives of the proje ct are the
following. (1) Preparation of biocompatible nanoparticle multilayers that can be
attached to nerve cells. (2) Registration and characterization of the
photoinduced nerve cell membrane currents and potentials following optical
excitation of the interface as function of NP and biological structures. (3)
Optimization of NP-cell coupling for different interface structure. &lt;br/&gt;