* 0350183
* Directed Evolution of a Glycosynthase Via Chemical Complementation
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2004,02/29/2008
* Virginia Cornish, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 02/29/2008
* USD 539,000.00

With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Virginia W. Cornish of Columbia University will develop a general,
high-throughput assay for enzyme catalysis that allows directed evolution to be
applied to a broad range of chemical reactions. During the previous granting
period, the Cornish laboratory developed a general, high throughput assay for
enzyme catalysis based on the yeast three-hybrid assay (Chemical
Complementation) that should allow directed evolution to be applied to a broad
range of chemical reactions. This assay detects enzyme catalysis of bond
formation or bond cleavage reactions based on covalent coupling of two small
molecule ligands in vivo. The heterodimeric ligand reconstitutes a
transcriptional activator, turning on transcription of a reporter gene. Bond
formation is detected as activation of an essential reporter gene; bond
cleavage, repression of a toxic reporter gene. The assay is high-throughput
because it can be run as a growth selection where only the cells containing
functional enzyme survive. The assay can be readily extended to new chemistry
simply by synthesizing dimeric ligands with different substrates as chemical
linkers. Here, it is proposed to apply this assay to the directed evolution of
glycosynthases, enzymes that can be used for carbohydrate synthesis.
Carbohydrates remain one of the few classes of natural products that are still
difficult to synthesize with modern synthetic methods. Enzymes can provide an
obvious alternative for carbohydrate synthesis because of their control of
regio- and stereochemistry. In preliminary results, Professor Cornish has shown
that Chemical Complementation can detect the glycosynthase activity of a known
glycosidase variant using a LEU2 growth selection. The long-term goal of this
research is to use directed evolution to generate glycosynthase variants with a
range of substrate specificities for carbohydrate synthesis. The immediate
objective of this proposal is to use the selection to improve the in vivo
expression of the enzyme to allow for use of the glycosynthase on a preparative
scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
supports Professor Virginia W. Cornish of Columbia University whose research
using directed evolution has the potential to make it possible to routinely
generate proteins with new functions for use as reagents for chemical synthesis
and biomedical research, in chemical products, and even as therapeutics. This
research also is ideal for training students to work at the interface of
chemistry and biology. These projects involve synthetic chemistry, protein
chemistry, and yeast genetics. In addition to training Ph.D. students, these
projects are used to introduce undergraduates to laboratory research through an
NSF-REU program and the Columbia University GSAS Summer Research Program for
Minority Undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;