* 0350157
* Dissertation Research:  Dixy Lee Ray: Marine Biologist and Public Scientist
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Mary Jo Nye, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 12/31/2005
* USD 7,600.00

This is a Science and Technology Studies dissertation improvement grant. The
research will examine the scientific career of Dixy Lee Ray, a marine biologist
and oceanographer working at the University of Washington from the late 1940s
through 1971. Funds from the grant will support expenses related to travel. The
researcher's study of Ray's life will address three related areas of interest to
historians, sociologists, and scientists: disciplinary developments within
oceanography and marine biology, innovative efforts in public science during the
Cold War, and the changing role and status of women in science during the latter
half of the twentieth century. Ray is an interesting study because she was an
effective proponent of biological oceanography in the United States and shaped
the disciplinary make-up of oceanography during those decades. At the same time
she became a leader in popular science education as director of the Pacific
Science Center and through the novel use of television to communicate science to
children. Ray's activity within the administration of oceanography and within
science popularization illustrates the congruence of the marine sciences with
public efforts to educate society about the natural world. As a female scientist
Ray's experiences were interwoven in her work as an oceanographer and public
scientist, affecting her career choices and her public persona. Issues of women
in science will provide another category of analysis for this dissertation. A
critical analysis of Ray's scientific career can help to illuminate some of
these important issues. And, by drawing upon literatures from three distinct
areas within the history and sociology of science, this study may help further
knowledge of the scientific enterprise as a whole. In addition, women engaged in
the scientific enterprise or those broadly interested in women's professional
advancement may find this study of great value as an example of one woman's
experience in a profession gradually opening to female leadership.