* 0350040
* Dissertation Research:  The Technological Transition from Natural to Artificial Indigo from the Perspectives of Science, Commerce, and Politics in Colonial India, c. 1860-1914
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/2003,11/30/2004
* Steven Usselman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John P. Perhonis
* 11/30/2004
* USD 10,870.00

This is a Science and Technology Studies dissertation improvement grant. The
proposed dissertation examines the conduct of science and the process of
technological innovation in the political and economic context of global
colonization. Funds under this grant would provide the means to examine relevant
materials in several British archives. The researchers will develop a case study
of European planters based in colonial India who organized the production and
distribution of natural indigo as they responded to a sudden challenge posed by
synthetic substitutes manufactured in Germany. The project will take a
transnational, interdisciplinary perspective. It will examine manufacturers and
researchers in India, including both field-based agronomists and laboratory-
centered chemists, as well as key consumers and policy makers in Britain. The
dissertation will contribute to several areas of academic interest: the
literatures of Science and Technology Studies, South Asian history, colonial
history, economic and business history, and innovation studies. The study will
have implications of relevance to policy makers and business people attempting
to comprehend the dynamics of scientific R & D and seeking to ascertain how
changing global dynamics influence the character of science and the process of
technological change.