* 0350002
* Dissertation Research:  The Population Explosion:  Population Growth, Environmentalism, and American Culture, 1945-1980
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2004,08/31/2005
* William Cronon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2005
* USD 8,000.00

This is a Science and Technology Studies dissertation improvement grant. The
proposed project will use a case study of Paul Ehrlich's 1968 book The
Population Bomb to shed light on the social origins of the American
environmental movement. Funds from the grant will support travel to Palo Alto,
Denver, Washington, and New York for the purposes of archival research and
qualitative interviews. Ehrlich's Population Bomb helped biology recapture a
social relevance not seen since before WWII. Environmental historians and
historians of science, however, have yet to explore this explosion of neo-
Malthusianism at the heart of environmentalism. Like the larger population
control movement, Ehrlich's book at first appeared to unite Americans from
across the political spectrum on a host of issues. It seemed to bring together
conservatives and liberals on many of the most pressing issues of the day.
American relations with the third world, racial unrest in the inner city, and
suburban growth issues. Within a few years, however, Ehrlich and the population
control argument became a target against which a vast array of groups defined
themselves. Socialists and free-market conservatives, black nationalists and
white conservatives, feminists and the new right, and even fellow
environmentalists all critiqued Ehrlich's logic, sometimes bitterly. By the mid
1970s, it seemed a wonder that Ehrlich and The Population Bomb ever had the
appeal that it once did. This research project returns to the 1950s and 1960s to
examine the scientific/intellectual and cultural roots of the explosion of
interest in population control during the early days of the environmental
movement. It hopes to reveal the lasting contributions of Ehrlich's book, as
well as to critically examine the ways in which unintentional race, class, and
gender insensitivities played out in Ehrlich's logic. Reconnecting
environmentalism with its neo-Malthusian roots has the potential to alter the
way historians tell the story of the environmental movement's postwar emergence.