* 0350414
* SGER:     Optimal Solution of the Direct and Inverse Problems of Contaminant Dispersion
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2003,12/31/2004
* Dietmar Rempfer, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Linda G. Blevins
* 12/31/2004
* USD 35,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.:
CTS-0350414&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: DIETMAR
REMPFER&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: ILLINOIS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OPTIMAL SOLUTION OF THE DIRECT INVERSE PROBLEMS OF
CONTAMINANT DISPERSION &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general goal of this project is
to develop practical methods for the prediction of the dispersive spread of
contaminants in the atmosphere, and for the localization of the source of
contaminants once they are detected. This problem can be solved in a
satisfactory manner if a complete description of the velocity field of the
atmosphere, both as a function of time and of space, is available. However,
atmospheric flows are almost always turbulent, which means that large ranges of
length and time scales are present in the flow. Thus, if one intends to measure
these velocity fields by simply placing sensors on some regular grid that is
fine enough to resolve the important length and time scales of the flow, one
finds that a prohibitive number of sensors will be required. From these
considerations it follows that it is necessary to obtain a description of the
turbulent flow field that (a) requires a minimum amount of information, and (b)
allows the highest possible accuracy in tracking, both backwards and forwards in
time, the evolution of contaminant concentrations as a function of time. The
method of Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (Lumley, 1971) has been developed as a
means to describe turbulent flow fields using a minimal amount of information.
The techniques associated with this method appear to be well suited also to
achieve the second of the goals mentioned above. The accurate assessment and
prediction of the dispersion of contaminants with a limited amount of resources
is important both in the areas of environmental management and policy, as well
as in the area of national defense against potential biological and/or chemical
threats. After the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center in September
2001, the national awareness of potential terrorist threats has undergone a
significant change. Among prime areas of concern, in particular after the
occurrence of several incidents involving agents of biological warfare (Anthrax
spores) in the wake of the September 11 events, is the threat of terrorist
attacks using chemical or biological agents. In order to defend against such
attacks, it is important to have the capability to detect the occurrence of such
an attack in a timely manner, and to locate the source of the attack as
accurately as possible. A prime motivation of our project is the development of
technologies and techniques that make it possible to achieve these
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;