* 0350091
* Feedback Between Plants and Soil Microbes in Serpentine and Prairie Grasslands
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Brenda Casper, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 04/30/2008
* USD 306,000.00

Feedback between plants and soil microbes in serpentine and prairie grasslands

This research investigates whether the relationships between certain grass
species and their mycorrhizal fungi play a role in maintaining plant species
diversity in natural communities. Mycorrhizal fungi generally form mutually
beneficial associations with plant roots. Plants supply the fungi with sugars
and, in return, receive benefits that include increased uptake of water and
nutrients, and in some cases, increased ability to cope with toxic metals.
Recent studies have documented negative feedback between different mycorrhizal
fungi and different plant species, where the fungi associated with a particular
plant species do not provide as much benefit to that plant species as do fungi
associated with other plant species in the community. Consequently, when one
plant dies and its mycorrhizal fungi and any associated pathogenic fungi remain
in the soil, that plant is likely to be replaced by a different plant species,
thereby promoting species diversity. This work builds on negative feedback found
in a grassland on serpentine soil, which naturally has a high heavy metal
content. Negative feedback will be further explored at that site and in the
tallgrass prairie, where these same grasses occur. Results may also help in
developing mycorrhizal fungi that facilitate remediation of soils polluted with
heavy metals.