* 0350116
* Wavelet-Based Algorithms for Control of Smart Civil Structures
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/2003,03/31/2004
* Hojjat Adeli, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 03/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

Abstract Even though classical feedback control algorithms such as the Linear
Quadratic Regulator (LQR) and Linear Quadratic Gaussian (LQG) algorithms can be
used to reduce vibrations, they suffer from a number of fundamental
shortcomings. They achieve a significant level of attenuation in the vicinity of
the natural frequencies of the structure, but fail to suppress the vibrations
when frequency of the external disturbance differs even slightly from the
natural frequencies of the structure. A limitation of classical optimal control
algorithms is due to the fact that the input excitation must be known a priori
which is not the case for civil structures subjected to earthquake or wind
loading. Intellectual Merits: The primary objective of the proposed research is
to explore wavelet-based algorithms for creation of a new control model for
active, semi-active, and hybrid control of civil structures subjected to dynamic
forces such as earthquakes and winds overcoming some of the shortcomings of the
existing feedback control algorithms. The new control model will a) have the
ability to suppress vibrations over a range of input frequencies, b) be less
susceptible to structural modeling approximations and errors, and c) include the
external excitation term. This is achieved through adroit integration of a
feedback control algorithm such as the LQR or LQG algorithm, the filtered-x
Least Mean Square (LMS) algorithm, and wavelets. The goal is to achieve optimum
control under external dynamic disturbances in real time. A focus of the
proposed research will be development of optimal control strategies utilizing
the filtering and transformation characteristics of wavelets and wavelet-based
algorithms. A secondary objective of the proposed research is to explore the
development of a hybrid control system through judicious integration of a
passive supplementary damping system with a semi-active tuned liquid column
damper (TLCD) system. The new model utilizes the advantages of both passive and
semi-active control systems, thereby improving the overall performance,
reliability, and operability of the control system during normal operations as
well as a power or computer failure. The robust wavelet-hybrid feedback LMS
control algorithm will be used to find optimal values of the control parameters.
The proposed hybrid control system eliminates the need for a large power
requirement, unlike other proposed hybrid control systems where active and
passive systems are combined. Broader Impacts: The potential benefits of the
proposed research to society at large will be creation of a new generation of
smart civil structures with improved safety and reliability against natural
hazards such as earthquakes and strong winds encountered in most of the country.
The proposed research will a) lead to new control techniques for hazard
mitigation of structures subjected to dynamic seismic and wind loading, b) be of
value to the general domain of vibration control including control of mechanical
and aerospace structures, and c) result in new insights in the use of wavelets
for solution of other intelligent civil infrastructure systems.