* 0350213
* Complexity Regularized Signal Processing for Networking Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2003,08/31/2009
* Robert Nowak, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2009
* USD 395,507.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;0310889&lt;br/&gt;Robert D. Nowak&lt;br/&gt;William Marsh
Rice U&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's private and public communications networks
are critical systems of data terminals, routers, and switches that provide the
backbone of our economic, scientific, and education systems. Consequently,
signal processing methods for estimating performance characteristics and
detecting key component failures and malevolent behavior are crucial for
insuring the reliability and robustness for this vital infrastructure. Moreover,
networks of sensors and actuators will soon be part of our information systems.
These networks will provide critical links between our environment and our
information-based society. Distributed and hierarchical algorithms for data
analysis and signal processing will be central to the operation of such
networks.&lt;br/&gt;This research targets these important, emerging signal
processing applications in networking. The proposed research blends the fields
of adaptive and distributed signal processing, nonparametric estimation and
classification, network traffic measurement and modeling, and network traffic
analysis and tomography. The project involves the development of theories and
methodologies for data analysis, estimation, and classification in networking
applications. Most inference problems arising in networking are extremely
challenging; the amount and nature of the data that is easily collected is very
limited, and the estimation or classification tasks are often severely ill-
posed. Common inference methodologies such as maximum likelihood are of limited
utility in large-scale networking problems due to these confounding factors.
Therefore, complexity regularization methods for estimation and classification
provide the core computational signal processing tools in the project. These
methods temper the trade-off between fitting to the data and model complexity
(and hence variability).&lt;br/&gt;Two core problems in network analysis and
inference are the focus of this proposal. (1) Network Tomography: Network
tomography involves estimating performance characteristics and traffic flow
patterns from measured traffic at a limited number of points in the network.
This problem is very ill-posed and existing schemes do not perform well in
large-scale implementations. We propose novel complexity regularized approaches
to network tomography that aim to capitalize on certain, naturally occurring,
sparsity characteristics of the network tomography problems. (2) Multi-channel
Network Traffic Analysis: Much work has been done in the area of network traffic
analysis, but the focus has been mostly on signal point traces. Analysis and
understanding of the relationships between traffic flows at different points in
networks is crucial to overall performance. We propose to investigate and
develop analysis methods capable of revealing important traffic
interrelationships, dependencies, and coincidences at
multiple&lt;br/&gt;measurement points. The research investigates: 1) fundamental
limits in network inference methods for estimating and detecting conditions
critical to network performance; 2) integrated and flexible approaches to
spatio-temporal analysis of internetwork traffic patterns; 3) scalable,
distributed, and decentralized algorithms for network data analysis and
inference; 4) basic theory of complexity regularization and distributed signal
processing.&lt;br/&gt;