* 0350752
* Building a Cyberinfrastructure for the Biological Sciences (CIBIO)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2003,08/31/2005
* John Wooley, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2005
* USD 53,779.00

The 21st Century Biology subcommittee of the Advisory Committee for the
Biological Sciences Directorate (BIO AC) held a two day workshop to address the
current status, anticipate the potential, and provide guidance to the
Directorate on how NSF Bio can best empower the biological sciences community to
utilize the extraordinary impact of modern information technology, which will
lead to a more effective, productive environment for research and education.
This is made possible by a new, underlying, NSF-driven, infrastructure
empowering people, their ideas and their use of tools for discovery. The
numerous advances in the basic and applied fields, within all performance
domains, for computer and information science and engineering (notably, funded
by CISE) have been extraordinary. After several decades of exponential advances
in hardware and software, information technology has become an intrinsic
component of our economy, our sciences, our industry, and our society. The
pervasive, ubiquitous, embedded, seamlessly available technology not only has
become the singular most important cog in the Nation's industry, but also the
central cog in world wide research and development, commerce and communication.
Correspondingly, by consolidating and accelerating the components, NSF can
exploit the convergence of these exponential trends, which are said collectively
to have passed a threshold in applicability and importance, to create a
comprehensive foundation, a cyberinfrastructure (CI), on which to build the
Science, Technology and Education of the 21st Century. CI is perceived as being
as transformational for science, technology and commerce as Gutenberg's
invention of the printing press was for society, setting the stage for growing
literacy, public dialogue for growing populations, and ultimately, democracy. CI
promises the same open access to literacy, public dialogue and democratic
rewards. CI is indeed ideally suited for the cottage industry that is biology,
due to the revolution in grid services, data integration, and modern information
technology, coupled with the advent of a biological research approach, focused
at a systems level, that is integrative, synthetic and predictive, or what NSF
calls 21st Century Biology. The BIO AC Workshop of the 21st Century Biology
subcommittee addressed the key questions for BIO's involvement and role within
the NSF fabric, and at the conclusion of the workshop provided BIO with a short
white paper, along with presentation material, containing relevant policy
advice. Further steps to involve and empower the full biological sciences
community were outlined at the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two review
criteria for consideration by NSF are deeply intertwined in this proposal. That
is, the intrinsic scientific merit of the activity and the potential
contribution arising from the proposed activity to the Nation's infrastructure,
and other related goals of NSF beyond supporting the best research per se, are
fully coupled in the outcome of the workshop. Not only is CI international in
scope, but also, the implementation of CI will require breaking down the digital
divide. Already, the universities and states without tier 1 research
institutions are preparing proposals and working on implementing CI to enable
their science. CI for BIO is ideal in democratizing access to information and
resources, and meeting the needs of the entire community. Community Colleges,
Minority Serving Institutions such as Tribal Colleges, Hispanic Institutions,
Colleges for Research and Education, Historically Black Colleges and
Universities will all have increased opportunities to participate. The web has
already provided novel access to all. CI infrastructure will empower many new
ways in which all scientists, and students, will be able to contribute to the
Nation's research endeavors, and enhanced modes of training will be established.
It would be hard to find an activity that will contribute more in terms of
outreach and also of societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;