* 0350847
* US-Pakistan Cooperative Research:  Toward a Better Understanding of the Pakistani Himalayas: Inferences from Remote Sensing, Field, Age and Isotopic Data
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2003,08/31/2006
* Shuhab Khan, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2006
* USD 29,040.00

0243015&lt;br/&gt;Khan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is for
support of a cooperative project between Dr. Shuhab Khan, Department of
Geosciences, Idaho State University (I.S.U.), Pocatello, Idaho, Dr. J. Douglas
Walker, Department of Geology, University of Kansas (U. of K.), Lawrence, Kansas
and Dr. Mohammed T. Shah, Center of Excellence in Geology, University of
Peshawar (U. of P.), Peshawar, Pakistan. The investigators plan to: (1) conduct
field work in the northern Kohistan terrane in the Pakistani Himalayas to map
and sample for geochemical and isotopic dating (U-Pb) of the Teru volcanics and
associated rocks from the Teru-Shandur and Teru-Yasin areas; (2) conduct a
program of geochronologic and isotopic investigations in the area; (3) to run a
mapping exercise for the Teru volcanics in the entire northern Kohistan terrane
by using space-borne data and field observations. The results will improve
understanding of the age, areal distribution, and isotopic and geochemical
affinities of the late-stage volcanics and their implications for the evolution
of the northwest Himalayas, the syn- and post-collisional tectonothermal history
of northwest Kohistan, and the Andean margin and post-collisional history of the
Kohistan terrane in particular and the Himalayas in general. The investigators
plan to develop and validate techniques for lithologic mapping of Kohistan arc
sequences by using data from the recently deployed space-borne ASTER sensor,
which can potentially be used to map vast areas in the Himalayas that are
largely inaccessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The proposed research program
builds on preliminary age, geochemical, and isotopic results in the Teru-Shandur
area, which were obtained by the investigators, as well as on the existing
collaborative relationship between the principal investigator and U. of P. The
research results will contribute to the broad understanding of collisional
orogenesis. The proposed work will have an educational impact both at I.S.U. and
the U. of P., as graduate students from both universities will be involved in
the research. Dr. Khan received his Ph.D. in 2001 and is starting an academic
and research career at Idaho State University. He will be supported by the
excellent technical analytical expertise in Dr. Walker's laboratory the U. of K.
A Pakistani scientist will spend two months at I.S.U. to help in the processing
and interpreting of images and in the preparation of a manuscript.&lt;br/&gt;