* 0350730
* Rigidity, Hodge Theory and Arithmetic Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Bruno Klingler, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2006
* USD 110,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0350730&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Bruno Klingler&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project is concerned with
fundamental questions arising in&lt;br/&gt;the representation theory of Kaehler
groups and discrete&lt;br/&gt;subgroups of Lie groups. The techniques appeal to
various fields,&lt;br/&gt;from geometric analysis to arithmetic. There are four
aspects to&lt;br/&gt;the project: 1) study the rigidity and arithmeticity of
cocompact&lt;br/&gt;complex hyperbolic lattices, for which Margulis's
superrigidity&lt;br/&gt;theorem does not apply. More generally the PI is trying
to&lt;br/&gt;construct a reasonable moduli space for non-
archimedean&lt;br/&gt;representations of Kaehler groups (analogous to
Simpson's&lt;br/&gt;non-abelian Hodge theory for archimedean representations).
2)&lt;br/&gt;study the positivity of a natural kernel on the Bruhat-
Tits&lt;br/&gt;building of a p-adic simple Lie groups. This would lead
to&lt;br/&gt;strong results in the representation theory of such groups.
3)&lt;br/&gt;find a short-cut to prove that non-arithmetic lattices don't
have&lt;br/&gt;property T. 4) use ergodic theory to prove some cases of
the&lt;br/&gt;Andre-Oort conjecture for Shimura
varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept of "rigidity" underlies many of
nature's secrets:&lt;br/&gt;certain natural objects (and their mathematical
models, like&lt;br/&gt;certain curved spaces appearing in general relativity, or
certain&lt;br/&gt;groups appearing in quantum mechanics) can not be deformed.
A&lt;br/&gt;fundamental discovery of mathematical analysis was
that&lt;br/&gt;"rigidity" is essentially a consequence of "arithmeticity":
these&lt;br/&gt;rigid objects have a simple description in terms of sequences
of&lt;br/&gt;rational numbers. These numbers provide the cherished
invariants&lt;br/&gt;of modern physic. This project aims to develop new methods
for&lt;br/&gt;investigating crucial occurences of such arithmetic structures
in&lt;br/&gt;some natural symmetry groups, their related spaces and
the&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems where they occur.&lt;br/&gt;