* 0350343
* SLC Catalyst: The Development of Synthetic Learning Environments
* SBE,SBE
* 10/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Stephen Fiore, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Maria Kozhevnikov
* 09/30/2005
* USD 220,000.00

There is little doubt that new and emerging technologies will have an impact on
how instructional systems are developed and deployed over the next several
decades. However, without the necessary scientific base to inform design,
sizeable investments will be made into learning systems that are ineffective, or
at best, not optimal. The long-term vision of this catalyst project is to extend
fundamental understanding of the learning process as a basis for optimizing the
use of technology in learning. The overarching goal is to explore how emerging
technologies can be better designed to support learning by augmenting,
replacing, creating and/or managing a learner's actual experience with the
world. Hence the aim is to study synthetic experience as a means to enhance
learning and performance. The term synthetic learning environments (SLEs) is
being used to describe such systems; this research will generate knowledge that
leads to their optimization in both design and implementation. This effort will
demonstrate and extend the value of a unique collaboration between education and
entertainment as a means to generate innovative teaching approaches and methods
for enhancing the learning process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many theories of
learning and development of expertise have at their core the notion that people
use their experience is the basis for learning, particularly in complex, high-
performance tasks. Technology has advanced to the point where it is possible to
augment, create, replace, enrich and accelerate this natural process of gaining
experience (and hence learning) through creation of SLEs. However, in order to
make full use of these opportunities, basic research is needed to better
understand the nature of synthetic experience -- that is, experience that is
deliberately created with hardware and software. Moreover, a host of learning
environment features must also be investigated to determine how they are best
incorporated into SLEs. The current effort will address these questions by
synthesizing past work; creating a conceptual framework for studying synthetic
experience; delineating a long-term, prioritized research agenda; and conducting
a prototype experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the psychological
consequences of computer-generated synthetic experiences -- specifically, how
engaging, believable, realistic, potent, and meaningful they can be -- has
enormous potential to effect many aspects of society. For example, if synthetic
experiences are processed similarly to actual ones, then there is potential to
substitute synthetic experience for actual experience in education and training
systems; personalized, interactive entertainment; workforce selection,
certification and testing; and perhaps even situations such as counseling and
psychotherapy. In addition, this technology has the potential to make learning
resources much more accessible (e.g., to underrepresented groups), to
individualize them so that traditional barriers to learning for many students
can be removed, and to create experiences that many learners would typically be
unable to access. The proposed research will lay the groundwork for development
of guidelines and tools that will make technology-enabled learning systems
widely available and cost effective to develop for use by all learners.
&lt;br/&gt;