* 0350115
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Children Left Behind: Reactions to Parental Emigration in Ecuador
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2005
* Steven Parish, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2005
* USD 6,892.00

The recent political and economic turmoil in Ecuador has spurred a significant
flow of emigrants. Many of these emigrants are parents who leave their children
behind, because of the local availability of extended family and inexpensive
childcare versus the difficulty of adjusting to a new country with children.
Western culture research has reported the deleterious effects of maternal
separation in early childhood; this dissertation research by a cultural
anthropologist studies the effects of emigration on older children in a cross-
cultural context. The student will examine the effects of separation from
emigrated parents on their left-behind children, how distress develops and how
cultural understandings may be used to adapt socially and psychologically to
distress from separation in the context of emigration in Guayaquil, Ecuador.
With person-centered interviews, projective tests, and observations of the
children and caregiver's behaviors to assess the child's psychological state
while their parents are preparing to emigrate, during the actual departure, and
while their parents are abroad, the student will determine the psychological
state of the child and the methods that the child uses to adjust to parental
emigration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research has the
practical application to inform psychologists, policy-makers, and caregivers how
to best help these children cope with the psychological effects of parental
emigration. In exploring how and why some children are able to adjust to
parental emigration and others are not, those seeking to assist these children
can better understand the efficacy of certain psychological interventions. This
model for understanding distress in a particular context can be extrapolated to
other situations in which children face similar distress. In addition, this
research will contribute to the educational development of a doctoral candidate
in psychological anthropology interested in applied research.&lt;br/&gt;