* 0350834
* Trophic ecology of small hydromedusae:  a new perspective on their function in coastal ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* John Costello, Providence College
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/2008
* USD 161,630.00

The focus of the research is the trophic role of small (bell diameter &lt; 5 mm)
hydromedusae. Medusae are important, often highly selective, planktonic
predators that can strongly affect standing stocks of metazoan zooplankton as
well as fish eggs and larvae. The feeding rates, prey selection patterns and the
underlying feeding mechanisms that have led to the success of large, conspicuous
medusae have been well studied. However, most medusae are small. These small
medusae are abundant, taxonomically diverse, and often have cosmopolitan
distributions. Yet their feeding ecology is virtually unknown despite their
status as the largest and most diverse group of gelatinous zooplankton in the
sea. Preliminary data indicate that many small hydromedusae feed differently and
have different trophic roles than their larger relatives. These preliminary
studies have shown that some small medusan species (1) feed as omnivores on
microplankton, including phytoplankton and (2) are sufficiently abundant and
have sufficiently high feeding rates to remove a significant proportion of the
phytoplankton standing stock in the coastal ecosystems where they occur
seasonally. This project will address the hypothesis that this combination of
high abundance and high feeding rates enables small hydromedusae to function as
significant grazers of phytoplankton during periods of peak seasonal production.
Consequently, the contemporary paradigm that medusae are primarily predators of
planktonic metazoans may require significant revision in order to encompass the
trophic role of small hydromedusae. The goal of the research is to examine the
feeding processes and impact of small hydromedusae by examining their trophic
role in Narragansett Bay, Rhode Island. We will use a combined approach of (1)
quantifying the trophic impact of small hydromedusae on the plankton community
of Narragansett Bay, Rhode Island and (2) quantifying the functional bases of
their feeding and prey selection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of
the Proposed Activity: The research will lead to new understanding of community
feeding rates, prey selection patterns and the underlying feeding mechanisms
that have led to the success and evolutionary longevity of the most diverse
taxonomic group of medusae. If small medusae feed primarily as omnivores on
microplankton and are able to significantly affect microplankton standing
stocks, then the research will document a new and important trophic link between
the metazoan and microbial food webs. The new knowledge will provide protistan
ecologists with enhanced understanding of the factors controlling microplankton
standing stocks and production rates. The study will also provide evolutionary
ecologists with a greater understanding of the biomechanical factors that have
influenced the evolution of small hydromedusan body form and function as well as
protist behavior and body form. From this perspective, this study directly
addresses the issue of understanding factors influencing biological diversity
and its ecological consequences in marine systems, a specific theme emphasized
by NSF's Biological Oceanography division. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
of the Proposed Activity: The project will encourage scientific discovery by
documenting a new, but presumably common, trophic link in pelagic food webs. The
participation of scientists from two primarily undergraduate institutions and
one primarily graduate institution enhances opportunities for training and
mentorship. Each institution will involve students in every aspect of the
research (5 undergraduates during each year of the proposal, 2 from RWU and 2
from PC; 1 undergraduate from the Marine Biology program at URI will do an
independent study course (15 credits) with Gifford during the spring academic
term of each project year). Upon receipt of funding, Gifford will apply for a
budget supplement to support participation in the project by a secondary school
science teacher during the summer months. As in the past, we will use our
contacts with media involved in education of the general public (radio,
television documentaries, news articles and aquarium exhibits) to communicate
our new findings about medusan ecology. Our continuing dialog with these outlets
to the public allows us avenues to communicate our findings to a wide public
audience and to educate the general public. &lt;br/&gt;