* 0350819
* The Social Foundations of Global Conflict and Cooperation: Waves of Globalization and Global Elite Integration Since 1840
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,12/31/2006
* Christopher Chase-Dunn, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* paul ciccantell
* 12/31/2006
* USD 152,312.00

This research studies the relationship among globalization, global elite
integration, and global conflict and cooperation from the nineteenth to the
twenty-first centuries. The main research question is the extent to which the
changing social foundations of global elite integration contributed to the
myriad forms of global conflict and cooperation during waves of globalization
and periods of backlash, and can thus help us predict future global conflicts.
For instance, a more thoroughly integrated global elite, based on broader social
foundations cutting across lines of race, class, gender, nationality, and
civilizations, may be able to prevent the kind of chaos that characterized the
last wave of deglobalization. Conversely, instability and conflict can be
expected if elite power rests on increasingly narrow, militarized social
foundations and related forms of exclusivist identity and citizenship typical of
periods of hegemonic decline and globalization backlash. We will analyze and
delineate the social foundations of elites cross-nationally by investigating the
most powerful individuals, families, firms, states and international
organizations for selected countries in ten targeted years: 1840, 1860, 1880,
1913, 1929, 1950, 1970, 1980, 1995, and 2004. We will examine the links among
global elites to determine the degree and strength of their connections and
their changing social foundations. We will use three inter-related research
designs. The first analyzes a subset of elites from key core countries; the
second is cross-national and includes all countries and regions where comparable
data on unequal forms of civil, political and social citizenship, stratified in
welfare or warfare-welfare states, or other important aspects of political,
socioeconomic structure and links can be found; the third focuses on the largest
regional and global international organizations. Using a combination of
structural equations modeling, network analysis, GIS mapping, and comparative
historical analysis, we will assess the relationship among the social
foundations of globalization, global elite integration, and global conflict and
cooperation over time. The broader impacts of this research include the
following: Project databases, animated global maps on the project web site, and
publications will provide valuable data for students, scholars, NGOs and public
policymakers. Project data on the relationship between waves of globalization,
global elite integration and their changing social foundations will aid
initiatives to promote equality, democracy, inclusive forms of citizenship and
global cooperation.