* 0350003
* MILE HIGH, MILE DEEP: Imagining and Modifying Topographical and Subterranean Environments
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Michael Reidy, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2008
* USD 300,000.00

This proposal is an SGTR to involve postdoctoral fellows and graduate students
in a research group at Montana State University dedicated to understanding the
importance of space and place for the practice of science and to sharing that
understanding with undergraduate students. Given its twofold commitment to
research and teaching in exciting new cross-disciplinary curricula at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels, MSU is an ideal venue for training advanced
graduate students and recent scholars in remapping the boundaries of the history
of science and technology, environmental history, and historical and political
geography. &lt;br/&gt;Over the past four years, the Department of History and
Philosophy has hired a cohort of faculty with expertise in the history and
philosophy of science and technology and environmental history. Working closely
with faculty from the Department of Earth Sciences and the Program in Native
American Studies, the department has inaugurated a new undergraduate major in
Science, the Environment, Technology, and Society, and new Ph.D. programs in
History and Earth Sciences with specific emphases on geography, environmental
history, and the history of science and technology. In addition, the university
is implementing a new undergraduate core curriculum that requires students to
take a new course entitled "Contemporary Issues in Science." The postdoctoral
scholars and graduate students supported by the SGTR will conduct research and
receive training in teaching in innovative programs designed to improve students
understanding of the critical links between science, technology, society, and
the environment. Because of the distinctive configuration of disciplines within
the Department of History and Philosophy, which includes specialists in the
history and philosophy of science and technology, students and scholars
supported by the SGTR will have the opportunity to work closely with scholars in
a department with a long tradition of working collaboratively across
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research component of this
project advances the spatial turn that has been underway in each of the
disciplines noted above by combining the history of science and technology with
environmental history and geography. The project directors have both focused
their careers on understanding place-based and culturally informed sites of
knowledge generation. The PI and co-PI are experts in the social and cultural
history of science and technology and their broader societal impacts.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: First, this project affords a unique training
opportunity for recent Ph.D.s and doctoral students to link their research with
ongoing curricular reform that seeks to put knowledge about science, technology,
society, and the environment at the center of student learning. Second, because
of its "place-centeredness" in the Greater Yellowstone Heritage Region, this
project is committed to drawing on the intellectual resources and needs of
Montana's Native American communities that comprise Montana's largest ethnic
minority group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;