* 0350554
* Biogeography and community structure in mussel beds at Pacific hydrothermal vents
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2007
* Cindy Van Dover, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/2007
* USD 193,372.00

Intellectual Merit. Funding is requested to continue community structure
and&lt;br/&gt;biogeographic analysis of organisms associated with hydrothermal
vents. Work&lt;br/&gt;completed to date has led to the acquisition of a unique,
quantitative assessment of&lt;br/&gt;diversity and faunal similarities and
differences among vent and seep mussel beds from&lt;br/&gt;vent sites along the
East Pacific Rise and the Mid-Atlantic Ridge and seep sites in
the&lt;br/&gt;Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico. These samples provide a rich context
within which to&lt;br/&gt;interpret the faunal composition and structure in
mussel beds in an area south of the&lt;br/&gt;Easter Microplate (38S) and in the
Lau and Fiji back-arc basins. Specimens will be&lt;br/&gt;collected using our
standard gear from two discrete mussel beds at each of the 3
primary&lt;br/&gt;sites. Once collected, samples will be processed using the
standard protocol established&lt;br/&gt;in our lab, and identified with the help
of the extensive voucher collection maintained at&lt;br/&gt;The College of
William &amp; Mary, and with the aid of taxonomic specialists as
necessary.&lt;br/&gt;A subset of appropriately preserved sorted samples will be
made available for molecular&lt;br/&gt;analyses, which will be undertaken in
collaboration with R. Vrijenhoek. Molecular&lt;br/&gt;analyses will focus on
taxa where there is a need to test for cryptic species or
phenotypic&lt;br/&gt;plasticity and selected other taxa of interest to
Vrijenhoek and Van Dover, in addition to&lt;br/&gt;the suite of taxa that
Vrijenhoek is separately funded to analyze (primarily
tubeworms,&lt;br/&gt;mussels, crabs, clams). The proposed community structure
and faunistic analyses will&lt;br/&gt;contribute to our understanding of the
degree of evolutionary alliance of vent faunas&lt;br/&gt;within the Pacific
Ocean basin and to potential barriers or conduits to dispersal.
The&lt;br/&gt;work is of particular interest because the study sites have been
strategically chosen to&lt;br/&gt;address biogeographic issues relating to the
degree of isolation of adjacent back-arc basin&lt;br/&gt;systems, the
relationship of these back-arc faunas to the most-southern-known
vent&lt;br/&gt;faunas on the mid-ocean ridge (at 38S), and the relationships
among these faunas and&lt;br/&gt;sites already studied north of the Easter
Microplate on the East Pacific Rise.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. Numerous
undergraduates and graduate students will benefit from&lt;br/&gt;participation
in field programs and analysis of samples. Aspects of the research
are&lt;br/&gt;incorporated into the PIs undergraduate and graduate teaching.
Results will be published&lt;br/&gt;in the professional literature and will be
made available to the public through web-based&lt;br/&gt;resources and through
public lectures by the PI and her students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;