* 0350467
* Collaborative Research:  Decision-Making on Behalf of Others
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2006
* John Alford, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2006
* USD 97,080.00

A surprising number of the important decisions in modern society are undertaken
by one person on behalf of other people. CEOs make decisions on behalf of
employees in the firm; pastors on behalf of their congregations; generals on
behalf of their troops; teachers on behalf of their students; gang leaders on
behalf of their followers; parents on behalf of their family; members of
corporate boards on behalf of shareholders; lawyers on behalf of their clients;
and perhaps most obviously, elected representatives on behalf of the
constituents they represent. Though students of decision-making have an
impressive understanding of decisions made by those acting on their own behalf,
an analysis has yet to be undertaken of the precise manner in which decisions
taken on behalf of others differ from those occurring in a traditional dyadic
context. In this research project, the investigators employ a series of
experiments to isolate and thereby to ascertain the manner in which decisions
are different when they are made on someone else's behalf. In an illustrative
experiment, a subject is given $20 and told to divide it with a second player in
any fashion. From existing research utilizing single-shot dictator and ultimatum
games it is known that subjects typically give nearly half to their anonymous
partner. But not known is the extent to which this generosity is curtailed (or
enhanced) when subjects are acting on behalf of others. If the structure of the
experiment is modified so that a subject acts on behalf of a group of five
people (including the subject) and must decide how to allocate $100 (5 x $20)
between his/her own group and a second (receiving) group, with all members
within a group receiving the same amount, decisions are likely to be different.
Identifying the precise nature of the difference in behavior between these two
common and important decision arrangements is the central goal of this project.
The intellectual merit of the project is that it provides a clear empirical test
of the conditions under which leading theoretical models of decision-making
apply. For example, the purest form of the rational choice model, drawn from
microeconomics, hypothesizes that decision-makers will always attempt to
maximize their short-term tangible gains, an expectation that often turns out to
be false when people are acting on behalf of themselves. But a second theory,
drawn from social and evolutionary psychology and utilized in the current
project, emphasizes people's concern for the way others perceive them and
therefore leads to the expectation that, somewhat ironically, decision-makers
will be more protective of the resources of others than they are of their own.
As such, the research holds considerable promise of determining the precise
conditions under which leading models of decision-making apply. The research has
a broader and more practical impact by helping citizens, reformers, and
decision-makers themselves to understand the psychological pressures acting on
decision-makers in various real-life contexts. Assuming the results of the
experiments are as anticipated, if maximization of short-term gains is the
desired goal, giving authority to representatives becomes the most fruitful
approach. If, however, the desire is for decision-makers to share and to engage
in altruistic punishment, the sensible thing to do is to let people make
decisions for themselves.

