* 0350772
* The Econometrics of Distinguishing Jumps from Volatility
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Yacine Ait-Sahalia, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2008
* USD 190,754.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO: 0350772&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION:
Princeton University&lt;br/&gt;NSF PROGRAM: ECONOMICS&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ait-Sahalia,
Yacine&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: The Econometrics of Distinguishing Jumps from
Volatility&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop methods to
estimate the volatility parameter with high frequency data when certain
complications arise. Two complications that will be studied situations where the
Brownian process is contaminated respectively by jumps and market microstructure
noise. The PI will develop maximum likelihood techniques to identify the
variance with the same degree of precision as if there were no jumps. The PI
will then show that this result continues to hold if Levy jumps processes (which
are both infinitely more frequent and infinitely small) other than the standard
Poisson jumps contaminate the Brownian noise. In the presence of market
microstructure noise, the research will study whether it remains optimal to
sample the returns process as often as possible for the purpose of estimating
the variance consistently with the basic principle that more data is preferred
to less. One result shows that, if noise is present but unaccounted for, the
optimal sampling frequency is finite. A second result shows that modeling the
noise term explicitly restores the first order statistical effect that sampling
as often as possible is optimal. This remains true even if one misspecifies the
assumed distribution of the noise term. This robustness result argues in favor
of incorporating the noise when estimating continuous time models with high
frequency&lt;br/&gt;Financial data, even if one is unsure about the true
distribution of the noise term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ability to decompose total
noise into a Brownian part and a discontinuous jump Is useful in a number of
contexts: for instance, in option pricing, the two types of noise have different
hedging requirements and possibilities; in portfolio allocation, the demand for
assets subject to both types of risk can be optimized further if a decomposition
of the total risk into a Brownian and a jump part is available; in risk
management, such a decomposition makes it possible over short horizons to manage
the Brownian risk using Gaussian tools while assessing VaR and other tail
statistics based on the identified jump component. Generally, the ability to
disentangle jumps from volatility is the essence of risk management, which
should focus on controlling large risks while leaving aside the day-to-day
Brownian fluctuations. The results of this research will make it possible to
distinguish volatility from jumps with perfect accuracy, thereby helping to
improve risk management. Understanding how to control for the presence of market
microstructure noise is useful in the same contexts. In addition to graduate
training, this research will also lay the foundation for international research
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;