* 0350676
* SGER: Identification and Preliminary Modeling of the Culture-Based Risk Mental Model
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2005
* Tonya Smith-Jackson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2005
* USD 93,664.00

The purpose of this study is to determine the culture-based influences on risk
mental models to identify the structure and components of what has been coined
the "culture-based risk mental model" or CRMM. Differences in injuries and
fatalities from accidents in workplace settings are not solely determined by
social power or choice of occupations within a society. Since 1988, culture has
been found to be a strong influence on the risk of injuries and fatalities, and
on individuals' perceptions of risk and seems to interact with social power and
choice to determine risk perception, risk tolerance, and compliance behaviors.
But, the manner and mechanisms by which culture influences risk are not
understood, except in the context of social power, where certain groups are more
likely to be exposed to hazardous jobs. The unanswered questions are: What other
factors related to culture influence individual tolerance for hazardous work or
high risk contexts? What types of cultural critical incidents occur in the
workplace that may contribute to risk disparities? And, what tools and
techniques can be used to assess, analyze, and control the underlying factors
related to cultural differences in risk contexts? One important mechanism
underlying risk perception is the risk mental model and this project is designed
to understand the decision-making and thought patterns associated with culture-
based risk mental models. These patterns relate to cultural and social-cognitive
socialization processes. These components will be conceptually modeled and
quantified so that we can develop methods to describe and predict outcomes
related to risk based on differences in culture. The ultimate goal is to
eliminate risk disparities by developing explanatory models that can be used to
design and evaluate the effectiveness of interventions to enhance safety for all
groups, regardless of culture. &lt;br/&gt;