* 0350132
* Technology and Risk in Industrializing America, 1750-1980
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2006
* Arwen Mohun, University of Delaware
* Fixed Amount Award
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2006
* USD 84,999.00

This is a proposal to support one year of sabbatical research. It is to complete
a book about technology and risk in American history. The project uses eight
case studies to address the question "how did industrialization change the ways
Americans have thought about and dealt with physical risk in their everyday
lives?" The PI intends to complete chapters on pre-industrial risk, early 20th-
century guns and gun culture, and product design and liability after World War
II. Research for five other chapters on lightning rods, railroads, factories,
the safety movement, and amusement parks is mostly complete. &lt;br/&gt; The
project's research methodology involves techniques drawn from accepted practices
in the fields of social history, history of technology, material culture
studies, and legal history. The work plan calls for separate research questions
and source materials for each proposed chapter. The pre-industrial chapter uses
colonial newspapers such as the Pennsylvania Gazette, letters and diaries,
records of almhouses and hospitals, and other sources to answer questions such
as: what kinds of risks did 18th- and early 19th-century Americans confront? How
did they manage those risks? What roles did ideas about religion, morality, and
personal responsibility play in those choices? The chapter on guns also uses
newspapers and magazines, as well as advertising, company records, and business
ephemera. Research questions include: how did urbanization, cultural change, and
new manufacturing techniques influence the ownership and use of guns? How did
Americans manage gun risk, individually and collectively? The final chapter
explores the effects of consumerist movements and legal liability on product
design and marketing between the 1950s and 1980. It utilizes published legal
literature, the papers of the Consumers Union and the Consumer Product Safety
Commission, and a variety of engineering books and journals. &lt;br/&gt; No
broad study of risk in American history exists in print. Historical arguments
are widely used in the social theory literature about risk, but these studies
contain little actual content about the past. American historians have written
about workplace safety, automobiles, railroads, urban fires, and a smattering of
other topics, but no one has explained how these individual stories fit together
into a larger historical process. This book will help bridge the social theory
and history approaches to risk and will also add a much-needed technology
studies perspective to the risk literature. In the field of history technology,
this study represents a problem-driven approach that transcends studies of
individual technologies for their own sake. It also implements new insights
about the relationship between production and consumption and the agency of a
wide variety of technological actors. &lt;br/&gt; Everyone has had experiences
with technological risk: a car accident, a cut from a knife, the feeling of fear
before stepping onto an airplane. Because this book is about a common set of
experiences, it may attract a broader readership which wants to understand their
own interactions with technology. For this audience, the message is that our
current ways of handling risk have a history and are the product of specific
human choices and values, not just some vague form of determinism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;