* 0350812
* Collaborative Research: The Second Generation in Early Adulthood: A Decade-Long Panel Study
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2005
* Ruben Rumbaut, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 03/31/2005
* USD 44,914.00

The proposed study will analyze the adaptation process of second generation
immigrants in early adulthood in the United States. Children of immigrants
comprise today close to one-fourth of all young Americans aged 21 or under and
represent the fastest growing segment of this population. Success or failure of
second generation immigrants' economic, social, and cultural adaptation to
American society will have an important effect on the cities and regions where
today's immigrant population concentrate. This study will examine actual adult
outcomes of the adaptation process on the basis of data collected expressly for
this purpose. These data come from the just-completed third-survey of the
Children of Immigrants Longitudinal Study (CILS), the largest research project
to date focused on the immigrant second generation. CILS was begun in 1992 with
a survey of 5,266 children of immigrants attending 8th and 9th grades in
Miami/Ft. Lauderdale and San Diego, and continued with a follow-up of these
students at the time of high school graduation in 1995-96 plus a survey of 50
percent of their immigrant parents. The recently completed follow-up survey
traces the original sample into early adulthood, average age 24 and includes
detailed data on adult outcomes such as education, employment, occupational
status, ethnicity of spouses/partners, present family situations, incarceration,
teenage motherhood, welfare dependence, and other indicators of downward
assimilation, voting, political preferences, civic behavior, ethnic and racial
identities, and identification with American society. It is this extensive data
set that we intend to analyze, employing as predictors of key second generation
outcomes, personal, family, and school variables measured in the two earlier
surveys. Using these data, issues of causal order and non-spuriousness of causal
effects can be addressed in a more robust manner on the basis of this data set.
Findings will be disseminated, as in past phases of this study, through academic
publications as well as through public lectures, journalistic articles, and
Internet sites accessible to policy-makers and the public. The project's
intellectual merit includes the following: This is the first major study on the
long-term consequences of contemporary immigration through a focus on the
adaptation of its offspring. It will test novel theories of segmented
assimilation and compare them with those stemming from classic perspectives in
this field. The project's broader impacts include the following: Results of the
study will provide the first authoritative conclusion about the adaptation of
the contemporary second generation and its impact on the cities and regions
where it concentrates. As such, results of the study will have a direct bearing
on immigration policy and education and language programs focused on new
Americans.