* 0350383
* Molecular-Level Studies of Structure and Photophysics in Conjugated Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2004,05/31/2006
* Michael Winokur, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2006
* USD 158,000.00

Conjugated polymers represent a class of materials that incorporate the physical
attributes of conventional polymers and, simultaneously, electronic and optical
properties more often associated with classic inorganic semi-conductors. In
terms of science and technology as a whole, these polymers are becoming a
mainstream building block for developing new device technologies. This
evolutionary progress is based on widespread advancements in materials
synthesis, processing and in the science and technology of their applications.
At the molecular level they remain highly complex materials with numerous long-
standing questions and, given the desire for molecular level engineering, a
multitude of newer issues concerning subtle structure/property relationships.
Understanding and controlling the three-dimensional organization at the shortest
length scales (0.1-10 nm) remains a central issue for defining their potential
in real world applications and identifying the ever present limitations.

This initiative represents a focused set of research projects that will enhance
the fundamental understanding of structure, structural phase behavior in
conjugated polymers and, additionally, the impact that structure has on
technologically important photophysical properties. A combination of direct
diffraction studies, molecular modeling and structure refinement techniques
constitute the core of these efforts and these will be used for clarifying
issues pertaining to molecular-level structure in the most highly ordered
materials. Even in the best cases these conjugated polymers often include
multiple conformational sequences along the skeletal backbone. Therefore a
proper accounting of these structure/property relationships necessitates a more
integrated approach combining other techniques (including photoabsorption,
photoluminescence and Raman spectroscopy). Novel polymer processing techniques
and extensive use of in situ methodologies will also be exploited.

On a broader level this research includes activities which meld multiple
techniques and interdisciplinary collaborations in order to congently and
comprehensively address central issues of local conjugated polymer structure and
its impact on salient photophysics. An important component of this work is
portability and accessibility to the science community. This will be
accomplished through a set of selected new directions. To the fullest extent
possible, all new experimental developments will rely on web-accessible
instrumentation interfaces and standardized hierarchal data formats. These
attributes will provide ready access to students both at the graduate and
undergraduate level. Ultimately the knowledge and techniques developed though
the course of this research will provide very basic and accurate answers to
questions of structure, its evolution and the direct relationship to
photophysics within these diverse materials.

