* 0350580
* Role of Pituitary Adenylate Cyclase-Activating Polypeptide (PACAP) in the Activation of Hypophysiotropic CRH Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 09/02/2002,09/30/2004
* Gabor Legradi, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 09/30/2004
* USD 33,000.00

The stress response of mammals is a complex response to stimuli such as severe
environmental change that might otherwise be deleterious to the whole organism.
The appropriate response requires the interplay of the nervous system and
production of certain hormones that prepare the animal to adapt physiologically
to the stressful challenge. Certain peptide neurohormones and neurotransmitters
in the key brain region of the hypothalamus are critically involved in stress-
activation, but the fine regulation of these basic mechanisms is poorly
understood. This project is designed to uncover the specific role of a recently
discovered neuropeptide, PACAP (pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating
polypeptide), in stress-activation in the hypothalamus. Neuropeptides are small,
protein-like molecules that serve specific functions in the brain, and help
establish or maintain communication between nerve cells (neurons). PACAP is an
intriguing molecule presumed to have important functions in adaptive functions
such as stress-activation. Biochemical, molecular, anatomical and
immunocyctochemical methods are used in this research to determine where, when
and how PACAP regulates the gene expression and the release of a key hormone,
CRH (corticotropin-releasing hormone) from a population of cells in the
hypothalamus.&lt;br/&gt; Results will be important not only for
neuroendocrinology, but also potentially for many systems where PACAP may have a
novel role as a co-transmitter with classical neurotransmitters like
catecholamines. This project will also have an impact on the development of the
career of a young investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;