* 0351518
* Multiple Steady States and Hysteresis off a Boundary Current Leaping across a Gap: Socian Shelf Water Crossover Events
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Vitalii Sheremet, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2008
* USD 586,673.00

0351518&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of a shelf-break current crossing over
a strait will to be investigated using theoretical, numerical, and laboratory
approaches with the emphasis on understanding the dynamics of such a process.
The project will address specific questions: how and under what conditions does
crossover occur; what is the character of the transition between the states with
and without crossover; what are the characteristics of the crossover events, and
what indices and locations can be used to monitor the crossovers. As a prototype
of this process, the Scotian Shelf Water (SSW) crossover events occurring in the
Northeast Channel, separating Georges Bank from the Scotian Shelf will be
considered.. The SSW crossovers, rich in plankton, have important implications
for Georges Bank biological productivity. The dynamical process itself is very
dramatic and very distinct, but poorly understood. The bathymetry in this area
is relatively simple, allowing idealized theoretical representation and finally,
a lot of observational data has been recently collected as a part of the
U.S.GLOBEC (GLOBal ocean ECosystems) program on Georges Bank, which needs to be
analyzed and synthesized. The data come from various sources: multiple large-
scale hydrographic surveys, fine-resolution sections, moorings, drifters, sea
surface temperature measurements from satellite, wind data from weather buoys,
etc. The SSW crossover events in these data are well documented. Preliminary
work indicates that the crossovers can be reproduced by varying the intensity of
the shelf-break current related to the slope/shelf density difference within a
range consistent with realistic annual variability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Understanding the causes and variability
of the SSW crossovers is critical for the knowledge of basic ecology of the
region and successful management of the Georges Bank fisheries. Slight changes
in temperature and salinity differences between the shelf and slope water may
potentially allow continuous flow of SSW onto the Georges Bank. The hydrographic
conditions in this region are known to be linked to the North Atlantic
Oscillation (NAO) and the river output from the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and
therefore are greatly affected by the global warming and climate change. The
proposed project will benefit the educational and research programs at the
University of Rhode Island by supporting a graduate student and by allowing the
PIs to mentor summer students in the SURFO program. It will also enhance the
utilization of a recently acquired equipment in the geophysical fluid dynamics
laboratory for active research during this project and through collaboration
with colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;