* 0351430
* Scaling Up Forest Ecosystem Carbon Budget from Stand to Landscape: Impacts of Forest Structures
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Conghe Song, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2008
* USD 159,950.00

The overall goal of this project is to improve our understanding of the impacts
of the multi-dimensional forest structures on scaling up forest ecosystem carbon
cycle from stand to landscape through the integrative use of remote sensing,
ecological models and ground observations. Though funding is requested for UNC
Chapel Hill only, this is a collaborative research between the Department of
Geography at UNC Chapel Hill and the School of Environment at Duke University.
The expertise and research facilities from the two campuses are complementary.
The proposed research will expands the scope and depth of the existing projects
in Duke Forest. The project will take the necessary steps to transform the
understanding of mass and energy exchange between forest ecosystems and the
atmosphere at Duke Forest to a regional understanding. The project will use the
AmeriFlux and FACE sites in the Duke Forest as the anchor points for scaling up
through the integrative use of remote sensing and ecosystem models. Currently
the global FLUXNET has over 200-flux towers world wide, and the up-scaling
strategy investigated in this project will provide in-depth understanding of how
to scale up from FLUXNET measurements to improve our understanding in global
carbon cycle. The project proposes to use multisensor remotely sensed data to
map multi-dimensional forest structures, including tree size and density, stand
ages, leaf area index, and subpixel tree cover. The remotely sensed data include
high-resolution (=1m) digital orthophoto quads and space-born images from
Ikonos/QuickBird, medium resolution (30 m) Landsat images, and coarse-resolution
(250m) MODIS/MISR images. The project will develop algorithms to use information
from spatial, spectral/temporal and directional domains of remotely sensed data.
The project can substantially enhance the use of remote sensing to extract
detailed spatial vegetation information. A series of well-established ecological
models will be used in the project, each of which will take forest structure at
the appropriate scale to simulate terrestrial ecosystem carbon cycle. In
addition to quantifying the errors caused by omitting forest structures in
simulating carbon cycle, the project will lead to major improvements to the
these models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;