* 0351638
* U.S.-Polish Collaborative Research:  Localization and Fracture under Dynamic Loading Processes in Mesomechanics Problems
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2004,09/30/2008
* George Voyiadjis, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 09/30/2008
* USD 40,000.00

The is a U.S.-Polish cooperative research project that will investigate damage
and fracture phenomena under dynamic and cyclic loading conditions in modern
engineering materials. The principal investigators are Dr. George Voyiadjis from
Louisiana State University &amp; Agricultural and Mechanical College, Dr. Piotr
Perzyna and Dr. Wojciech Dornowski from the Institute of Fundamental
Technological Research (Warsaw, Poland) and Dr. Tomasz Lodygowski from Poznan
University of Technology (Poznan, Poland). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
addresses an important and unresolved problem in the theory of inelastic
behavior of materials. It will enhance the understanding of fracture and
particularly localized fracture phenomena in thermo-elasto-viscoplastic flow
processes under dynamic loadings in modern engineering materials. This study is
the combination of theoretical modeling, computational simulation and
comparisons with existing experimental data to address localization in damage
phenomena. Results of this research are expected to increase the understanding
of the localization damage phenomenon and eventually contribute to reducing and
controlling detrimental effects of dynamic and impact
loads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in engineering research fulfills the
program objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and
Central/Eastern Europe to combine complementary efforts and capabilities in
areas of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis of equality,
reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.