* 0351893
* N2 Fixation in Marine Sponges:  A New Nitrogen Source for Coastal Ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2004,10/31/2006
* Christopher Martens, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 10/31/2006
* USD 400,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE- 0351893 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial transformations
of nitrogen (N) strongly influence the dynamics and diversity of marine
communities and ecosystems. Inputs of new N from N2 fixation are of particular
interest. Many species of abundant marine sponges are known to host large and
diverse microbial communities thought to fix N2, although few data support this
assumption. In recent studies of stable isotopes of multiple sponge species in
the FL Keys two basic groups of sponges were identified and differentiated by
their d15N values. In addition to low d15N values, which are indicative of N2
fixation, one group had a 15N2 incorporation assay. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this study, researchers from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
will focus on quantifying rates of microbial N2 fixation together with
photosynthesis and respiration in low and high d15N sponges. Further comparative
studies with low and high d15N sponges will use molecular biology techniques
(e.g., 16S, nifH, DGGE, FISH analyses) to examine their microbial communities
and to identify active N2-fixing microbes within test sponges. The team of
scientists will also examine the dynamics of N2-fixing symbiont-sponge
interactions throughout the sponge life cycle and estimate levels of new N
export from sponges. After exploring a natural environmental gradient in the
Florida Keys the study will be expanded to oligotrophic waters off San Salvador
Island, Bahamas, in order to investigate how other environmental parameters,
such as light levels, affect d15N values of sponges and rates of N2 fixation.
This research will not only address the longstanding questions regarding N2
fixation in sponges and importance of sponges as a source of new N for coral-
algal reefs and other coastal ecosystems but also broaden our basic
understanding of the biogeochemical significance of marine microbial-
invertebrate associations and how environmental factors control the rates of
biogeochemical processes occurring within these systems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;