* 0351850
* Does mating success determine population growth rate at low abundance in marine copepods?
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* William Kimmerer, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2009
* USD 568,921.00

Successful mating is a prerequisite for population growth in organisms that
reproduce sexually. Unlike other determinants of population growth, mating
success is inversely related to population density, resulting in an inverse
density-dependent relationship between rate of increase and local population
density. The resulting feedback should prevent dilute populations from
persisting or growing; yet, they do persist.

This project will examine the potential for poor mating success to suppress rate
of increase of copepod populations at low density. This study will build on
previous studies of mating in copepods that emphasized behavior and physiology;
however, the focus of this research will be on consequences of behavior. That
is, a series of experiments will support a model of the probability of
successful mating as a function of local population density of adults. Copepods
from an estuarine environment will be used under the expectation that they may
be adapted to high density and therefore most likely to show effects at low
density.

The mating success probability model describes encounter rate, as in models
describing feeding (Gerritsen 1980), together with simplified population
dynamics. Although behavioral studies have determined volume search rates for
mating, the conditional probability of actually mating upon encounter has not
been determined. Model parameters include the product of the volume search rate
and this conditional probability; this product, rather than its components, will
be determined from experimental results. The experimental work will examine the
frequency of mating in unmated copepods confined together under various
conditions of density, sex ratio, container size, and food concentration. These
experiments will be conducted using copepods of various species with a range of
swimming and searching behaviors in an attempt to determine how these behaviors
result in different mating frequencies. Preliminary and ancillary experiments
will test for experimental artifacts and issues such as time for males to
regenerate sperm after mating. Environmental determinants of copepod sex ratio,
a key parameter in mating probability, will also be examined with an emphasis on
the potential role of dietary lipids.

Intellectual merit: Zooplankton occupy a key role in oceanic foodwebs, and their
population dynamics has been the subject of considerable research. Among
determinants of population growth rate, mating success has received relatively
little study, and most of that has been on behavior and anatomical structure.
Yet, mating success should be a key determinant of recovery of populations from
periods of low abundance, as well as establishment of new populations from
initial seeds. This research builds on previous work to include all components
of mating (Buskey 1998) rather than only encounter rate.

Broader impacts: The results of this research will have impacts in two areas
important to society. First, invasive species, a major concern in coastal
waters, must establish populations from initially small inocula, which are
therefore subject to the positive feedback addressed here. Second, these results
may be transferable, at least in principle, to the study of endangered and rare
species of other taxonomic groups. The proposed research will also contribute to
education by providing an opportunity for a Master's thesis at San Francisco
State University, a minority-serving institution.