* 0351499
* The Oceanography and Biochemistry of Cadmium
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2010
* Francois Morel, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2010
* USD 1,012,191.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;OCE- 0351499&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although it is generally
considered a toxic element, cadmium is scavenged from the ocean surface by the
biota and incorporated into the organic material that settles and is
remineralized in deep water. Recent data demonstrate that Cd is in fact a
micronutrient that substitutes effectively for Zn in many species of marine
phytoplankton. In marine diatoms, which dominate coastal and upwelling waters,
Cd substitutes for Zn as the metal center in carbonic anhydrase (CA), an enzyme
involved in the acquisition of inorganic carbon for photosynthesis. Cd is also
utilized by coccolithophores, which flourish in oligotrophic gyres, but the
biochemical function in these organisms is unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
study, a researcher from Princeton University will elucidate the processes
responsible for the cycling of cadmium (Cd) in seawater based on the general
hypothesis that the oceanic cycling of Cd results from its utilization as a
micronutrient by phytoplankton under low ambient Zn concentration. Preliminary
evidence indicates that Cd may serve as a metal center in alkaline phosphatase
(AP), an enzyme involved in the acquisition of phosphorus from organic
phosphate. Using new laboratory experiments with the model coccolithophore
Emiliana huxleyi, the scientist will identify the principal CD enzymes in this
organism, starting with the hypothesis that Cd-AP may be such an enzyme. Studies
of the DNA sequences coding for Cd enzymes in various species will reveal the
diversity of these enzymes among microalgae and identify consensus
oligonucleotides to identify corresponding DNA and RNA sequences in field
samples. Indirect evidence for the synthesis of Cd enzymes (and of its response
to environmental conditions) will be provided by analysis of key elements and
compounds (e.g., particulate Cd, dissolved CO2 and PO4) along natural chemical
gradients and in on-board incubations of natural samples amended as necessary.
Direct evidence and quantification of the Cd enzymes will be sought by
application of the molecular tools developed in the laboratory, using
immunodetection, PCR of DNA samples and reverse transcription PCR of RNA
samples. The successful completion of this project will not only explain the
processes that control the oceanic geochemistry of Cd, document the importance
of Cd as a micronutrient, and provide a mechanistic basis for the utilization of
Cd in sedimentary CaCO3 as a paleo-indicator of past nutrient concentrations,
but also lead to the discovery of novel metallo-enzymes and provide new insights
into the ecology of diatoms and coccolithophores.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;