* 0351373
* Construction of a Panel Database from Linked Population and Agricultural Census Records, 1850-1880
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Jeremy Atack, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/2008
* USD 151,516.00

This project will construct an unbalanced panel from existing micro-level
federal census data. Specifically, it will link the records for individuals,
families and households from the 1850, 1860, 1870 and 1880 federal censuses of
population for a sample of townships in the northern United States to the
records of the censuses of agriculture for these communities in those census
years which are the only years for which comprehensive agricultural census data
are available. The core of the panel is an expanded version of the widely-used
Bateman-Foust sample from the 1860 censuses of agriculture and population to
include more western agriculture (including the West Coast) and to improve
coverage&lt;br/&gt;of agriculture in the Northeast. Temporal coverage was
expanded to include 1850 as well as 1870 and 1880. Virtually all the individual
data have been collected. This proposal underwrites the record linkage and panel
creation and its distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Not only
is 1850-80 the only period for which a panel of linked data between the census
of population and the census of agriculture can be created but it is also a
period of fundamental economic and social change in an area that has been
largely ignored in recent scholarship: the agrarian northern part of the United
States. It therefore promises to reopen scholarship in this area by providing a
new, large-scale, user-friendly resource. Among the changes taking place in the
communities in the panel are initial European settlement, a spreading
transportation network, growing urbanization, and rural stagnation and
depopulation. The panel provides much greater detail (albeit for just a limited
number of communities) plus an essential time series dimension not found in
other micro-datasets such as the IPUMS. However, it is a complement to rather
than a substitute for these other samples. Indeed, to enhance complementarity we
will recode using IPUMS codes and construct the same variables (e.g. "own
children"). The principal challenge in this project is the linkage of the
individual census databases one to another. Specifically, individuals in the
census of population in each of the 140 communities will be linked across census
years if they remain in those communities. Also farmers in each year will be
linked to the farms that they operated in the township. Record linkage is
primarily through the names of the individuals (though supplemented by other
information). This task will confront the same kinds of challenges that face all
who assemble and maintain records from assorted sources including biomedical
records, taxes and security services as well as historians and genealogists.
These challenges include data discrepancies and transcription errors that serve
to obscure and confuse true links. Although linkage is partially computerized
using various phonetic encoding schemes and also taking account of the effects
of aging on ink and paper, we have found that human involvement is unavoidable.
Indeed, it is critical to success and the prime consideration behind this
funding request.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: While the PI has his own
research agenda for these data, the primary objective remains the creation of
the panel database as a public good. Numerous scholars have indicated their
interest in these data and their potential value in training graduate students
and providing material for graduate theses. Many of the individual samples have
already been made available through the PI, USGenWeb and various state and
county historical and genealogical societies. Indeed, USGenWeb has formed a
special projects taskforce to handle these data. The rest of the individual data
will be made available shortly as it is checked. The completed panel will be
archived with ICPSR and also made available on the web page of the PI where
other databases that I have helped collect already reside.&lt;br/&gt;