* 0351288
* Relocation and Concentration in the 2004 Emergence of Periodical Cicadas
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2006
* John Odland, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2006
* USD 79,806.00

Emergences of periodical cicadas are spectacular events and may exert important
effects on forest ecology. This project is an investigation of the general
hypothesis that human modifications of forest environments increase the effects
of cicada emergences by causing cicadas to concentrate in particular
environments. Periodical cicadas spend most of their lives underground but
adults emerge to reproduce, at 13 or 17-year intervals, and their spatial
behavior during the brief emergence period accounts for the relocation and
concentration of cicada populations. The large biomass of cicadas produces a
major flux of nutrients from below to above ground. Emerging cicadas also
inflict substantial damage on trees and shrubs as they deposit eggs in twigs and
the emergence ends a period of heavy feeding on tree roots by maturing nymphs
and initiates a period of lighter feeding by younger nymphs of the next
generation. These effects may alter ecological dynamics by favoring some species
of trees and shrubs but the effects will depend on the spatial concentration of
cicadas. That concentration is likely to be altered by human modification of the
forest, since cicadas select areas of forest edge and recent disturbance to
deposit the eggs that produce the next generation. The largest brood of
periodical cicadas will emerge in Spring, 2004 and the analysis will be based on
spatial samples that will be sufficient to analyze the location of the cicada
population before and after the emergence. The samples will be used to test
specific hypotheses about the net relocation and concentration of the cicada
population using methods for spatial statistical analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will reveal specific features of the ways that
human activity works in conjunction with a natural process, specifically the
spatial behavior of cicadas, to alter ecological dynamics and modify a forest
environment.&lt;br/&gt;