* 0351964
* Noise-Induced Escape in Multistable Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2004,01/31/2006
* Daniel Stein, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Earle L. Lomon
* 01/31/2006
* USD 210,000.00

Project Summary &lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for the support of work to study a
broad class of stochastic processes involving noise-induced escape from the
basin of attraction of a locally stable state. The proposed research includes
analytical, numerical, and experimental work. It particularly aims towards the
development of new probabilistic and asymptotic techniques, tests of new
theoretical ideas uncovered using these techniques, and their subsequent
application to an array of selected open problems associated with transitional
and relaxational processes in systems both at and away from equilibrium.
Intellectual merit of proposed activity. The choice of research projects
described herein is guided by three objectives. They are: development of new
mathematical techniques that significantly broaden the variety of systems and
situations accessible to analysis; application of these techniques to the
solution of outstanding problems in physical, chemical, and engineering systems;
and testing, both experimentally and numerically, of the resulting theoretical
predictions. The overall research program thereby aims towards a significant
advance in our understanding of nonlinear dynamical systems perturbed by weak
noise, a class of systems that cuts across many scientific disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact of proposed activity. Mathematical methods
developed by the PI and collaborators will be applied to a broad range of
systems that, put together, are of fundamental importance in a variety of
scientific fields, and at the same time have promising future technological
applications. These include electroconvective pattern formation in liquid
crystals, oscillating chemical reactions in small volumes, periodically driven
nucleation, magnetization reversal in nanomagnets, and stability of monovalent
metallic nanowires. Training will be provided to graduate and, if possible,
undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds. For example, the proposal
includes an experimental/theoretical collaboration in the study of transport
between wells in periodically modulated potentials, employing optical traps. The
experiment, which is already in the initial stages, is designed to test
theoretical predictions of the PI and others, and is largely being carried out
by a graduate student whose Ph.D. thesis will include these studies. There
should also be a number of resulting outreach activities, ranging from
presentations to classes at local K-12 schools to lectures to graduate students
in other fields at multidisciplinary summer schools. The PI has regularly
engaged in these activities for many years. The PI has been a long-time active
contributor to the field of large fluctuations and noise induced escape from a
locally stable state. He and collaborators have uncovered a large number of
previously unsuspected phenomena, and have laid the groundwork for further
explorations. The research described in this proposal will study some exciting
and fundamental questions in the problem of escape induced by weak noise, with
wide applicability to the theory of rate processes and the dynamics of
nonequilibrium systems.&lt;br/&gt;