* 0351836
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Applying Game Theory to River Restoration in Mosaic Landscapes
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Brent Haddad, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/2006
* USD 9,472.00

This project develops and applies the analytical methods of game theory to the
field of environmental restoration. It fully incorporates the complexity of
strategic feedbacks between private landowners and resource users, restoration
managers, and the spatial heterogeneity of mosaic landscapes in game-theoretic
models. This approach layers the interactions and negotiations between
restorationists and resource users to create a dynamic and more realistic model
of natural-social systems associated with efforts to restore landscapes. It uses
game-theoretic techniques to organize the actions and goals of restorationists
and resource users to identify how and why social systems impact restoration
activities, and how to better manage scarce restoration resources in light of
landowner motivations and perspectives.

The research program focuses on the complex social and natural interactions that
influence the success of river restoration efforts. Specifically, it pursues the
following questions: 1. What are the feedbacks from society that are elicited by
river restoration activities? What triggers these feedbacks, and what are the
bounds of these influences? 2. What strategies do restorationists and others
involved in large-scale restoration projects currently employ? What are the
resulting equilibria or paths of these strategic interactions? 3. How can these
strategies be changed to improve payoffs within a non-cooperative framework?
What additional gains are available within a cooperative framework?

This research answers these questions for three types of river restoration: flow
restoration, riparian corridor restoration, and landscape restoration. These
types are considered at three different sites of river restoration in
California. Flow restoration is considered via dam relicensing on the North Fork
of the Feather River. Corridor restoration is considered for riparian
reforestation of the upper Sacramento River. Landscape restoration is considered
for the planned dam removal on Matilija Creek.

The broader impacts of this research includes the development and application of
game-theoretic models for both descriptive and prescriptive purposes in the
field of environmental restoration, a field that until now has been dominated by
qualitative social science methods and cost-benefit analysis. This work provides
a greater understanding of negative impacts and feedbacks from restoration and
conservation, and identification of policy options that could improve
restoration and conservation efforts in conflicted social settings.