* 0351892
* Collaborative Proposal: Laboratory Studies of Stirring by Small-Scale Geostrophic Motions
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Miles Sundermeyer, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 04/30/2009
* USD 297,583.00

0351892/0351905&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Tracer release studies
in the coastal and open ocean suggest that lateral dispersion on scales of 1 to
10 kilometer cannot be explained by shear dispersion or dispersion by lateral
intrusions. Dispersion on these scales may be due to stirring by small-scale
geostrophic motions, or vortical modes. Analytical and numerical modeling
studies support this conclusion. However, a complete description of the
generation of vortical modes via geostrophic adjustment of internal wave
breaking events, their effect on lateral stirring, and their eventual
dissipation is still lacking. The goal of the proposed laboratory experiments is
to study lateral stirring by vortical modes formed by geostrophic adjustment of
diapycnal mixing events., and to better quantify the importance of vortical mode
stirring in the ocean. The main contributions of this work will be to test
theoretical predictions for vortical mode stirring when internal wave forcing
and breaking are present, and to provide a basis for parameterizing horizontal
dispersion rates by vortical mode stirring in the ocean.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments will be conducted using the University of
Rhode Island's Graduate School of Oceanography rotating tank facility. A 1 meter
diameter, 30 centimeter deep uniformly stratified rotating tank will be used to
model conditions in the ocean's stratified interior. Two methods will be used to
generate diapycnal mixing events: 1) mechanical stirring in the form of
localized grid-forced turbulence, and 2) a quasi-random field of internal waves
and wave breaking generated by near resonant forcing of a mode-1 internal wave,
and wave-wave interactions to scatter energy into higher modes. The formation of
vortical modes and their effects on lateral stirring of a passive fluorescent
dye will be examined using a combination of Particle Imaging Velocimetry (PIV),
Laser Induced Fluorescence (LIF), and digital video analysis. A major advantage
of the proposed laboratory studies over previous analytical and numerical
studies is that diapycnal mixing events will ultimately be driven by internal
wave breaking rather than some artificially imposed method of mixing. The
proposed work will build extensively on analytical and numerical studies by the
investigators and collaborators, which predict the amount of lateral dispersion
caused by vortical mode stirring. However, these studies did not explicitly
include breaking internal waves, but simulated their effects in terms of
buoyancy flux. A major focus of this study will be to test theoretical and
numerical predictions when large-scale internal wave forcing and diapycnal
mixing by internal wave breaking are explicitly included. This will allow an
assessment of the effects of large-scale internal waves, the conversion to
potential energy through diapycnal mixing by internal wave breaking, and the
transfer of energy into vortical modes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
The proposed work will help provide a quantitative description of vertical mode
stirring on scales of 1-10 km in the ocean. Dispersion on these scales affects
distributions of physical, biological, and chemical tracers, and is particularly
important to understanding global ocean circulation and heat balances, since
these scales are approximately the grid scale of state of the art global ocean
circulation models. The project is a collaborative effort between the University
of Rhode Island and the University of Massachusetts at Dartmouth. It will
support one full time graduate student and one undergraduate summer intern per
year for four years. We will attempt to fill these positions with candidates
from underrepresented groups. The laboratory experiments will also be used to
demonstrate internal wave dynamics for physical oceanography courses taught by
the investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;