* 0351139
* A Proposal to Provide Technical Assistance to Increase the Participation and Competitiveness of Minority Institutions in the Major Research Instrumentation Program
* O/D,OIA
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2008
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Sherrie Green
* 10/31/2008
* USD 560,892.00

McBay &lt;br/&gt;OIA-0351139&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quality Education
for Minorities (QEM) Network, a non-profit organization, has been instrumental
in improving the education of under-represented groups that have been
historically underserved by the nation's educational system. A successor to the
Quality Education for Minorities Project based at MIT, QEM continues to develop
effective strategies of STEM education for under-represented populations, and
focuses on issues and barriers that prevent minorities from receiving a high
quality education. In order to offer competitive research and research training
programs in STEM, it is imperative that all US faculty and students
participating in the research enterprise have access to state-of-the-art
instrumentation enabling them to perform high quality research. This award to
QEM will continue previous efforts in providing technical assistance to minority
-serving institutions; equipping faculty with the essential tools needed to
develop competitive instrumentation proposals to NSF's equipment programs,
including the Major Research Instrumentation Program. As a result all US
institutions will have opportunity to secure funds needed to facilitate their
efforts in the quest to unravel the challenges presented by the
universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;