* 0351250
* A Model of Cellular Pattern Formation in the Growing Retina
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* David Cameron, SUNY, Upstate Medical University
* Continuing grant
* Aixa Alfonso
* 08/31/2008
* USD 203,867.00

The precise spatial patterns of cells in the nervous system help to determine
the types of neuronal computations that are performed. The mechanisms that
control the formation of these crucial cellular patterns, however, are poorly
understood. The ultimate goal of this project is to identify and characterize
the mechanisms that control cellular pattern formation in the growing central
nervous system. Using the retina as a model system, a multidisciplinary
combination of empirical and computational modeling techniques will be used to
work toward this goal. Specifically, predictions arising from a computational
model of cellular pattern formation, the key component of which is a signaling
pathway that controls the time and location of cell births during retinal
development and growth will be tested. Many structures within the body are
organized non-randomly at the cellular level, so this project is expected to
provide general insights into how the body is assembled during development.

This project involves an integrative combination of cellular, computational, and
quantitative analysis techniques. The investigators include a neuroscientist,
and a biomedical engineer, and the project thus serves as a model for how the
disparate methods and approaches can be brought together into a cohesive effort
to address a general problem of developmental biology. There will be active
participation of a neuroscience graduate student and bioengineering
undergraduate students. We intend for this project to provide students with the
confidence to pursue future research projects that involve novel,
multidisciplinary approaches.