* 0351987
* Government Performance, Valence Judgments, and The Dynamics of Party Support
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2004,12/31/2009
* Marianne Stewart, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2009
* USD 402,959.00

This research project advances knowledge of the dynamics and determinants of
&lt;br/&gt;party support in democratic polities. One aspect of the research
concerns dynamic relationships between public service delivery and aggregate
party support. Acutely aware of the importance of these relationships, governing
parties of varying ideological hues have made repeated attempts not only to
bolster the supply of public services, but also to curb the electorate's demand
for them. The latter efforts have met with relatively little success. Many
voters remain convinced that government can, and should, be heavily involved in
fields such as education, health, welfare, and transportation, that
privatization schemes often go awry, and that government is responsible when
public services go badly or are not delivered at all. To date, however, research
on factors affecting the aggregate dynamics of party support has focused
heavily, indeed almost exclusively, on the impact of economic conditions and
various "one-off" political events. By restricting attention to economic
conditions and salient events, existing studies have ignored the consequences of
public reactions to government performance in a wide variety of highly salient
policy areas such as health care, education, and national security. Building on
the results of &lt;br/&gt;earlier research on the determinants of party support
conducted by the principal investigator and colleagues, the study will specifies
and tests rival models of how government performance evaluations in several
important policy areas affect the dynamics of aggregate-level support for
governing and opposition parties in a major mature democracy, Great Britain. A
second aspect of the research concerns modeling the individual-level dynamics of
party support. Here, the principal focus is gathering the large-N, multi-wave
panel data needed to address longstanding controversies regarding the
individual-level dynamics of partisan attachments. Although these controversies
have major theoretical implications for understanding the nature of party
support in democracies new and old alike, their resolution has been hindered by
the lack of sufficiently large multi-wave panels, disputes regarding the proper
measurement of partisan attachments, and the absence of suitable statistical
tools for analyzing the latent-level dynamics of nominal-scale measures of
partisanship. Such tools are now available, and the research gathers the
requisite large N panel data needed to analyze individual-level latent variable
dynamics of partisan attachments measured using both the traditional British
Election Study (BES) party identification question sequence and an alternative
party supporter battery. &lt;br/&gt;The aggregate-level time series and
individual-level panel data needed to conduct the research are gathered in 48
consecutive monthly surveys of the British electorate. Surveys are be conducted
by YouGov, Britain's premier internet survey firm. Each monthly survey is
conducted with a national sample of 1,000 persons 18 years of age or older,
yielding a total N of 48,000 cases. Multi-wave national panels, including a
four-wave panel with an N of approximately 5,000 cases will be embedded in the
surveys. The large size of the cross-sectional and panel surveys facilitate
theoretically interesting sub-group analyses. Aggregate time series analyses
will be informed by recent work by the principal investigator and colleagues on
the specification and testing of rival fractional error correction models.
&lt;br/&gt;Individual- and aggregate-level data gathered in the study will be
deposited annually with the ICPSR Data Archive, and also will be available for
downloading from the project website. The website also will provide monthly
"DataCam" updates of the evolution of time series variables. Project findings
will be presented at major scholarly conferences, and papers and technical
reports will be available for downloading from the website.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;