* 0351043
* Collaborative Research: Establishing a High-resolution Temporal Record of Quaternary Climate-Glacial-Ocean Linkages in Southern Alaska (and IODP Site Survey)
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* John Jaeger, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rodey Batiza
* 04/30/2007
* USD 66,207.00

Title: Collaborative Research: Establishing a High-resolution Temporal Record of
Quaternary Climate-Glacial-Ocean Linkages in Southern Alaska (an IODP Site
Survey)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI/Institution: John Jaeger, Florida; Ross Powell,
Northern Illinois University; Joseph Stoner, University of Colorado at Boulder;
Sean Gulick, University of Texas Institute of Geophysics; Ellen Cowan,
Appalachian State University; Bruce Finney, University of Alaska-
Fairbanks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part
of a site survey for a proposed IODP program to drill marine sediments
associated with late Cenozoic climate change and tectonic activity along the
southern Alaskan margin, the researchers will combine efforts with an already
funded piston coring and shallow imaging cruise and will acquire additional
piston cores and high-resolution seismic images at proposed Gulf of Alaska drill
sites. This region is believed to be analogous to, but have a smaller influence
than, the Tibetan plateau in terms of the possible feedback between climate
change and tectonics. The coring program has been designed to provide temporal
resolution at sub-decadal to millennial time scales and sufficient spatial
resolution to capture some of the variability in the provenance of marine
sediments derived from glaciated source areas. The researchers will use the
recovered core material to constrain the timing of deposition, sediment mixing
rates, sediment fluxes, and sediment sources, to infer glacial dynamics, and to
characterize basic visual and physical properties. In collaboration with Oregon
State University colleagues, they will obtain additional information about
paleotemperature, salinity, and oxygen conditions. The researchers will also
process the marine seismic data for use in sequence stratigraphic correlations
and baseline characterization of the proposed IODP drill sites.&lt;br/&gt;