* 0351297
* Collaborative Research: CROSSTEX - An Experimental Study of Onshore Bar Movement
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2009
* James Kirby, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2009
* USD 253,189.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0351297&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cross-shore
sediment transport processes play a crucial role in the annual episodic cycles
of erosion and accretion on most beaches. Great strides have been made in our
understanding of erosional processes during intense storm events, and models
have shown reasonable skill in predicting storm bar formation and offshore
migration. A parallel understanding of accretional processes, particularly the
landward migration of bars, has not yet been obtained. Consequently, predictive
models of cross-shore transport processes exhibit little skill in predicting
morphology change for any extended sequence of erosional and accretional events.
Part of the lack of present understanding stems from a paucity of available data
sets. In the field, measurement of profile evolution during an accretional event
requires having both a detailed surveying program and sufficient hydrodynamic
instrumentation in place at the right time in order to allow testing of process
based models. The Duck '94 experiment has provided one such data set. However,
cross-shore processes in the field can be masked or altered by the lateral
diffusion of the large longshore transport volume, and can be further
complicated by the evolution of two dimensional bathymetric variations, leading
to longshore variability of the cross-shore transport pattern. Large scale
laboratory experiments have been conducted at near-to-field scale, eliminating
most of the concerns over scaling issues and providing an isolated look at
purely cross-shore processes. However, the existing data sets do not provide a
long enough look at the shoreward movement of bars during accretional events,
and do not provide measurements of the multiple events that are needed to
provide both calibration and a blind test of predictive models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's will conduct an extended cross-shore morphology
experiment to examine the shoreward migration of shore-parallel sand bars under
accretional wave conditions. The experiments will be conducted in the large wave
flume facility at Oregon State University. The experimental program will
primarily examine the relative roles of suspended load versus bedload modes of
transport. Also included will be whether "plug-flow" (mass failure of the upper
layer of the sand bed) plays a significant role during shoreward bar movement
events. Extensive use will be made of hydrodynamic models (based on Boussinesq
or nonlinear mild-slope formulations) to design experimental conditions and
assist in choice of instrument placement. The acquired data set will be used to
test the predictions of both the hydrodynamic models and the sediment transport
models, which are driven for extended periods by the hydrodynamic models. This
data set which will adequately describe the hydrodynamics and sediment
transportmechanisms associated with a significant period of shoreward bar
movement, will provide a test base for evaluating modern sediment transport
models which is presently lacking. The improvement of process-based predictive
models which could result from access to such a data base could markedly
increase the coastal engineering and nearshore oceanography communities' ability
to predict the seasonal variability of shoreline erosion and accretion in the
U.S.'s heavily populated coastal zones. The results of this project will be
disseminated broadly through publications in peer-reviewed journals,
presentations at international and national conferences, workshops for
scientists interested in the data set and for industry members and coastal
managers, inclusion of the results in classroom material, and participation by
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;