* 0351770
* Partnership for Research and Education in Materials Between FAMU and CMU
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2004,09/30/2010
* Rufina Alamo, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Continuing Grant
* Sean Jones
* 09/30/2010
* USD 2,768,808.00

This Partnership for Research and Education in Materials (PREM) between Florida
Agricultural and Mechanical University (FAMU) and Carnegie Mellon University
(CMU) is a continuation of an earlier Collaborative to Integrate Research and
Education (CIRE) program between FAMU and CMU.&lt;br/&gt;In this activity,
twenty undergraduate and six graduate students will be organized into six
groups, under the mentorship of a professor from both FAMU and CMU as
follows:&lt;br/&gt;1- The Role of Five-Parameter Grain Boundary Character in the
Properties of Thin Film and Superplastic Materials, P.N. Kalu (FAMU), K.Barmak
and A.Rollett (CMU).&lt;br/&gt;2- Grain Boundary Engineering Using Two Point
Function Statistics, E. E. Kalu (FAMU), H. Garmestani (Consultant) and B. L.
Adams (BYU).&lt;br/&gt;3- Partnership in Magnetism and Magnetic Processing, Ke
Han (FAMU), J. Schwartz (FAMU) and M. E. McHenry (CMU).&lt;br/&gt;4- The use of
Chiral Surfaces to Control Specific Polymeric Crystal Growth, R.G. Alamo (FAMU)
and G. Rohrer (CMU).&lt;br/&gt;5- Materials Improvement of Superconducting
Electronic Devices, J. Schwartz (FAMU), and P. Salvador (CMU) &lt;br/&gt;6-
Processing Model For Polycrystalline Micro and Nano Structured Materials, P.J.
Gielisse (FAMU) and G.S. Rohrer (CMU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students will
receive jointly taught Materials Science lectures via a live Internet
connection. This multi-media component will also provide regular live
teleconferencing between the students and faculty at both institutions. This
award will provide the means to create three more courses and hardware for
better interactive, long-distance learning between the two institutions. Ten
FAMU students will spend their summer at CMU, providing a pool of minority
students excited about research and expanding their exposure to research and
graduate school. It is anticipated that the partnership will strengthen the
quality of the FAMU materials science curriculum at both the undergraduate and
graduate levels and enhance the opportunities for minority students to
participate in materials science research at CMU. It will also enhance the
materials science research resources at both institutions through long-term
collaboration, shared equipment, and shared software.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;