* 0352681
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Pastoral Neolithic of East Afica Revisited through a New Chronology for the Emergence of Pastoralism from Tsavo National Park, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Chapurukha Kusimba, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2004
* USD 11,909.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Chapurukha M. Kusimba, David Wright will undertake
archaeological excavations and analysis at the site of Mtembea kwa Barafu in
Tsavo, Kenya. Mtembea kwa Barafu is located on the banks of the Galana River
within Tsavo East National Park and was a large, prehistoric village that dates
to at least 2,000 BC. There is evidence that the village was inhabited many
times over thousands of years based on the discovery of distinct layers of
pottery, animal bones and stone tools eroding from separate river terraces at
the site. The earliest dated occupation of the site occurs at during the time
when people in East Africa were changing their subsistence patterns from one
that was based solely on hunting and gathering to one that revolved around
domesticated food products. Wright's excavations have great potential to enhance
general understandings of the environmental and social factors that played a
role in the transition from foraging to domestication.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Archaeologists have long been interested in determining how, when and
why people decided to adopt domesticates. For millions of years, hominids
successfully hunted and gathered their food, but only in the last 10,000 years
has domestication of plants and animals occurred. Domestication is recognized as
an important social transition-one that allowed for the development of densely
populated urban centers, surplus economies and political power vested in small
groups of individuals rather than spread throughout a community. Understanding
the environmental conditions present during the origins of domesticated plants
and animals can answer whether or not extreme climatic stimuli may have played a
part in encouraging people to adopt domesticates. In order to answer important
questions regarding incipient domestication processes high precision dating
methods such as Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) radiocarbon analysis and
Optically Stimulated Luminescence (OSL) will provide an accurate chronology of
when people settled at Mtembea kwa Barafu. These methods will also assist in
interpreting river aggrading and downcutting for the last several thousand
years, which is an important indicator of general environmental conditions in
the area. Coupled with advances in the Quaternary sciences that are providing
detailed regional and global understandings of past environments, these data
will be important for framing occupations of Mtembea kwa Barafu in a specific
environmental context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of this work,
archaeologists will have a clearer picture from the perspective of one site that
can elucidate general motivations behind altering human subsistence patterns
that functioned uninterrupted for millions of years. These data will also assist
in developing a sustainable future for modern African pastoralists, who are
challenged by restricted land allocations for grazing and watering their
animals. By looking at successful land-use strategies of the past, the laws that
regulate the distribution of grazing land and restrict the use of resources can
be more effectively targeted to meet the needs of herding people today as well
as preserve the ecosystem for future generations. The Tsavo research agenda is
long term and will eventually solicit the assistance of local community leaders
in presenting data of past and current pastoral lifeways to the international
donors and government officials who design land management policies. However,
funds for the current project will be used to build the dataset of prehistoric
pastoral adaptations and will be presented in Wright's upcoming doctoral
dissertation, peer-reviewed journals and conferences. Future efforts to broaden
the scope of presentation to the American and international public will be
augmented by the research undertaken in this year's project.&lt;br/&gt;