* 0352803
* Meeting of Young Researchers in the Earth Sciences MYRES: A Conference Series and Community Development Initiative
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2007
* Cin-Ty Lee, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 02/28/2007
* USD 63,180.00

Lee&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0352803&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will allow the
establishment of a biennial conference series, the "Meeting of Young Researchers
in the Earth Sciences (MYRES)", that will gather junior scientists in
geochemistry, geodynamics, mineral physics, seismology, and other related Solid
Earth fields. The primary aim of MYRES (www.myres.org) is to further science by
accelerating the growth of an interdisciplinary, international, open, and
unbiased community of colleagues that can interact regularly to informally
exchange ideas, data, and tools, and to formulate new collaborative research
projects. The focus of each MYRES meeting will be the overview and discussion of
a major outstanding problem from the Solid Earth Sciences. This award will
support the first MYRES meeting, to take place in August 2004, on the following
subject: "Heat, Helium, Hotspots, and Whole Mantle Convection".
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that the primary broader impact of this
activity will be to bring together early-career specialists that can educate
each other about the specific issues each discipline can address, and thus,
allow a more comprehensive understanding of the nature of the constraints
different disciplines can provide to a specific problem. MYRES also plans to
implement new ways to educate across disciplinary boundaries and to evaluate
these innovative procedures to ensure the success of the educational aspect of
these meetings. The long-range goal of the larger MYRES initiative, which also
entails a wide range of planned online resources, is to establish a framework
for unhindered, international scientific cooperation. Such community-building
efforts are expected not only to have a substantial educational impact among
this new generation of scientists but also help improve the overall
effectiveness of research in the Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;