* 0352958
* The Circumpolar Active Layer Monitoring Network-CALM II (2004-2008):     Long-Term Observations on the Climate-Active Layer-Permafrost System
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Frederick Nelson, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
*  Elliott Francis
* 06/30/2010
* USD 1,187,171.00

The overall goal of the Circumpolar Active Layer Monitoring (CALM) program is to
observe the response of the active layer and near-surface permafrost to climate
change at multi-decade time scales. The CALM observational network, established
in the 1990s, will continue to observe the long-term response of the active
layer and near-surface permafrost to changes and variations in climate at more
than 125 sites in both hemispheres and involving 14 participating countries.
Approximately 60 sites will measure active-layer thickness on grids ranging from
1 ha to 1 km2, and 100 sites will observe soil temperatures, including
permafrost temperatures from boreholes. Most sites in the CALM network are
located in Arctic and Subarctic lowlands, although 20 boreholes are in
mountainous regions of the Northern Hemisphere above 1300 m elevation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are derived for the
hypothesis that widespread, systematic changes in the thickness of the active
layer could have profound effects on the flux of greenhouse gases, on the human
infrastructure in cold regions, and on landscape processes. It is therefore
critical that observational and analytical procedures continue over decadal
periods to assess trends and detect cumulative, long-term
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;