* 0352824
* U.S.-Turkey Collaborative Research: Cross-Layer Approaches for Interactive Media Streaming
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2004,08/31/2007
* Yucel Altunbasak, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 25,500.00

0352824 &lt;br/&gt;Altunbasak&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports collaborative research between Dr. Yucel Altunbasak, Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
Georgia and Dr. Mehmet Civanlar, Department of Computer Engineering, Koc
University, Istanbul, Turkey. They propose to study the development of a new
framework for multimedia streaming that integrates the application and network
layer functionality. Timely delivery of the media being a critical task, new
application-aware streaming methods have to be developed to support these
services better. Real-time media distribution imposes stringent bounds on the
packet loss and delay to achieve a minimally acceptable quality. Under no
quality-of-service guarantees, satisfying these demands requires intelligent and
network adaptive source coding plus innovative use of the existing network
resources. The PIs will investigate methods based on vertical integration in the
conventional protocol stack. The PIs propose models for multi-path streaming and
plan to develop a multi-path selection method that chooses a set of paths
maximizing the overall quality at the client under various constraints. Dr.
Altunbasak and his students have worked extensively on video processing and
video communications over error-prone networks and developed several new
algorithms to improve the existing standards. Their strength in this area is
complemented by the extensive experience of Dr. Civanlar, who is an expert in
the areas of computer network architectures and protocols for multimedia. This
combination of expertise is appropriate for the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The main contributions of this research
will include: development of multi-path streaming models, particularly for
multiple description encoded video streaming; development and evaluation of
techniques for the use of network support to aid the path selection function;
characterization of multi-path streaming methods and their evaluation for path
selection problem; use of existing overlay infrastructure to provide proof of
concept for the proposed path selection method; design of a reusable
experimental platform for experimenting with proposed path selection method over
intercontinental links. The work will go beyond the path selection methods in
today's simpler environments into the near-future environments that will involve
much richer and more demanding multimedia communication services. The research
results will enhance performance of important applications over the Internet.
The project will encourage student exchange, and specific classes and projects
in both institutions that will involve undergraduate students. The project will
promote developing solutions for distance learning classes. The society will
indirectly benefit from any improvements on the 'information highways' and the
related services.&lt;br/&gt;