* 0352316
* Social Conventions, Sexual Selection, and Acoustic Signals in Wild Brown Capuchins
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2010
* Sue Boinski, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Kaye E. Reed
* 01/31/2010
* USD 259,509.00

The capacity to combine objects and employ objects as tools is considered one of
the major achievements of our species and figures deeply in our mythological,
philosophical, cultural, and academic explanations for the evolution of human
intelligence and behavior. Many researchers hold that object manipulation,
language, social skills, and brain structure are been linked in human evolution.
For the past 40 years capuchins monkeys, New World primates in the genus Cebus,
have often been suggested as models for the evolution of intelligence and tool
use in humans. Among primates, only only chimpanzees and humans exceed capuchins
in the frequency, complexity with which objects are combined and manipulated.
Although suggestive observations come from capuchins in captivity, scant
evidence from wild populations is available to test hypotheses as to why
exceptional manipulative abilities can be advantageous in natural settings and
how individuals acquire these skills.

Brown capuchins (Cebus apella) in the Central Suriname Nature Reserve (CSNR) use
complex object manipulation at the highest rates yet documented among wild
capuchins. More specifically, male capuchins at CSNR employ an array of object
combinations and manipulations labeled as percussion: striking sticks or hard
fruit against hard surfaces and breaking off tree limbs. Percussion generates
mechanical (non-vocal) acoustic sounds that transmit farther and more reliably
in this densely forested environment than social signals based on visual
displays. Preliminary observations suggest that capuchins evaluate the acoustic
structure of the noises males produce in percussion as honest indicators of male
strength and vigor important in male-mate competition and female mate choice,
i.e., the stronger the male percussing, the louder the noise. This research
project evaluates hypotheses about (1) the functions of brown capuchins'
percussive behavior, focusing on the relative benefits accruing in sexual
selection versus foraging, and (2) the expression of percussion in relation to
an individual's developmental status and social circumstances. Whatever the
findings, the theoretical implications are important and encompass anthropology,
biology, ecology, and psychology.

Percussive behavior will be most fully understood against the distinctive
ecological background of capuchin society at CSNR. First, the biota of the
Guianan Plateau is characterized by extremely low energy and nutrient flow
relative to other Neotropical regions. Second, these regional ecological
characteristics are compounded by previously unsuspected landscape earthworks by
pre-Columbian Amerindians populations in the area now encompassed by the CSNR.
Recent exploratory work by Boinski and colleagues confirms that pervasive
archeological features are present in CSNR; these sites covary with the bamboo
and liana forest habitats preferentially used by capuchins.

This primate and community ecology research program has been ongoing in the CSNR
since 1998 and remains the only multi-year ecological project within Suriname's
forested interior since the end of violent civil uprisings (late 1970's - early
1990's). Boinski and her team work with biologists, educators, and wildlife and
conservation officials of Suriname, international NGOs, and Peace Corps. Long-
term supportive relations have developed between Surinamese Park Service and the
research team, leading to educational and conservation outreach and
contributions to the scientific infrastructure of Suriname by this project far
beyond the immediate research products. Educational videos produced from
research tapes will be made freely available on the web. The CSNR project is
engaging the Surinamese with provocative questions about the cultural and
biological significance of their matchless forests at a moment in history when
national and foreign interests seek to expand economic exploitation of these
same forests.

