* 0352943
* A Workshop:Development of a National Systematics Infrastructure: A Virtual Instrument for the 21st Century
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2003,10/31/2005
* Dennis Stevenson, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 10/31/2005
* USD 60,000.00

A workshop is being organized to address the problems of making available to
researchers, policy makers, educators and the general public the breadth of
information in the vast wealth of the nation's collections of biological
specimens. We have included individuals (1) who have experience in many aspects
of collections-based research in the nations museums and universities, (2) whose
research results would benefit from a biodiversity observatory, (3) who are
familiar with existing database initiatives and their implementation (4) who
represent major national museum collections to smaller regional collections and
university based collections. Our emphasis has been to identify participants who
think broadly and critically about the scientific mission of biological museum
collections and who integrate the diverse needs and capabilities of user
community of people discovering and describing new species into a coherent and
achievable set of goals. To accomplish this, we have deliberately placed an
emphasis on working scientists who are familiar with emerging informatics and
cybertechnologies. They will develop the goals and structure for a biodiversity
observatory so that the technical details can be effectively and efficiently
developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A report from the workshop will be submitted to
NSF in draft form no later than February 2004 and published in final form by May
2004. The report will be distributed to numerous scientific societies for
comment and will be made available on the World Wide Web. In addition, one or
more scientific papers will be generated from the workshop for publication in
leading journals. Implications for such a taxonomic "instrument" for education
are profound and broad. In terms of formal education, students at any college
could potentially take a virtual on-line taxonomic class from a world authority
and see specimens in real time from collections across the country and compare
these to their own observations. This would help to inspire and educate a new
generation of field biologists, as well as educate all biologists who need to
identify species in their own research to do so. Biologists working for a
government organization or NGO could learn to identify diverse species on-line,
facilitating their own work. Teachers at K-12 levels, as well as motivated
students, could creatively use this vast store of our knowledge of taxonomy to
build new curricula and new ways of visiting the natural environment. This will
contribute to the ability of both scientists and the general public to
understand the environment and know what they are seeing and, thus actively
participate in the inventory of biodiversity and help establish policy and
priorities in the use and conservation of different species and
habitats..&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;