* 0352599
* Orchestrating Photochemistry, Energy Transfer and Electron Transfer in Multichromophoric Molecular Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2009
* Thomas Moore, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 01/31/2009
* USD 710,200.00

With this renewal proposal the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
continues its support for the work of Drs. Devens J. Gust, Anna L. Moore, and
Thomas A. Moore of the Department of Chemistry at Arizona State University in
Tempe, Arizona. The research is aimed at the synthesis and investigation of
molecular photochemical energy conversion devices, which mimic the elements of
natural photosynthetic systems including photochemical excitation, charge
separation, and energy storage. These goals will be accomplished through the
synthesis of "Supermolecules" based on porphyrins, fullerenes, and carotenoid
polyenes. These supramolecular species undergo photochemically induced electron
transfer to produce long-lived energetic species. The molecules will be coupled
to photochromic species that are isomerized by light into colored and colorless
forms in order to create light activated molecular switches. This research by
Professors Gust and coworkers has the potential of aiding the development of
practical photoelectronic devices that are able to convert solar energy into
stored chemical energy with an efficiency that rivals that of green plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
Program, Professor Gust and coworkers will carry out collaborations with
coworkers at the undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral levels. The project,
which requires a combination of many skills and techniques including organic
chemistry, spectroscopy, biochemistry, and quantum chemistry, will provide
important interdisciplinary research training for the students involved.
Although fundamental in nature, the research is expected to provide a basis for
advances in solar energy utilization, molecule-based sensing, and data
processing, storage and transmission, and for a better understanding of
biological electron and energy transfer processes.&lt;br/&gt;