* 0352377
* US-Germany Cooperative Research: High Resolution Surface Zone Analysis in the Transregional Center on Process Chains for the Replication of Complex Optical Components
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2010
* Don Lucca, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2010
* USD 239,457.00

0352377&lt;br/&gt;Lucca&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports Don Lucca and
students from the Oklahoma State University in an extensive collaboration with
the universities of Aachen and Bremen in Germany. The PI's NSF research project
is part of a U.S.-Germany Transregional Collaborative Research Center that
involves sixteen technical projects centered on the development of processes for
the manufacture of complex, high-quality optical components for next generation
applications in information technology and telecommunications, health care, the
life sciences, sensing, lighting, and energy conversion. There are technical
projects in the areas of deign, had coatings, replication techniques, and
measurement science and technology. Funding for the long-term research center,
with the exception of the project here described, is being supplied mainly by
the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, the German counterpart to NSF. The research
focus of the U.S. project, "High Resolution Surface Zone Analysis," is the
investigation of the near-surface mechanical nature of sol-gel derived diamond-
turnable, hard mold coatings which will be used in the volume production of
ultraprecision optics of polymers and glasses. Nanoindentation will be used to
study the near-surface mechanical properties including elastic modulus and
hardness, and the surface residual stress state of the hard coatings. Depth
profiling studies will e performed on cross-sectioned and taper-sectioned
coatings with a newly developed method for near surface zone analysis. The
adhesion and delamination behavior of the mold coatings will be explored with
the use of nanoscratching. The project will also further contribute to the
development of advanced surface characterization tools needed for assessing the
near-surface mechanical state at the nanometer scale.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
making extensive German expertise and facilities available to the US group of
researchers, the collaboration will make it possible to train several US
graduate and postdoctoral students in an international setting. This will give
the students experience in international research collaborations and make it
possible for them to establish international connections that could continue to
be productive throughout their careers.&lt;br/&gt;