* 0352969
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: A Novel LIDAR System Development and Studies for Remote Sensing
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2009
* Anwar Ahmed, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/2009
* USD 30,000.00

0352969&lt;br/&gt;Kirkici&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a collaborative project between a team headed by Dr. Hulya Kirkici,
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn,
Alabama and Dr. Cankut Ormeci, Department of Construction and Geodesy at
Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey. They plan to study the
development of smaller, lighter and less costly LIDARs (Light Detecting and
Ranging) systems. LIDAR has been used in several areas such as space
applications, earth science, target recognition and ranging. Although the basic
system level operating principles are similar to radar, LIDARs operate at much
higher frequencies and can therefore produce much higher spatial resolution, and
can track fast moving particles and objects with higher accuracy. Because of
these characteristics, LIDARs have a major advantage over radar technology in
many applications such as pollution control, atmospheric science, and target
recognition. LIDAR is an active detection system that uses lasers as the
coherent light source directed at the target for detection; however, there are
spectrometric and spatial resolution issues in some applications. Current LIDAR
systems are based on very expensive technology that uses CO2 or Nd-YAG lasers,
and have been used in many developed countries as a scientific and industrial
tool. Furthermore, these lasers are very large, lacking mobility, and are
expensive. In this project the PIs will study the feasibility of using a low
cost and low weight portable laser system, such as semiconductor solid state
(diode and/or diode pumped) laser as the light source, a photodetector to detect
the scattered light from the source, and off-the-shelf optical components to
design a prototype LIDAR system. Design, construction, and integration of this
novel LIDAR system will be demonstrated. During the integration stage, they will
develop system control software and imaging software to acquire and analyze
data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The proposed research will foster a
relationship between researchers in the US and in Turkey. The two teams have
complementary experiences. The group in Turkey is well established in the field
of remote sensing and the development of soft ware whereas the US group is more
experienced with laser technology. It is anticipated that this project will
broaden the networks and partnerships among the participants. The results will
have very broad applications in remote sensing, including the ability to detect
structural damage due to earthquakes, a constant natural hazard in Turkey and in
the United States.&lt;br/&gt;