* 0352533
* Experiments on Fractional Quantum Hall Effect and Related Physics in New Regimes
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Daniel Tsui, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2009
* USD 600,000.00

In modern day electronics, almost all device functions are performed by
electrons that are confined to move in thin films, or along the interfaces, of
semiconductors. Such so-called two-dimensional (2D) electron systems, which
behave at normal ambient as an ordinary gas of 2D particles, evolve into a new
frontier of physics when they are subjected to the extreme conditions of low
temperatures (T&lt;&lt;1K) and high magnetic fields (B&gt;&gt;1T). Some of the
observed physical phenomena are first realizations of early theoretical
predictions (e.g. the Wigner crystal and the skyrmion); others, such as
composite fermions, are more recent discoveries and inventions. All represent
the ultra-low energy physics manifested in the quantum mechanical principles
that govern the behavior of large numbers of strongly interacting electrons in
the solid state. This project will explore such ultra-low energy electron
physics in previously inaccessible physical regimes of low electron densities
and ultra-low temperatures, to below 1 mK. The experiments, designed to uncover
new quantum phases in these regimes and to probe into their quantum phase
transitions, are also expected to have broader impacts in two areas of societal
importance: One is in the education and training of future leaders in science
and technology with multi-disciplinary knowledge and perspectives, as well as
cutting edge technical skills. The research, being multi-disciplinary in nature,
will educate students and post-docs involved to be fluent in condensed matter
physics, the science of semiconductor materials, and the processing technology
of semiconductor devices. The other area is on the future quantum computer. The
current vision for a fault-tolerant quantum computer is the one that uses
nonAbelian particles. To date, the only known realization of such particles in
the solid state consists of the quasi-particles of the exotic liquid condensate
of paired composite fermions found in 2D electron media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
modern day electronics, almost all device functions are performed by electrons
that are free to move in two dimensions in thin films, or along the interfaces,
of semiconductors. Such so-called two-dimensional (2D) electrons behave at
normal ambient as an ordinary gas of independent 2D particles. The behavior of a
large number of them together is simply that of the sum of the individual
particles, each adequately described by the classical law of physics. However,
when subjected to extremely low temperatures and high magnetic fields, they
become a new frontier for ultra-low energy physics, surprisingly rich in novel
phases that manifest the workings of quantum physics that govern the behavior of
a large number of strongly interacting electrons in the solid. This project will
explore ultra-low energy electron physics in previously inaccessible physical
regimes of low electron densities and low temperatures. This should uncover new
quantum phases of the electrons, where they are more appropriately pictured as a
new kind of exotic liquid or solid, and to probe their transformations. It is
also expected to have broader impacts in the education and training of future
leaders in science and technology with multi-disciplinary knowledge and
perspectives, as well as cutting edge technical skills. The research, being
multi-disciplinary in nature, will educate students and post-docs involved to be
fluent in condensed matter physics, the science of semiconductor materials, and
the processing technology of semiconductor devices.&lt;br/&gt;