* 0352483
* US-India Cooperative Research:  Investigations on Theoretical Aspects of Compton Scattering
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Richard Pratt, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 04/30/2007
* USD 24,000.00

0352483&lt;br/&gt;Pratt&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award supports the
U.S.-India collaborative research entitled Investigations on Theoretical Aspects
of Compton Scattering. Professors Richard Pratt, University of Pittsburgh and
Barum Chatterjee, Bose Institute, Calcutta will investigate one of the basic
processes by which photons interact with matter, inelastic photon (Compton)
scattering. This has become a subject of renewed investigation since the
precision of experimental measurements has reached a level at which underlying
assumptions and approximations inherent in all theoretical calculations can be
reexamined. This research will increase the extent of theoretical understanding
of the inelastic scattering of photons, by comparing cross sections predicted
from the most advanced theoretical calculations with precise experimental
results and with other theoretical predictions. &lt;br/&gt;The US PI is the
leading international expert in this field of research. The collaboration, which
joins the expertise of an experimental group in India with that of a theoretical
US group, will advance fundamental understanding of Compton scattering and
motivate new experimental studies at the Bose Institute. It is expected to
enhance research and education in the both countries and encourage the formation
of new partnerships. This activity is cofunded by the Government of India's
Department of Science &amp; Technology (DST) under the NSF/DST joint program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;