* 0352775
* Functional Neuroimaging of Face and Object Representations in the Ventral Visual Pathway
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2005
* James Haxby, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Smith
* 07/31/2005
* USD 125,000.00

Visual recognition of faces and other object categories evokes distinct,
category-related patterns of response in the extrastriate cortices of the human
ventral visual pathway. With funding from NSF, Dr. James V. Haxby is
investigating the representations of within-category distinctions among faces in
the ventral visual pathway of the human brain. Previously, he and his colleagues
showed that the patterns of submaximal neural responses also carry category-
related information, indicating that the representations of different object
categories are overlapping, and that weak and strong neural responses are both
integral to population responses that represent object appearance. However,
previous studies only addressed the distinctions between representations for
different object categories and only analyzed the consistency of patterns of
response within but not across individual subjects. The objective of the funded
research is to investigate the representation of distinctions between exemplars
within a single category, namely human faces. Experiments are testing whether
representations of within-category distinctions among faces have a more focal
anatomical distribution in the ventral pathway, that is, whether within-category
differences are represented in regions that respond maximally to faces or are
more broadly distributed. Studies are (1) examining the distribution of neural
responses to within-category stimulus changes, and (2) analyzing the patterns of
response evoked by stimuli. Face appearance is manipulated along two
computationally-defined dimensions, one that reflects continuous variation in
gender-related appearance and a second that reflects continuous variation from
lean to wide, to investigate the correlation between patterns of neural response
and computationally-defined alterations of face appearance. With other
investigators, in addition to using methods of topographic pattern analysis,
more sophisticated methods (e.g. PCA, ICA) are being developed for dissecting
patterns of response that can identify the parts or subspaces that carry
different aspects of information. These studies represent a novel approach to
elucidating the detailed structure of the representation of faces in the ventral
visual pathway. The long-term goal is to discover the principles of organization
that underlie the topography of face representations and, thereby, reveal the
correspondence rules that relate patterns of neural response to computational
descriptions of information about face appearance. These principles of
organization for topographically-organized population responses also may be
relevant for the study of other types of information, such as visual motion,
audition, and language. Development of new methods for analyzing patterns of
response in neuroimaging data will benefit the entire field of functional
neuroimaging and will facilitate the development of a new perspective on the
neural representation of abstract information. Using computational models to
guide the research on neural representation of faces will advance understanding
of how faces are recognized, how factors such as social stereotypes and race
affect face recognition, and the role face perception plays in social
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts. This research involves the
efforts of a postdoctoral fellow and graduate students. It is helping to build
the research and education program in cognitive neuroscience at Princeton
University. The research is being used in classes at Princeton and will serve as
the basis for guiding student research projects and for helping researchers from
other fields, such as social psychology, apply functional neuroimaging to
related questions. Students from under-represented groups are encouraged to
become involved with the research team and to complete research projects.
Collaborations with computational modelers and applied mathematicians facilitate
the learning of new computational methods by psychologists and serve to ignite
interest in cognitive neuroscience in other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;