* 0352534
* Cooperative Research on Seismic Resistant Design of Low-Cost Housing Units
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2004
* James Wight, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 10/31/2004
* USD 4,788.00

PI: James K. Wight, Univ. of Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Merit: &lt;br/&gt;For most major earthquakes, the largest loss of life is
typically caused by the total or &lt;br/&gt;partial collapse of low-cost housing
units that have not been adequately designed and/or &lt;br/&gt;constructed to
resist seismic forces. The purpose of this proposal is to launch an
&lt;br/&gt;exploratory investigation of the use of high performance concrete for
the construction of &lt;br/&gt;low-cost seismic resistant housing units. The
high performance features to be studied &lt;br/&gt;include self-compacting
concretes and the additional of a low percentage of steel fibers to
&lt;br/&gt;the concrete mix. Designs for both precast and cast-in-place housing
units will be &lt;br/&gt;investigated. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will be used to initiate a long-term cooperative
research effort aimed at the &lt;br/&gt;development of a variety of standard
designs for low-cost housing units in moderate to &lt;br/&gt;high seismic risk
zones. The development of such standard designs should prove to be
&lt;br/&gt;very beneficial throughout Mexico, as well as other Central and South
American &lt;br/&gt;countries that have access to similar construction materials
for low-cost housing. A &lt;br/&gt;short-term goal of this cooperative research
effort will be the development of proposals to &lt;br/&gt;use the NSF-NEES
facilities to dynamically test these standard housing units. The
long-&lt;br/&gt;term goal is the reduction in loss of life in future
earthquakes. &lt;br/&gt;