* 0352000
* SGTR -- Studying Emerging Technologies: Empirical Research in a Speculative Space
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Bruce Lewenstein, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* stephen zehr
* 06/30/2008
* USD 209,452.00

This Small Grant for Training and Research (SGTR) supports development of a
program to train graduate students in study of emerging technologies. Given the
rapid pace of technological change in such areas as biotechnology and the new
genetics, information technology and computing, and nanotechnology and
materials, demand is increasing for a cadre of social scientists and humanists
specializing in the study of the social dimensions of emerging technology. The
SGTR will create a focus area on emerging technologies in Cornell's existing
Ph.D. program in Science & Technology Studies (S&TS). This award will provide
support for two students for three years. Students in the new focus area will
participate in a new graduate seminar on "Studying Emerging Technologies," take
an advanced methods seminar, and take courses, participate in laboratory
rotations, or engage in other activities to acquire appropriate technical
knowledge. Each will conduct an empirical research project on an emerging
technology that requires active engagement with the technical knowledge and help
to organize and present an annual campus-wide panel discussion on social
dimensions of emerging technologies. The program will also involve organizing an
annual research workshop on studying emerging technologies. Unlike studies of
any particular new technology, study of "emerging technologies" requires
understanding a cluster of related issues: the complex deployment of
"revolutionary" discourse; the intertwining of changing practices in
laboratories, patent offices, and investment houses; the new "practical
cosmologies" developed by technical workers as they embrace and extend
technological revolutions; and the ethical complexities of conducting research
about emerging technologies while often, because of ethnographic methodology,
simultaneously participating in technological development. This project seeks to
create a coherent training and research program integrating these issues into a
coherent theoretical frame. The direct impact will be to train a particular
cohort of two students per year in studying emerging technologies. Its broader
impacts will include producing new courses on "studying emerging technologies,"
"archiving contemporary science," and other topics; sponsoring empirical
research projects that, through presentation and publication, will contribute to
wider scholarly discourse about emerging technologies; supporting campus-wide
discussions between the scientific and technical communities and the science and
technology studies community about the social dimensions of emerging
technologies; and engaging individual faculty and students in the sciences and
engineering in exploration of emerging technologies. Taken together, these
activities will create broader awareness of issues associated with emerging
technologies and will lead to wider integration of issues from science and
technology studies into the work of scientists and engineers.