* 0352382
* SGER:  E-Government in Rural Communities: Developing a Customer Service Approach to Enhancing Civic Engagement
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2004,09/30/2004
* Susanne Monahan, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald Rainger
* 09/30/2004
* USD 20,000.00

The two-fold goal of the research activities described in this proposal is to
assess readiness and lay the groundwork for a novel e-government initiative
among Montana local governments. The introduction of the new forms and
technology of e-government in cities and counties with small populations, few
resources, and slight Internet experience will likely encounter a variety of
obstacles. The initiative, by adopting a simple and flexible customer service
approach to providing information and communicating with constituents, aims to
ease the transition while providing mechanisms to strengthen government-citizen
interaction and sense of community. &lt;br/&gt; The research questions to be
studied under the main initiative concern the effect of introducing e-government
information services on the attitudes, perceptions, and practices of both
government agencies and citizens. Is there a change in openness or
responsiveness on the part of government? How are public trust, engagement, and
understanding of issues affected? How are actual practices altered, including
the processes by which citizen queries or complaints are made and responded to,
and by which dissemination of information to the public is managed? These
questions will be investigated via surveys, interviews, ethnographic
observation, and web site usage analysis. Studies will cover both government
personnel and the public, and will be carried out before, during, and after
implementation of the initiative. &lt;br/&gt; Assessment and preparation
activities to be undertaken under the current proposal include: identification
of potential city and county participants and evaluation of their readiness;
examination of related literature and current local e-government practices;
design and testing of survey instruments and protocols; and creation of a
demonstration web site. &lt;br/&gt; The proposed activity will advance the
knowledge and understanding of local government officials of the effects of
implementing technological methods of interacting with constituents, and will
provide a broader impact by developing a model of e-government services that can
be replicated by other local governments. &lt;br/&gt; As a collaboration among
Montana State University, the Local Government Center, local government units
and the private sector, this project offers a unique opportunity to advance the
development of local e-government in sparsely populated, fiscally limited
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;