* 0352885
* Polyhedral and Graph Theoretic Methods in Mixed Integer and Combinatorial Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2007
* Egon Balas, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 08/31/2007
* USD 419,999.00

This project addresses theoretical and computational aspects of integer
programming and combinatorial optimization, using the tools of linear algebra
and graph theory. It is focused on the approach called lift-and-project,
developed in the nineties and recently incorporated into state-of-the-art
software. Lift-and-project cuts are generated from a disjunction involving a
combination of inequalities. One topic for investigation is how to
simultaneously optimize the weighted combination of inequalities used in the
disjunction underlying the cut, and the choice of multipliers in the monoidal
strengthening of the resulting cut. Another topic in the same direction offers
to improve the performance of Gomory cuts for mixed integer linear programs, by
combining inequalities in well-defined ways. Other topics, aimed at
understanding the structure of Lehman matrices and almost totally unimodular
matrices, or an algorithm for finding an odd hole in a graph, are related to two
important classes of problems: set packing and set covering. A better
understanding of these classes of problems is a central aspect of the very
active research currently occurring in the field of combinatorial
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To the extent that this project will be
successful, it will advance the state of the art in mixed integer and
combinatorial optimization, and thereby enhance our problem solving ability in a
broad range of activities, from industrial production to logistics and
telecommunications. The tools created here may be as useful in improving
homeland security, as they may be instrumental in reinforcing our technological
leadership. From the late fifties to the early nineties, integer programming was
a way to formulate almost any optimization problem, yet the available computer
codes could only handle toy problems of minuscule size. During the last decade
the state of the art has radically changed, and today well over half of the
integer programs formulated can also be solved. This project is expected to
significantly accelerate this change.&lt;br/&gt;