* 0352650
* Thermal and Photochemical Reactions of  Transition Metal  Complexes of the Nitrogen Oxides
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2009
* Peter Ford, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 02/28/2009
* USD 738,157.00

This award supports research by Professor Peter C. Ford at the University of
California at Santa Barbara to pursue investigations of the photochemical and
thermal reactions of transition metal complexes of nitric oxide (NO) and other
nitrogen oxide ligands (NOx). One goal is to develop precursors that can be
photochemically activated for NO delivery to biological targets. Another goal is
to characterize interactions of NO and other NOx such as nitrite ion, NO2, N2O3,
the nitroxyl anion NO- and HNO, with metal centers and the influence of such
interactions on the reactivities of these species. Modern kinetics
instrumentation will be used to elucidate the pathways by which these compounds
react, either spontaneously or under photochemical stimulation. These methods
include time-resolved optical and infrared spectroscopy of reactive
intermediates generated by laser flash photolysis or by rapid mixing.
Computational techniques will be employed to investigate the relative energies
and spectra of known and unknown compounds (using density functional theory) and
to simulate the kinetics behavior observed or expected for complex reaction
systems.

Studies will explore the reaction mechanisms for the basic chemical
transformations such as the formation and breaking of metal-ligand bonds and the
atom and electron transfer reactions that constitute the chemistry of these
"simple" species. Although fundamental in nature, the proposed studies have
potential relevance to the design of materials displaying desirable
photochemical properties for biomedical applications and for the
reinterpretation of the mechanism(s) by which a prospective vasodilator is
formed in the hemoglobin of red blood cells. The research also serves as a
platform for the education and training of members of underrepresented groups at
the graduate, undergraduate and postdoctoral levels.