* 0352769
* Workshop on Genomic Signal Processing and Statistics (GENSIPS); May 26-28, 2004; Baltimore, MD
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/2004,01/31/2005
* Pablo Iglesias, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 01/31/2005
* USD 34,000.00

We are requesting funding for the second Workshop on Genomic Signal Processing
and Statistics (GENSIPS), which is planned for May 26-28, 2004. The workshop
will be held on the Homewood campus of The Johns Hopkins University, in
Baltimore, Maryland. The aim of this three-day workshop is to provide a forum
for presenting new results on genomic signal processing and statistics and
identify potential areas of research and collaboration between the biological,
statistical, and signal processing communities. The workshop has been approved
as an IEEE Signal Processing Society cooperating meeting and has a significant
tutorial component with the aim to educate, to bring awareness of genomics
problems to the signal processing and statistics communities, and to stimulate
collaborative research in this area. We are planning to invite ten
internationally renowned researchers to deliver plenary talks covering all three
areas of interest: biology, signal processing and statistics. Contributed poster
sessions and a round-table discussion session will also be featured in the
technical program. Support from DARPA, NSF and the Whitaker foundation is sought
to help defray registration fees and travel expenses for invited speakers and a
few students, as well as anticipated costs associated with the planning and the
logistical issues related to holding a successful meeting.