* 0352041
* The Role of  Protein as a Contributor to Organic Nitrogen in the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2007
* H. Rodger Harvey, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 01/31/2007
* USD 384,376.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OCE-0352041&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of
the large refractory organic nitrogen pool in the overall nitrogen cycle is well
recognized, but its chemical composition and the mechanism(s) responsible for
its resistance remain unanswered. Recent work has documented the importance of
the amide linkage to organic nitrogen preserved in sediments and soils. The
principal investigator on this project and others at the Chesapeake Biological
Laboratory have recently shown that proteins can be preserved during early
diagenesis and extracted from sediments. The overriding premise of this proposal
is that those proteins that are preserved might retain the signal of their
original biosynthesis, with only minor modification to their structure. If this
is true, then structural identification of individual proteins and mixtures can
be used to detail the origins of such proteins and the likely processing which
allow their eventual incorporation into sediments. There are therefore two
objectives of this project: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To adapt current mass
spectrometric methods for the analysis of primary protein structure to determine
the origin and contributions of proteins and their modified products in detrital
material and sediments. The primary sequence of amino acids and secondary
protein structure will allow not only the major inputs to be assessed, but also
the possible contribution of bacterial carbon and nitrogen to the undefined
organic pool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a combination of field collections and
experimental incubations, to determine if subtle structural modifications to
proteins can help account for the missing sink of organic nitrogen that is not
quantified as total hydrolysable amino acids or extractable proteins. Modified
protein might represent an important fraction of organic nitrogen, but is either
not available to microbial attack or exists as an end product of the degradative
process. Subtle alterations to protein structure may be another important piece
of the puzzle in understanding the preservation and long-term sequestration of
organic nitrogen (and carbon) in marine systems. &lt;br/&gt;