* 0352500
* System Integration Contractor for the Integrated Ocean Drilling Program
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2003,06/30/2015
* David Divins, Consortium for Ocean Leadership, Inc
* Contract
* James Allan
* 06/30/2015
* USD 609,772,535.00

NSF pioneered scientific ocean drilling in the late 1960's with the Deep Sea
Drilling Project (DSDP), a test of the plate tectonic hypothesis and a basic
reconnaissance of deep-sea sediments and crustal rocks. DSDP was followed in
1985 by the Ocean Drilling Program (ODP), the present phase of ocean drilling,
which is a focused examination of Earth, ocean and climate processes. NSF
provided the primary facility for both DSDP and ODP by contracting and
converting an industry drillship for scientific drilling. International
participation in planning, research and funding of operations grew from an
initial five countries in DSDP to over 20 nations in ODP. ODP drilling
operations terminated on September 9, 2003 with completion of a drilling program
to study the early rifting history of the North American
margin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although ODP has terminated as planned, ocean
drilling remains an essential capability in modern geoscience research and
education and is used to examine processes ranging from changes in the Earth's
climate to the rifting and drifting of continents. Drilling is the primary tool
for sampling sediment and crustal rock from the 70 percent of the Earth's
surface covered by oceans, and is the only technique for sampling anything more
than a few meters deeper than the ocean floor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on
this continuing requirement for ocean drilling, over 600 ocean and earth
scientists have completed an internationally coordinated planning effort to
examine the scientific objectives for a new phase of ocean drilling, the
Integrated Ocean Drilling Program. Their efforts have resulted in the
publication of the initial science plan for the IODP - Earth, Oceans and Life:
Scientific Investigations of the Earth System Using Multiple Drilling Platforms
and New Technologies. The plan identifies the following three objectives for
initial emphasis in IODP: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Deep Biosphere and the Sub-
seafloor Ocean: Drilling will concentrate on expanding our understanding of the
architecture and dynamics of the vast subseafloor plumbing system, where flowing
water alters rock, modifies the long-term chemistry of the oceans, lubricates
seismically active faults, concentrates economic mineral deposits, and controls
the distribution of life in the oceanic crust and upper mantle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Processes and Effects of Environmental Change: Ocean
sediments provide a unique record of Earth's climate fluctuations and permit
detection of climate signals on three time scales: tectonic (longer than 0.5
million years, and produced by changes in continent positions and continental
seaways); orbital (20 thousand years to 400 thousand years, and produced by
changes in the earth's orbit); and oceanic (hundreds to a few thousand years,
and produced by changes in ocean circulation). Using a global array of sites,
these sediment records will allow a sophisticated and detailed analysis of the
causes, rates and severity of changes in the Earth's climate system and their
relation to increased rates of biologic evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solid
Earth Cycles and Geodynamics: The rates of mass and energy transfer from the
mantle to the crust and back are not constant through time and the causes of
these variations and their influences on the global environment are poorly
understood. Drilling during the early phases of IODP will concentrate on
sampling and monitoring regions of the seafloor that currently have the highest
rates of energy and mass transfer, and comparing these results to older geologic
settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IODP scientific objectives require a heavy
vessel for drilling deep sedimentary and crustal holes, a lighter vessel to
provide widely distributed arrays of high-resolution cores to address climate,
environmental, and observatory objectives, and occasional use of drilling
platforms for the Arctic and nearshore projects that cannot be undertaken from
the two primary IODP vessels. MEXT has secured funding of approximately $500
million for the heavy drillship to address deep drilling objectives in the new
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under contract OCE03-52500 NSF will provide the
light drilling vessel, its operation, and science support services for IODP. In
November 2002, the NSB approved the solicitation of proposals and the award of a
10-year contract for vessel conversion, operation and science support. Although
delayed by the continuing resolution under which NSF operated until early March
2003, the RFP response has now been evaluated, and Joint Oceanographic
Institutions, Inc. (JOI, partnered with the Texas A&amp;M University Research
Foundation and Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Columbia University) has been
selected as the contractor to provide non-riser drilling capabilities for IODP.
The Alliance of these three organizations will operate the JOIDES Resolution in
FY '04 and '05 and then complete a vessel selection and conversion program to
provide drilling services for the remainder of the IODP. Texas A&amp;M
University will manage drilling operations and science services, while Lamont-
Doherty will be responsible for down-hole logging. JOI serves as overall
integrator and prime contractor for this US contribution to IODP.&lt;br/&gt;