* 0352261
* Recruiting Values for Opinion
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2004,06/30/2010
* Thomas Nelson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2010
* USD 142,481.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project examines how communicators influence opinion on
political issues by recruiting social values. Values serve as important sources
of opinion by providing enduring standards with which citizens can evaluate
public policies. Much of the research on values does not, however, adequately
address the political and psychological dynamics by which values influence
attitudes. The association between social values and political issues is the
object of contentious public debate; political communicators compete to
construct perceived linkages in public's mind between certain issues and values.
Because controversial issues often bring two or more esteemed values into direct
competition, partisans also try to influence the public's prioritization of
competing values. This project focuses on the tactics that communicators use to
recruit values, and will also examine the impact of such tactics on individual
political attitudes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine five
separate value recruitment tactics. The communicator makes a straightforward
claim that a value is relevant to a particular issue, e.g., Peace is patriotic.
Communicators can also offer analogies between the target issue and a familiar
issue with clear value referents. So, for example, those objecting to new
Internet security measures might compare the regulations to wiretapping to make
privacy values seem especially relevant. The communicator might also offer
social and behavioral cues as a way of tarnishing the values recruited by the
opposing side. In so doing, the communicator seeks to associate the opponent's
values with disreputable social groups or unsavory behavior. In value
bolstering, the communicator seeks to magnify the value's esteem by linking it
to other values, such as patriotism or religiosity. Finally, the communicator
may redefine or relabel a value. A call for equal rights, for example, might be
relabeled as a demand for special rights; alternatively, equality might be
defined narrowly as is equal opportunity, rather than unequal outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To provide a comprehensive examination of the variety and
impact of value recruitment, this project incorporates case study, content
analysis, and experimental designs. In the case studies and content analyses,
value recruitment will be examined over the course of actual public
controversies. The case studies will include interviews with the leaders of
political organizations to examine how the groups incorporated social values
into their public campaigns. The content analysis will examine how value
recruitment tactics vary across issues. The experimental work will examine the
effects of value recruitment on individual political attitudes. The PI will also
examine how individuals come to perceive the relevance of certain values for
specific controversies, and how they judge the relative importance of competing
values. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research's broad impact and scientific
contribution centers on the added insight this award will bring to the extant
literature in political science and social psychology on the effects of values
on public opinion. It will provide more complete information about the role of
social values in public debate over political controversies. It will also
contribute to a better understanding of the individual psychological processes
linking values to attitudes. &lt;br/&gt;