* 0352570
* Extending and Enhancing the National Library of Virtual Manipulatives as a National Teaching Resource for School Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* E.Robert Heal, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Tzur
* 03/31/2007
* USD 779,651.00

This project seeks to extend the work already being done (with NSF funding) on a
web-based library of virtual manipulatives for students in grades K-8. Materials
will be developed serving grades 9-12. Other features to be added would be
translation into Spanish and voice-overs for existing materials, and the
capability of printing and saving student work. A set of software tools for
teachers would enable them to construct customized web pages using the
manipulatives, as well as small modules ready for insertion into existing
curricula. New materials developed for teachers will include lists of
instructional objectives, suggested learning activities and assessment tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation will investigate the quality of human/computer
interaction, the relevance of the materials to current pedagogy, the
effectiveness of the resulting instruction and the process of building
communities of users of the materials. Questions to be asked in evaluation
include: Does the project increase student access to the potential of the
computer? Does it increase the perceived relevance of the mathematics to the
student? Will it increase collaboration between on-line users? Quasi-
experimental studies, observations interviews, and surveys will be used to
answer these questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination will proceed through
commercial publishers who have already committed to this project, through the
Web, and through professional journals and conferences. &lt;br/&gt;