* 0352947
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Seismic Retrofitting of Reinforced Concrete Structural Members by Composite Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2009
* Azadeh Parvin, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/2009
* USD 61,239.00

0352947 Parvin

Description: This award supports a cooperative research between Dr. Azadeh
Parvin, Department of Civil Engineering, University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio, and
Dr. Cem Yalcin, Department of Civil Engineering, Bogazici University, Istanbul,
Turkey. The focus of the research is seismic retrofitting of reinforced concrete
structural members by composite materials. The project will comprise full-scale
experimentation on reinforced concrete beam-column joints retrofitted with
composite wraps under simulated seismic loadings as well as a comprehensive
analytical study using finite element method. Failure of reinforced concrete
beam-column connections will result in the collapse of the structure during
destructive earthquakes. The safety of structural systems relies on the behavior
of these connections. One way of retrofitting structures is to wrap the beam-
column connections with few thin layers of fiber composite fabrics to enhance
their load carrying capacity and ductility, with minimum disruption to their
usage during the rehabilitation procedure. Studies in this are have concentrated
on scale-down models, which may not the behavior of size structural members
under seismic loads. Experiments on full-scale specimens are essential to
validate theoretical predictions and empirical findings through small-scale
testing. This requires resources, which are available at Bogazici University,
and can be realized at a fraction of the cost of performing the same tests in
the United States. Dr. Parvin has experience in wrapping techniques on beam-
column joints through involvement in numerical and small-scale experimental
analyses. The main construction technology in Turkey utilizes reinforced
concrete for a wide spectrum of structures and as such a wealth of knowledge and
experience, which is readily available to researchers. This project will benefit
from complementary expertise possessed by the US and Turkish investigators and
substantial domain knowledge on reinforced concrete structures in Turkish
construction industry and academia.

Scope: Findings of the study will constitute valuable knowledge base currently
nonexistent to a large degree on the behavior of these joints, which will
benefit both countries in terms of saving lives and economics. The research will
offer an attractive repair and retrofit solution for buildings and
infrastructure components using modern fiber composite materials. Such materials
have unique properties in terms of strength, resistance to corrosion, lightness,
and ease of application while enhancing the performance of structural
components. Reinforced concrete constitutes a fundamental construction
technology for a wide spectrum of structures not only in US and Turkey, but also
around the globe. The project activities involve a female US investigator, and
will provide graduate students from the University of Toledo an opportunity for
international research experience. It will provide a scientist and graduate
student from Turkey an opportunity to use the state-of-the-art wrapping
techniques to a critical structural component, the beam-column connection.
Results of the project will be published in journals and conference proceedings
and will be incorporated in a graduate course offered by the PI. At the
completion of the project lecture series on retrofitting reinforced concrete
structural members will be offered by the collaborators.