* 0352916
* Control of Plant Cell Shape by the ASB Loci in Arabidopsis
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2003,02/28/2005
* David Oppenheimer, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Jacqueline Banks
* 02/28/2005
* USD 100,451.00

0091393 Oppenheimer

Plant cell shape plays a crucial role in plant cell function. Because of this
relationship, understanding how plant cell shape is controlled is of fundamental
importance to our understanding of plant cell biology. In addition,
understanding how cell shape is controlled may allow the manipulation of cell
shape, and hence cell function, in important crop plants for agricultural
benefit. One of the best model systems for studying the control of plant cell
shape is the trichome, or plant hair, on the higher plant Arabidopsis thaliana
(mouse ear cress).

It is well established that the cortical microtubule (MT) array plays a large
role in controlling the direction of plant cell expansion which is the major
determinant of plant cell shape. However, the mechanisms that organize the
cortical MTs during a change in the direction of cell expansion (such as
initiation of root hairs or trichome branches) remain an unresolved problem in
plant biology. We are using a genetic approach to identify the genes (and
ultimately the proteins) that participate in a specific, localized cell
expansion event-the initiation of trichome branches. Arabidopsis trichomes are
large, single cells consisting of three or four branches on a stalk. This
proposal focuses on four newly discovered loci (the ASYMMETRIC BRANCH [ASB]
loci) that control trichome branch position and length. Recent evidence suggests
that the MT cytoskeleton plays an important role in trichome branch initiation,
whereas the actin cytoskeleton plays a leading role in trichome expansion.

The immediate goals of the proposed research are to test hypotheses concerning
the organization of the actin and MT cytoskeletons in ASB mutants, and to
determine the genetic relationship of the ASB genes (which control branch
position) to the genes that control branch number. The cytoskeleton studies,
along with the genetic analyses, will provide a framework for a functional
dissection of the ASBgene products once the genes are cloned. Accomplishing the
objectives of the proposed research will provide critical information about the
mechanisms by which cell expansion is controlled. Because plant cells share cell
walls and thus cannot migrate large distances during development like animal
cells, the direction of cell expansion is a primary determinant of plant
morphogenesis. Therefore, mechanisms by which plants control the precise spatial
pattern of localized cell expansion is central to our understanding of plant
development