* 0352014
* Reliability of Electric Power Network and Grid
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2004,08/31/2006
* Masanobu Shinozuka, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Douglas A. Foutch
* 08/31/2006
* USD 75,000.00

Large-scale power outages occurred on August 14, 2003 covering a 10,000 square-
mile&lt;br/&gt;area involving 50 million people in more than 10 states in
Midwest and northeastern part of this&lt;br/&gt;nation and southern Canada. A
number of major centers of population such as Metropolitan&lt;br/&gt;New York
were impacted severely causing human inconvenience and miseries of all kind
while&lt;br/&gt;power recovery effort gradually took effect. The disaster may
have been caused by, as many&lt;br/&gt;suspected, malfunction of a critical
power component under excessive power demand in the&lt;br/&gt;summer heat. It
might take some time, however, to identify the exact cause of this worst
power&lt;br/&gt;blackout in the history of USA.&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
exploratory research is to acquire and archive potentially
perishable&lt;br/&gt;data related to the outages. We are particularly interested
in the way in which the outage initiated&lt;br/&gt;and cascaded throughout the
power grids. The data to be collected will span a spectrum
of&lt;br/&gt;mechanical, electrical and socio-economic impact with significant
emphasis on the data that are&lt;br/&gt;needed for grid reliability
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;PI of this proposed research studied extensively on
reliability of utility networks and&lt;br/&gt;power grids to resist seismic
conditions under which similar outages could happen. In these&lt;br/&gt;studies,
transmission networks and grids, involving Los Angels Department of Water
and&lt;br/&gt;Power.s (LADWP.s) and Memphis Light, Gas, and Water.s (MLGWP.s)
systems were used as&lt;br/&gt;living laboratories. These studies were based
upon the analytical simulation of power flow, using&lt;br/&gt;Electric Power
Research Institute.s Interactive Power Flow (IPFlow) code, which is the
industry&lt;br/&gt;standard, for realistic performance evaluation of Western
Electric Coordinating Council.s&lt;br/&gt;(WECC.s) power grid and of Memphis
transmission network.&lt;br/&gt;Initially, the study was motivated by an
accident in August 1996 in Oregon, in which a&lt;br/&gt;tree came into contact
with a segment of a high-voltage aerial power line, disabling
its&lt;br/&gt;transmission capability. The result was a wide-spread blackout in
several states and cities,&lt;br/&gt;including part of Los Angeles. In fact, the
research demonstrated that a local disturbance and&lt;br/&gt;instability can
propagate almost instantly far away to remote locations. The research
became&lt;br/&gt;more seriously significant after the tragic September 11 event
from homeland security point of&lt;br/&gt;view and has just added another layer
of relevance since the August 14, 2003 power outage.&lt;br/&gt;This is because
disablement can be man-made, accidental or malicious, and cause a
devastatingly&lt;br/&gt;negative impact on socio-economic welfare of the
directly affected regions immediately and of&lt;br/&gt;the nation in the long
run.&lt;br/&gt;PI.s experience and expertise plays a crucial role in identifying
the data that are&lt;br/&gt;indispensable and therefore should be collected for
the ensuing reliability analysis of the physical&lt;br/&gt;components, utility
networks and power grids. Since the preparedness for the emergency of
the&lt;br/&gt;utility organizations, individually and in collaboration, is
critical in minimizing the consequence&lt;br/&gt;of outages, the data will
include the record of implemented organizational response
processes.&lt;br/&gt;Beyond these, data are needed to record how transportation,
water and other lifeline systems and&lt;br/&gt;business/industrial sectors
behaved under the interruption of power supply. The estimated&lt;br/&gt;economic
losses will be updated as more information emerges, although the estimation will
be&lt;br/&gt;somewhat speculative within the first year after the
event.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact of this research is that it will contribute to
significant scientific advances&lt;br/&gt;in predictive systems analysis methods
and protective countermeasures, and it will benefit tens of&lt;br/&gt;millions
of customers of the utility systems, and local, regional and national
economy.&lt;br/&gt;Pedagogically the research project is truly beneficial in
training and encouraging junior&lt;br/&gt;researchers to become more interested
in the electric power related research where lack of&lt;br/&gt;research talents
has been conspicuous.