* 0352562
* Transformation of Criminal Justice Institutions in Iraq
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/2003,02/28/2006
* Bert Useem, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Isaac Unah
* 02/28/2006
* USD 12,173.00

This project, submitted under the Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER)
program, will examine the role of the criminal justice system in the creation of
political order in Iraq in the post-war period. Specifically, it will examine
efforts by the U.S. occupation and peacekeeping operations, under the direction
of the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA), to help transform Iraqi criminal
justice institutions. It will draw upon, and contribute to, three theoretical
literatures: that in criminal justice (where it will examine the possible
synergies and tensions among the goals of public value, legitimacy and
operational capability in the Iraqi context), public administration (where it
will examine the value of performance measures in shaping criminal justice
policy in Iraq), and political sociology (where it will focus on the possibility
of cross-ethnic and -regional integration in the wake of the military defeat of
Iraq). The primary focus of the proposed research is transformation of Iraqi
criminal justice institutions, and the idea that organizations achieve what they
measure. This transformation, however, is part of the construction of new sets
of institutions to govern Iraqi society. While the proposed research will not
attempt a comprehensive study of this broader transformation, inevitably the PI
will learn a great deal about it. This understanding will be used to identify
the broader constraints and opportunities of in transforming Iraqi criminal
justice institutions. The research will examine the strategies, problems,
dispositions, and opportunities of first the U.S., and then Iraqi,
decisionmakers and policy implementers involved in criminal justice policies.
Data collection will involve interviews with both American and Iraqi officials
in charge of criminal justice implementation, and the primary focus will be on
the arenas of policing and corrections. The researcher has been authorized for
travel to Iraq by the State Department, and has been assured of the cooperation
of both the U.S. military and the relevant authorities in the CPA in carrying
out his research. The proposed research holds the promise of making a
substantial contribution to U.S. goals in the Middle East, and will contribute
to the scholarly fields of criminal justice, public administration, and
political sociology.