* 0352936
* US-Bangladesh Cooperative Research: Geochemistry, Petrology, and Microbiology of As-Contaminated Alluvial Sediments and Groundwater, Bangladesh
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* James Saunders, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 03/31/2008
* USD 29,950.00

0352936&lt;br/&gt;Uddin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project supports
a collaborative project between Dr. Ashraf Uddin, Department of Geology, Auburn
University, Auburn, Alabama and Dr. Kazi M. Ahmed, Department of Geology at the
University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh. They plan to study arsenic-contaminated
alluvial sediments and groundwater in Bangladesh. Natural arsenic contamination
of shallow groundwater poses a major human health threat in many parts of the
world. Recent research indicates that young (Holocene) river floodplain aquifers
are most problematic due to their locally high arsenic levels and because they
are exploited for drinking by millions of people in developing nations. There is
a theory that As is released by reductive dissolution of the As-bearing hydrous
ferric oxides (HFO) in the floodplain aquifers. This As-HFO hypothesis may be
part of an arsenic geo-, bio-, hydro- (GBH) cycle. Recent research by the PIs
has generated field microbiologic data for the As-groundwater cycling processes
and has identified genera of FeRB and SRB involved using culturing and molecular
biology (16S rDNA) technique from field sites in the USA very similar to
affected areas of Bangladesh, India and Vietnam. The condition that lead to this
water chemistry in river floodplains is universal, but only rises to a serious
problem in the developing nations where this water is exploited for human
consumption. The PIs plan to extend and test the conclusions drawn from field
areas in USA to a seriously As-affected region of the world, to seek
verification of the hypothesis about the universality of biogeochemical controls
on this type of natural arsenic contamination. Past research by the PIs has also
demonstrated an important role that SRB play in nature in removing As from
groundwater. They will test bioremediation process to remove dissolved metal
(including As) contaminants in field experiments in Bangladeshi ground waters.
The research team has the needed skills and backgrounds to document the cause of
the arsenic problem, as well as a potential remediation tool.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The proposed research includes educational and
research activities for graduate students and post-docs. The proposed research
has significant technology transfer elements in it, during the progress of the
study, the PIs will be cooperating with local scientists and government
officials, and in the process, will provide the opportunity to educate them how
to implement the bioremediation process in the field should this proof-of-
concept research prove successful. Because As-contamination is a pressing
problem in the developing world, lessons learned in Bangladesh should be
applicable to many other countries. &lt;br/&gt;