* 0352945
* Forces and Forms of Change in Doctoral Education Internationally
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Maresi Nerad, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Carol Stoel
* 05/31/2008
* USD 157,235.00

All nations share a concern about how to best prepare the next generation of
leaders who will be &lt;br/&gt;able to confront a complex set of social,
political, technical, and health issues within a global &lt;br/&gt;setting.
There are many issues associated with globalization and doctoral education such
as the &lt;br/&gt;ways in which technology enables a new level of international
research and policy networks, the &lt;br/&gt;renewed interest in and commitment
to understanding the changing labor market for highly &lt;br/&gt;educated
professionals, and the production of PhD recipients as they represent the
leading labor &lt;br/&gt;force for knowledge-based economies. Taken together
these issues create a powerful motivation &lt;br/&gt;to share information about
how to educate these new leaders. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To facilitate the
understanding of forces and forms that shape doctoral education worldwide and
&lt;br/&gt;interpret the emerging trends, the Center for Innovation and Research
in Graduate Education &lt;br/&gt;proposes to bring together no more than thirty
key players (policy makers, graduate education &lt;br/&gt;researchers,
university administrators, industry representatives, and funders) from around
the &lt;br/&gt;world in a three-day conference. Issues to be discussed include,
needs of a highly educated labor &lt;br/&gt;forced for the 21st century, and the
characteristics of this labor force, the impact of technology on
&lt;br/&gt;research and education, the content and the pedagogy of doctoral
education, the transition from &lt;br/&gt;doctoral education or postdoctoral
appointment to stable employment, the changing &lt;br/&gt;demographics of the
doctoral student body (i.e., gender, socio-economic class, race, and
&lt;br/&gt;ethnicity), and financing graduate education, including the
privatization of education throughout &lt;br/&gt;the world. Differences and
commonalities among nations will be explicitly mapped out. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;We will commission a paper from each participating country describing
the current state of &lt;br/&gt;doctoral education according to a common set of
issues. The initial goal of these papers will be to &lt;br/&gt;create a common
language and understanding of each country.s system of doctoral education. On
&lt;br/&gt;this basis potential shared forces that drive doctoral education can
be identified and categorized. &lt;br/&gt;And, the group will work together to
investigate if the various reforms in doctoral education are
&lt;br/&gt;converging toward a similar model as a result of global forces.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This series of conferences will have a
number of important impacts. First, it &lt;br/&gt;will move a broad coalition of
scholars, policy makers, funders, and administrators toward a &lt;br/&gt;better
grasp of the issues of doctoral education across nations. Second, it will share
among &lt;br/&gt;participants information on innovations and best practices
currently shaping doctoral programs. &lt;br/&gt;Third, it will work toward
establishing greater inclusiveness within in the realm of doctoral
&lt;br/&gt;education of underrepresented groups. Fourth, it will work to develop
of a comprehensive &lt;br/&gt;research agenda on doctoral education
internationally. And, fourth, it will examine ways in which &lt;br/&gt;issues
can be addressed in policy to foster the education and training of leadership
for a &lt;br/&gt;knowledge-based society in a global economy. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The intellectual merits of this series of
conferences will include (1) &lt;br/&gt;furthering the research and training
opportunities and international collaboration in doctoral &lt;br/&gt;education;
(2) establishing an ongoing formal network of key players in doctoral education
so that &lt;br/&gt;forces (political, economic, technological) can be responded
to in a manner most conducive to &lt;br/&gt;furthering the high quality and
inclusiveness of doctoral education worldwide; and (3) providing &lt;br/&gt;a
comprehensive foundation for setting research agendas in doctoral education
through systematic &lt;br/&gt;knowledge exchange.