* 0352710
* Vorticity-Based Characterization of a High Reynolds Number Single-Stream Shear Layer
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,12/31/2009
* John Foss, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 12/31/2009
* USD 272,280.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.:
CTS-0352710&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS: JOHN F.
FOSS&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION: MICHIGAN STATE
UNIVERSITY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VORTICITY-BASED CHARACTERIZATION OF A
HIGH REYNOLDS NUMBER SINGLE-STREAM SHEAR LAYER&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
will support research that will contribute to understanding turbulent flow
physics by providing experimental data, and the insights derived from these
data, that will characterize the intermittent regions (high and low speed sides)
of a single-stream shear layer (self-preserving region). The shear layer is one
of the basic building block canonical turbulent flows that is present in many
engineering applications. These data, in addition too providing insight into the
physics of turbulence in their own right, are expected to be of value in the
development of Large Eddy Simulation (LES) computational tools. Specifically,
the detailed stochastic information to be provided will provide a valuable
reference condition for such computations. As an added feature, the array of
four-sensor vorticity probes will directly provide the spatially-filtered data
appropriate for an LES computation. In addition, the vorticity-based
intermittency designations will provide a definition for this fundamental
measure of the turbulent motions. The availability of these accurate and time-
resolved data will support LES computations, which in turn, promise advances for
more successful computations of the turbulent flows that are ubiquitous in
practical engineering problems. Derivative benefits include: improved combustion
efficiencies, better mixing processes and insight into acoustic emissions.
Broader impacts include technological elements, e.g. engineering computations,
as well as educational ones. A direct benefit is to support a laboratory that
strongly encourages opportunities for diverse students, and research
involvements for college age participants. The involvement of high school
students (MSU-High School Honors Science Program) is a further direct benefit.
The PI's long-term commitment, to providing student research experience will be
strengthened by the opportunities associated with this grant. &lt;br/&gt;