* 0352527
* Reconstructing Late Holocene Volcanic Aerosol Fluxes from Greenland Ice Cores Collected by the PARCA Project
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2008
* Lonnie Thompson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* William J. Wiseman, Jr.
* 03/31/2008
* USD 337,493.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Moseley-Thompson&lt;br/&gt;Ohio State
University&lt;br/&gt;OPP-03-52527&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
merit: The Principal Investigators will analyze the major anions and cations at
sub-annual resolution along the entire lengths of five multi-century ice cores
collected since 1995 in Greenland under the auspices of the NASA-NSF PARCA
(Program for Arctic Regional Climate Assessment) Project. Few Greenland ice
cores have been analyzed continuously at sub-annual resolution by ion
chromatography (IC) specifically to quantify the history of volcanically-derived
sulfate deposition. Most Greenland volcanic histories are based on conductance
measurements that serve as a proxy for, but not a direct measure of, excess
sulfate (EXS). The PARCA cores offer an unparalleled opportunity to nearly
double the number of annually-resolved Greenland ice core histories of EXS that
reveal the sporadic injection of volcanic aerosols into the atmosphere over the
last two to eight centuries. Of particular interest are the Humboldt and Tunu
cores that will provide the first annually resolved EXS histories determined by
IC from northwest Greenland (~812-year record) and northeast Greenland (~500
year record), respectively. The EXS histories from Greenland ice cores,
reflecting primarily the input from Northern Hemisphere and tropical eruptions
are critical for estimating: 1) the sporadic injection of volcanic aerosols in
the stratosphere, creating a natural climate forcing mechanism and 2) the slowly
rising background concentrations of sulfate aerosols from the combustion of
fossil fuels (i.e., coal), creating an anthropogenic climate forcing mechanism.
Ongoing studies that seek to differentiate the contributions of natural forcing
mechanisms from those attributable to human activities require knowledge of the
history of stratospheric sulfate aerosol loading and the resulting changes in
atmospheric optical depth. The polar ice sheets provide the best archive of this
information, but well-dated records based upon continuous chemical analyses at
sub-annual resolution are limited. The EXS flux histories that the Principal
Investigators will extract from the five Greenland PARCA cores will complement
existing records and improve the quality and detail of the ice core index of
Northern Hemisphere stratospheric sulfate loading over the last 800
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The improved 'ice core-derived'
volcanic aerosol records will be valuable to those exploring the relationship
between explosive volcanism and climate variability. The analyses will be
conducted by a Ph.D. student and the results will constitute the basis for the
student's doctoral dissertation. The results will be disseminated broadly to
those seeking proxy climate histories. The results from the ice core analyses,
as well as the glacier area and volume measurements, continue to be used, by
scientists as well as policy makers and stakeholders. The Principal
Investigators' ice core-derived climate histories and glacier retreat results
were included in the 107th Congress' second session, April, 2002, for global
warming discussions to the 2002 energy legislation. The ice core research group
includes postdoctoral fellows, graduate students and undergraduates who
regularly participate in both their field programs and the laboratory analyses.
This group is actively engaged in education. In 2002, media outreach included
highlights of the ice core research in more than 100 newspaper articles
associated with the NSF-funded Kilimanjaro project. This exposure has extended
to television (CNN, National Geographic Society) and radio (BBC World Service,
etc.) audiences. The details described confirm that the Ohio State paleoclimate
ice core research group is strongly committed to and actively engaged in
advancing discovery and understanding while promoting teaching, training and
learning at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;