* 0352517
* Technological Change and Collective Association: Changing Relationships Among Technology, Organizations, Society, and the Citizenry
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2009
* Cynthia Stohl, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Michael E. Gorman
* 06/30/2009
* USD 249,925.00

Organizations of various kinds are integral to the fabric of society, for many
reasons. They mediate relationships among citizens and between citizens and the
state, they influence the nature of social capital and collective identities,
and they structure collective action. Increasingly, organizations are sensitive
to technological change. The subject of this study is relationships among
technology, organizational change, and societal change. Research has already
shown that technology can influence how organizations operate. Key information
technologies affect organizational structure, strategy, and boundaries as well
as their resource requirements and reach. Research has also shown that large-
scale changes in the character of public organizations have been underway for
decades in the U.S. Of particular importance is a loss of membership and
vitality in a wide array of traditional, face-to-face organizations that are
associated with the development of trust and social capital. Citizens'
engagement has increasingly shifted to more anonymous, interest-oriented groups
alleged to be less powerful contributors to social capital and community health.
These two trends now intersect: long-term secular evolution in the composition
of public organizations that are so integral to the structure of society, and
rapid but likely long-lived technological changes in what organizations can do
and how they are structured. This study examines the intersection of these
trends, by comparing four classes of organizations and their members along
several dimensions, from their capacity to generate collective action to their
ability to generate social trust and a sense of shared purpose and common
identification among citizens. These classes of organizations are: traditional
organizations oriented toward personal, community-based interaction among
citizens (e.g. American Legion, Rotary Club); interest oriented organizations
with socio-political agendas but largely anonymous membership relationships
(e.g. AARP, National Education Association); online personal-interaction groups
(e.g. Yahoo Groups, Lycos Clubs) and online interest-oriented groups (e.g.,
MoveOn.org, SaveOurEnvironment.org). The twofold methodology merges in-depth
qualitative case studies of one organization in each class with randomized
surveys of pooled memberships of several randomly chosen organizations in each
class. The project advances a multidisciplinary theory of technology and social
change that synthesizes collective action theory, organization theories,
communication theory, and social capital theory. It explores this theory
empirically, using two methodologies that are typically not joined: individual-
level survey research with statistical modeling; and organization-level,
qualitative case-study research. Besides scholarly presentations and
publications, project results will include oral and written reports and
recommendations to public organizations about the use of information technology
in non-profit settings. In addition, this research examines questions of social
diversity in organizations and public life, and findings may be of value in the
broadening of organizations' appeal. Finally, the project will advance the
training of graduate students and will contribute to the substance of several
graduate courses at UC Santa Barbara.