* 0352135
* Interaction of Separated Gas Flow with Thin Liquid Films
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Bassem Armaly, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing grant
* William Wendell Schultz
* 08/31/2008
* USD 354,677.00

ABSTRACT

PROPOSAL NO.: CTS-0352135 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: JAMES A. DRALLMEIER
INSTITUTION: UNIVERSITY OF MISSOURI ROLLA

INTERACTION OF SEPARATED GAS FLOW WITH THIN LIQUID FILMS

The dynamics of thin liquid films that develop on a solid surface and are driven
by an adjacent gas flow have applications in many engineering problems and have
been the subject of many studies. However, the separation of shear driven films
from the solid surface due to a sudden expansion in geometry and the resulting
atomization in the separated gas flow field, has received little attention. This
complex interaction between the liquid film and the gas in separated flow is
encountered in mixture preparation for spark ignition engines, as well as in
atomizer design, refrigerant flows, and film drag over wetted surfaces.
Prediction of the circumstances under which the film separates from the wall is
the first vital step in modeling this interaction but current approaches are
extremely limited. It is the objective of this program to develop an
understanding of the dynamics between the coupled gas phase
(separated/reattached flow) and liquid phase, along with the details of the
dominant interfacial instabilities to the point that these processes can be
modeled. Of particular interest is the prediction of film separation from the
solid surface and its atomization as a function of gas phase velocity and wall
angle. The goals of the proposed work are to identify, characterize and model
the nature of the film separation and breakup process, using both flow
visualization as well as quantitative measures of the gas flow field, liquid
film and drop field. A unique test section is proposed which is designed to
provide distinct control of the shear force driving the surface of the liquid
film, the gas phase separation at the corner and the acceleration forces
experienced by the liquid film at the corner. Multiple quantitative laser-based
diagnostics will be used to characterize the gas and liquid flow fields. The
modeling program, in parallel with the experimental program, will rely on
established models for the gas phase and shear driven liquid film as well as a
unique combination of film instability mechanisms and empirical correlations. To
broaden the reach of the research programs, the principle investigators include
teaming of undergraduates with graduate students. The undergraduates will be
included in all aspects of the research and discovery process. For example,
undergraduate students may be put in charge of a lower priority measurement such
as a pressure or temperature measurement. Undergraduates will work with the
faculty and graduate students in determining sensor specifications, purchasing,
installation, data acquisition and analysis of results. Interested and capable
undergraduate student will be encouraged to pursue graduate studies. The results
of the research will be disseminated through the usual means of scientific
journals, technical meetings, and seminars.

