* 0353880
* Mathematics and  Computing Research Experiences for Undergraduates at Iowa State University
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Leslie Hogben, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 05/31/2008
* USD 217,112.00

The Department of Mathematics will host the summer program Mathematics and
Computing Research Experiences for Undergraduates at Iowa State University.
Participants will spend eight weeks working on research projects as part of
active research groups at ISU. The projects are in a variety of mathematical
areas, representing the diverse research interests of the ISU Mathematics
Department, but all utilize computational methods; current projects are
described in more detail on the website www.math.iastate.edu/reu/. In addition
to carrying out their own research, students will attend a weekly REU Seminar,
where they will hear faculty lectures on a variety of mathematical topics and
presentations related to attending graduate school. The REU will conclude with a
symposium of student reports. Participants will be provided a stipend,
accommodation in University student housing, and some travel and meal expenses,
and will have the opportunity to participate in social activities for REU
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year twelve students will be selected from
the national pool of talented undergraduates. Women and minorities are
particularly encouraged to apply and this REU will run concurrently with the ISU
Program for Women in Science and Engineering summer internship program and the
Alliance program, in which students from historically black colleges come to the
ISU Mathematics Department.&lt;br/&gt;