* 0353141
* Workshop:     Universal Usability Doctoral Research Consortium; November 10-11, 2003; Vancouver, BC
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2003,10/31/2004
* Marilyn Tremaine, IBM Thomas J Watson Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 10/31/2004
* USD 20,617.00

This is funding to support a doctoral research symposium (workshop) of
approximately 10 promising doctoral students from the United States and abroad,
along with distinguished research faculty. The event will take place in
conjunction with the ACM 2003 Conference on Universal Usability (CUU 2003), to
be held November 10-11 in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, and sponsored by
the Association for Computing Machinery's Special Interest Groups on Human
Computer Interaction (SIGCHI) and Computers and the Physically Handicapped
(SIGCAPH). Conceived a few years back by Ben Shneiderman, he CUU conference
series represents an effort to build a new community of researchers that look at
the broader, social issues of interface design. A key way to build this
community is through its youth. The consortium's goal is to bring PhD students
together from diverse backgrounds (computer science, biomedical engineering,
human communication theory and economics), so that they can see the broader
spectrum of research approaches to universal usability and also feel that there
is a community for them in which they can pursue their research. The PIs
recognize the pressures of conforming when students graduate and move into
research disciplines defined by academic departments; they wish to counter these
pressures by guiding the research of the attendees through contact with experts
in the field, allowing these young researchers to attend the CUU 2003
conference, presenting potential career paths within academia and industry, and
illustrating the interrelationship of different aspects of universal usability
through interaction among students and faculty with diverse research interests.
Student participants will make formal presentations of their work during the
consortium, and will receive feedback from a faculty panel designed to help them
understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative to related
research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis research
projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether
their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. The student participants
will also present their work during the technical program of the CUU 2003
conference. Evaluation of the consortium will be conducted, and results of the
evaluation will be available to the organizers of future
consortia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The consortium will help shape
ongoing and future research projects aimed at questions of universal access and
universal usability, will promote scholarship and networking among new
researchers in this emerging interdisciplinary area, and will give new these
promising young researchers constructive feedback on their work and expose them
to a larger community.