* 0353730
* PENN-UPR Partnership for Research and Education in Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Michael Klein, University of Puerto Rico at Humacao
* Continuing Grant
* Sean Jones
* 08/31/2009
* USD 2,894,747.00

&lt;br/&gt;The impact of the Paternership for Research and Education in
Materials (PREM) between the University of Puerto Rico at Humacao and the
University of Pennsylvania will be substantial. The UPR-HUMACAO is the largest
producer of undergraduate physics, chemistry, and computational mathematics
majors on the island. Continuity from the B.S. level to graduate school will be
sustained. Undergraduates at UPR-HUMACAO and other participating institutions
will be given the unique opportunity to engage in undergraduate research and to
interact with mainland students with the unavoidable consequence as motivation
to pursue graduate school. The faculty sense of self-worth is greatly enhanced
by participating as co-investigators with leaders in their fields. This has
already led to multiple research projects (many of them NSF sponsored or
submitted to NSF) that have increased faculty collaboration and made research at
UPR truly multi-disciplinary in nature. The new instrumentation will enhance the
research infrastructure and the quality of the academic program. &lt;br/&gt;The
research and education activities will be centered on three main topics:
Polymers, Sensors and Actuators Materials, and Mathematical Modeling &amp;
Simulation in Materials Science. These are the three areas that best exemplify
the successful collaboration between UPR and PENN and the ones that resulted in
the highest total scientific production and publications rates.&lt;br/&gt;New
research capabilities will be made available which has the prospect of
attracting even more faculty into research thereby increasing the pool of
scientists on the island. By involving faculty from other units of UPR (UPRRP
and UPR-CAYEY) the extent of the collaborative will be enhanced and the number
of students that participate in this project will increase. This will serve two
purposes; it will help establish a credible research environment in the
southeast part of the island, and it will also serve as a motivating factor in
inviting local high school students to campus and demonstrating the various
research projects undertaken by undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;Finally, this
partnership will help start a new program to offer a Master's degree in the
Physics of Materials Research, which at the moment is under consideration with
the UPR Board of Directors. This collaborative, initiated under the NSF-CIRE
sponsorship has shown a great deal of influence in the attitude, involvement,
and level of scholarly endeavors of the undergraduates and faculty at UPR.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;