* 0353670
* REU Site in Biotechnology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2008
* Sarwan Dhir, Fort Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2008
* USD 262,000.00

Fort Valley State University (FVSU), an 1890 co-educational institution serving
a student community consisting of 93% African-Americans, proposes to continue a
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site in biotechnology. The primary
focus of the REU program will be encouraging and facilitating the pursuit of
research careers and, secondarily, assisting students with interests in other
science-based careers to appreciate the nature of research. Ten students
(minorities/women) selected from Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) and minority serving institutions (MSIs) will work on their research
projects with pre-selected mentors for 10 weeks in various research areas
including genetic engineering, tissue culture, molecular genetics, environmental
science, and biochemistry. Students will participate in other laboratory
activities such as seminars by invited speakers and lab group meetings. They
will also attend workshops that relate to professional career development,
scientific writing and ethics in science. On field trips students will visit
major research biotechnology/pharmaceutical companies and academic institutions.
Participants will complete research projects, make oral presentations, and
submit written abstracts of their work. Students will assess the program's
effectiveness through exit surveys and a long-term tracking system. To promote
continued interest in research, two students will be nominated for additional
research funds to extend their research experience during the following school
year. These students will be encouraged to present their summer research
findings at a scientific meeting. For more info, contact Dr. Dhir at
dhirs0@fvsu.edu or visit http://www.fvsu.edu/biotech/centerindex.asp.htm.