* 0353078
* Collaborative Research: Operational Strategies for Price and Service Quality Competition
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,08/31/2007
* Hyun-soo Ahn, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 08/31/2007
* USD 248,700.00

This grant provides funding for an analysis of how to use operational strategies
to improve a firm's long-run profit and its ability to attract and retain
customers through improved service quality. Several classes of novel models will
be developed for the structural analysis of optimal pricing, production, and
service quality selection in a competitive make-to-order marketplace. Once
initial analysis is completed, these models will be extended to a variety of
complex environments, including models featuring multiple quality attributes,
general demand settings, multi-class demand, and oligopoly settings. To account
for the impact of operational strategy in a more complex environment, the
research team will study models under which the firm offers products on both a
make-to-order and make-to-stock basis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research will lead to a deeper understanding of the impact of
dynamic operational strategy in a competitive market place, and in particular,
will help to explain how the firm's ability to choose the "right" price and
quality will affect the firm's long-run profit and market-share. With the
cooperation from industry partners, the research team will develop a
methodological foundation that will ultimately lead to more efficient and
effective decision support systems to help managers to choose a "right"
combination of price and service (product) quality. Finally, the insights
developed in this research will be incorporated into a case study and a teaching
module. This research is collaborative work between the PIs at the University of
Berkeley and Washington University in St. Louis. Both the PIs and their graduate
students will regularly travel between the two locations to further facilitate
the collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;