* 0353204
* CAREER: Mathematical Foundations of Computer Graphics
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2004,08/31/2005
* James Arvo, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 08/31/2005
* USD 20,212.00

The objective of this research is to strengthen the theoretical foundations of
computer graphics by carefully formulating its mathematical underpinnings,
applying formal methods of computer science, and exploring fundamental
connections with other disciplines. The work plan is organized into four
categories: 1) mathematical underpinnings, 2) numerical methods, 3)
computational complexity, and 4) formal methods. Within each category several
specific projects are described.&lt;br/&gt;Work done under this grant will
depart from previous work in both the tools applied and in the areas
investigated. Among the novel tools to be applied are mathematical methods from
functional analysis (e.g. measure theory), information-based complexity (e.g.
radius of information), and formal &lt;br/&gt;methods of computer science (e.g.
refinement calculus); these tools will be applied to fundamental problems of
computer graphics, such as deriving and clarifying radiometric principles,
placing a priori limits on the accuracy of image-based rendering, and
differentiating images of non-Lambertian scenes. These projects are firmly
rooted in previous work performed by the author.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the
novel areas to be investigated are proving the correctness of rendering
algorithms, "inverting" rendering algorithms in response to user queries, and
formalizing the use of default assumptions, ambiguity, and contradiction in
human-computer interaction. The fundamental educational objectives of this work
are to infuse computer graphics with appropriate mathematical structure, to
train future graphics researchers in the art of constructing rigorous proofs and
formally verifiable algorithms, and to integrate the tools and fundamental
concepts of computer graphics into the core computer science curriculum. These
goals cannot be attained through the introduction of a single course, but will
instead require exposing students to the necessary concepts at many levels.
Toward this end, elements of computer graphics will be introduced into an
existing sophomore-level course on the theory of computation, and an advanced
graduate-level course will be devised that explores the interplay of computer
graphics, human-computer interaction, and artificial intelligence, while
emphasizing the role of mathematical abstraction and formal
verification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;