* 0353930
* REU Site: Collections-Based Undergraduate Research at The Academy of Natural Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2010
* Richard McCourt, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2010
* USD 363,389.00

The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) summer internship program at
the Academy of Natural Sciences offers eight students each summer a paid
fellowship to conduct independent research for ten weeks with Academy
scientists. Research experiences include taxonomic studies using the Academy's
biological collections, using both traditional and molecular techniques; field
research on the ecology of aquatic systems; and the history of scientific
collections. Applicants are recruited nationwide with an emphasis on recruiting
minorities and other underserved students. Local recruitment of students,
especially minorities, is done via site visits by the REU Coordinator to local
colleges and universities, including nearby HBCU's such as Lincoln College and
Morgan State University. The REU coordinator also oversees the application
process as well as planning and oversight of all activities during the summer.
Students are chosen on the basis of overall interest in organismal biology,
evaluations of two referees, and academic performance. After a one-week
introductory session, students work on independent research projects with a
Ph.D. scientist as his or her mentor. Students work side-by-side with curators
and senior scientists and are involved in all aspects of collections-based
research including collection and curation of specimens, participation in field
expeditions, and dissemination of scientific results through oral presentation
and publication. Students also participate in weekly seminars and workshops with
scientific staff. At an end-of-summer day symposium, students give oral
presentations of their research results. Publication of student papers is
especially encouraged and a new aspect of this program is instruction by the REU
coordinator on writing a scientific research paper and in-house publication of
all student papers. A student database is used to maintain contact with students
and monitor their progress after they have completed the program. Each year
mentors and students evaluate the program, and assessment by an outside
evaluator is conducted bi-yearly to provide guidance for the
program.&lt;br/&gt;This program provides diverse and exciting experiences in
collections-based research to train and recruit researchers, teachers, and
environmental policy and conservation experts in organismal biology. In
addition, The Academy of Natural Sciences provides an exciting research
environment, and its location in downtown Philadelphia offers students a unique
cultural experience. For more information visit our website at
www.acnatsci.org/research/reu.html, or contact our REU Coordinator at:
reucoordinator@acnatsci.org.&lt;br/&gt;