* 0353111
* Binary Compact Objects as Gravitational Wave Sources:  Modeling and Data Analysis
* MPS,PHY
* 11/01/2004,10/31/2008
* Vassiliki Kalogera, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly K. Berger
* 10/31/2008
* USD 305,965.00

This project studies gravitational wave source modeling and data analysis
relevant primarily to systems of compact stellar objects. The main goal is to
provide the theoretical basis necessary for (i) the understanding and
interpretation of current and future gravitational wave observations and (ii)
the development of efficient gravitational wave data analysis methods that will
facilitate the derivation of physical constraints on the properties of the
astrophysical sources. More specifically the proposed work focuses on the: (i)
construction of theoretical models for both specific observed systems and whole
populations of compact objects, (ii) development of statistical tools for the
interpretation of observations and the derivation of constraints on the
theoretical models, and (iii) exploration of innovative data analysis methods
for the most efficient use of future gravitational wave data with focus on
physical parameter estimation; the latter is crucial for the development of
gravitational wave interpretation and phenomenology. Some of the basic
underlying physical principles of this research will be used in the development
of public outreach activities which will benefit from and build upon the long-
standing connection between Northwestern U. and the Adler Planetarium and
Astronomy Museum. The plan includes the development of content for computer-
based, interactive museum exhibits with the goal to disseminate the research
results to the public and enhance their interest in compact stellar systems and
gravitationalwave physics. The project will involve both graduate and
undergraduate students (especially those from underrepresented
groups).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activity focuses on a number of
questions the answers to which are important for the interpretation of current
and future gravitational wave observations with LIGO and other ground-based
detectors. The next few years are very important for the development of
gravitational wave physics and interpretation and this research focuses on ways
of maximizing the gain from future detections, but also will use observed upper
limits to constrain current theories of compact object formation.