* 0353765
* REU Site:  Support for Biological and Limnological Research in Affiliation with the Nyanza Project
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2004,02/28/2006
* Alice Michel, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2006
* USD 214,034.00

Vassar College will host 6 REU students each summer in a 7 week field program in
Tropical Limnology and Evolutionary Biology. This program operates in concert
with a sister REU, the Nyanza Project, on Lake Tanganyika, Tanzania. Jointly,
these programs are designed to provide students with an interdisciplinary
perspective on tropical lakes and the opportunity for hands-on independent
research. Recruitment will be based on academic achievement, interest in ecology
and evolutionary biology, and career goals. We also aim to recruit from
traditionally underrepresented groups in the sciences. Students will travel to
Kigoma, Tanzania, on the shores of Lake Tanganyika, where they will: 1)
participate in a two-week interdisciplinary workshop (lecture, lab, and field
activities) involving geology, paleoclimatology, limnology, and evolutionary
biology, 2) learn the essentials of experimental design and statistical
analysis, 3) design and implement independent research projects in conjunction
with their peers, 4) present their work at the end of the summer in a formal
seminar, 5) write a report on their work. As a 10-million-year-old Rift Valley
lake with high levels of endemism among many faunal groups, Lake Tanganyika
offers unique opportunities for research in limnology and evolutionary biology.
The region is also experiencing high levels of population growth and land use
change which can subsequently affect the water chemistry and biodiversity.
Research projects can focus on topics such as pelagic nutrient dynamics,
fisheries biology, the effect of deforestation on tropical streams, the effect
of sedimentation on gastropods, predator-prey co-evolution, and population
distributions. Past research reports, more information about the program, and
application materials can be found at http://www.geo.arizona.edu/nyanza/. For
any additional questions, contact Catherine O'Reilly at caoreilly@vassar.edu
(845-437-7353) or Andrew Cohen at acohen@geo.arizona.edu (520-621-4691). This
award was cofunded by the Office of International Science and Engineering.