* 0353000
* Travel support to the PMSE symposium "The Interface of Polymers and Biomimetics" at the Spring 2004 ACS National Meeting, Anaheim, CA
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2004,02/28/2005
* Darrin Pochan, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2005
* USD 3,000.00

Proposal for travel support to the PMSE symposium The Interface of Polymers and
Biomimetics at the spring 2004 ACS national meeting, Anaheim,
CA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Financial support is sought to support the
interdisciplinary polymer symposium Interface of polymers and biomimetics to
take place at the 2004 spring national meeting of the American Chemical Society
in Anaheim, CA. The overarching goal of the symposium is to provide a forum for
direct interaction between polymer, materials, and biological researchers in
order to explore new interdisciplinary research activities in polymer science
and engineering. Specifically, there is a growing group of current materials,
biological, chemical, and engineering research that takes advantage of the
molecular tools of biopolymers (polymer conformation control via secondary
structure, biofunctionality, biocompatibility, specific binding, catalytic
activity, motor capability) to build new materials, synthetic strategies, and
devices. These bioderived molecules are multifunctional and diverse, spanning
polypeptides, DNA, RNA, polysaccharides, and supramolecular assemblies of lipds,
surfactants, or small peptides. It is hoped that this ACS symposium will present
a comprehensive overview of current research in using biopolymers for materials,
technological, and biotechnological applications.