* 0353016
* Investigation of Molybdenum Metallocene Complexes for Hydrolyzing Phosphate Neurotoxins
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* Louis Kuo, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Rabinovich
* 08/31/2009
* USD 100,000.00

Dr. Louis Kuo, Chemistry Department, Lewis and Clark College, is supported by
the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry of the Chemistry
Division for research into the syntheses and investigation of new organometallic
complexes that hydrolyze phosphate esters. Molybdocene dichloride (Cp2MoCl2) is
the only known organometallic system that carries out the hydrolysis of
organophosphates in aqueous solution. The PI has demonstrated that this process
involves a Lewis Acid/Base interaction of the molybdenum complex with the
phosphate center. Increasing the Lewis acidity of Mo(IV) should accelerate ester
hydrolysis. Thus, in this project the Lewis acidity of Mo(IV) centers will be
altered by attaching small electron withdrawing/donating groups to the
cyclopentadienyl ligand. A variety of these will be investigated in order to
develop relationships which relate the structures of the complexes with their
ability to hydrolyze phosphate esters. Using these relationships, new transition
metal-based materials will be designed for the degradation of organophosphate
neurotoxins. The second part of the project will investigate the ability of the
molybdocene derivatives to hydrolyze the P-S bond in phosphinothioates.
Throughout the project, mechanistic investigations will be
undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many chemical warfare agents and pesticides are
phosphate esters or resemble phosphinothioates. The main detoxification
strategies for these species are hydrolysis and incineration. This project seeks
to develop new agents that can accelerate the hydrolysis of phosphates and
phosphinothioates. There is current importance to developing better reagents
that hydrolyze phosphate esters because substantial stockpiles of chemical
warfare agents must be destroyed over the next few years. Educationally, this
project will have a major impact on undergraduate research at Lewis and Clark
College and the environmental implications of the project will impact the
college's burgeoning Environmental Studies program as well as its chemistry and
biochemistry programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;