* 0353941
* Collaborative Research: FRG: New development on nonparametric modeling and inferences with biological applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Chunming Zhang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 05/31/2008
* USD 216,000.00

The objectives of this proposal are to develop new and widely applicable
semiparametric and nonparametric approaches to solve challenging statistical
problems from computational biology. Frontiers of biological research such as
normalization and analysis of microarray and proteomic data, functional
connectivity of brains, covariate effects on longitudinal and functional data,
and prediction of individual response trajectories have generated a number of
outstanding statistical challenges. Several new semiparametric and nonparametric
models have been introduced to address the imminent needs for the aforementioned
biological applications. A number of innovative methods on nonparametric
estimation and inferences are proposed. Their properties will be investigated
via both asymptotic theory and simulations. Their efficacy in biological
applications will be carefully scrutinized. This proposal not only introduces a
number of innovative techniques and useful statistical models, but also provides
various new insights into nonparametric inferences. The research findings will
have significant impact on the future development of statistical theories and
methodologies.

Technological invention and information advancement have revolutionized
scientific research and technological development. Quantitative methods have
been widely employed in scientific communities. They have played pivotal roles
in knowledge discovery. This proposal intends to develop new nonparametric
techniques and theories that arise from frontiers of scientific development. In
particular, the investigators will develop models and cutting-edge technologies
for the analysis of microarray, proteomic, longitudinal and functional data and
fMRI brain images. Common characteristics of these data are their complexity and
size, where nonparametric techniques are particularly powerful and under
developed. The proposed techniques address imminent needs in computational
aspects of molecular biology, neurology, and epidemiology. In addition, they
will integrate new mathematical developments with those in science and
engineering, which empowers new knowledge discoveries and prudent policy making.
Undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctors and underrepresented groups
will be trained as results of this research.



