* 0353362
* NSF-Europe:     Evolution of the Dielectric Constant Across Electronic Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2006
* John Goodenough, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 03/31/2006
* USD 90,000.00

This project aims to investigate the charge-ordering (CO) phenomenon in mixed-
valent oxides with perovskite-related structures and to explore the design of
materials with a high dielectric constant. The evolution of the dielectric
constant at the crossover from localized to itinerant electronic behavior will
be studied. The evolution of physical properties at this transition continues to
be a subject of extensive and intensive investigation because there is still no
accepted theory of the character of this transition, which manifests a number of
novel phenomena. Surprisingly, the evolution of the dielectric properties has
received little attention, yet it promises to provide novel phenomena of
technical interest. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;Two of the key investigators of
the group in Spain have worked in Texas with Professor Goodenough, so excellent
working relationships have been established. In addition, a University of Texas
graduate student who is a U.S. citizen will study in Spain. The several
universities involved bring different synthetic and/or measurement techniques to
this complex problem, and the students of each country have an excellent
opportunity to benefit culturally as well as scientifically from this
collaboration. The possibility of designing a material with an anomalously high
dielectric constant would open a field of technical as well as fundamental
interest. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;