* 0353854
* REU Site:    Summer Research Projects in Contemporary Physics for Women and Minorities
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2004,03/31/2007
* Sidney Nagel, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2007
* USD 318,849.00

The University of Chicago Department of Physics administers a Research
Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) site project targeted especially towards
encouraging members of under-represented minority groups and women to pursue
careers in physics. Applications are solicited nationally from undergraduate
programs in physics and engineering with some emphasis on historically black
colleges and traditional women's colleges. The core of the program for each
student participant is a 10-week summer research project under supervision of an
individual faculty member. Each student is given a specific, well-defined
research task that can be completed within the 10-week duration of the program.
Typical projects are distributed among the areas of high-energy, cosmic-ray and
space physics, astronomy and astrophysics, general relativity, condensed-matter
physics, non-linear and non-equilibrium phenomena, optics and solar energy,
biophysics and electron and ion microscopy. These research experiences are
complemented by field trips to Argonne and Fermi Accelerator Laboratories. In
addition, each summer, a series of lectures is presented by faculty to provide
an overview of some of the most important research topics currently pursued in
physics. By having pre-college science teachers participate in our lecture
series, we believe we can broaden our scope and introduce some of the ideas of
cutting-edge research into high-school science classrooms. Each of the students
submits a written report describing her or his research and makes a formal oral
presentation during the last two weeks of the program. &lt;br/&gt;The Physics
REU provides the students with an exposure to the breadth and unity of physics.
In addition it provides the activities that bring all of the REU students into
contact with one another to create the peer interactions among students that
increase the program's excitement and vitality. We are enhancing the program by
taking advantage of the excellent rapport we have observed between the REU
participants and our graduate students. This will increase the feedback that we
can get about the program as well as provide increased mentoring by role models
close in age to the undergraduates.