* 0353162
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Rethinking Sociophonetics: Interdisciplinary Perspectives on the Northern Cities Chain Shift
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2004,07/31/2005
* Dennis Preston, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2005
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Dennis Preston, Mr. Bartlomiej Plichta will conduct
sociophonetic research in the Detroit metropolitan area for his doctoral
dissertation. The project investigates two current, yet unresolved, issues in
dialectal aspects of speech production and perception. Over the years,
researchers have established that speech perception is a very complex phenomenon
and that accurate comprehension of spoken language relies on the integration of
numerous types of stimuli, including auditory, visual, linguistic, and personal.
A substantial group of English speakers in the Detroit metropolitan area exhibit
pronunciation features known as "The Northern Cities Chain Shift." Although much
is already known about the pronunciation of vowels, accurate phonetic
descriptions of other important aspects of pronunciation in this speech
community are lacking. The first study investigates the dialectal use of
nasalization, a feature that is often reported in so-called "folk perceptions"
of dialects. The second study investigates the role of dialectal information in
comprehending spoken language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this
research project is to demonstrate that dialectal features play a crucial role
in the production and perception of speech. The results of this study will
broaden our understanding of language variation, which should be of great value
to sociolinguists, as well as educators, speech pathologists and audiologists.
This research may also have important implications for the construction of
cognitive and computational models of spoken language.&lt;br/&gt;