* 0353647
* REU Site in Marine Biomedical Sciences
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2007
* Peter A. V. Anderson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2007
* USD 224,235.00

This Undergraduate Research Training program in Marine Biomedical Science will
be held at the Whitney Laboratory, University of Florida, located in St.
Augustine, Florida. From its inception in 1986, the Whitney Laboratory REU
program has had two major aims: (1) to provide undergraduates with a realistic
and professional research experience that would reinforce their interest in
basic research or motivate them to consider basic research as a career option
and, (2) to make students aware of the value of marine animals and other
comparative model systems in fundamental biological research. Interns work
toward independence on a project selected from topics in neurobiology, molecular
biology, cellular biology, biochemistry, genomics, and nanotechnology.
Generally, students work with marine model systems such as horseshoe crabs,
lobsters, mollusks, cnidarians and non-marine invertebrates. Projects are
sculpted from ongoing research efforts yet are distinct. Other activities
include field trips to three distinct Florida marine environments, lectures that
highlight the research efforts at the Laboratory, weekly discussions on ethical
scientific conduct and group meetings with the directors from various University
of Florida graduate school programs. Interns attend workshops on collection of
marine organisms, handling and disposal of hazardous materials, preparation and
presentation of material for seminars and poster sessions, scientific writing
for publications, and notebook maintenance. Interns are also encouraged to work
with local area school children in marine science enrichment programs. The
program will accept up to 10 students for the annual summer session. Students
are recruited from colleges and universities throughout the United States and
territories, with a special emphasis on schools traditionally populated by under
represented minorities and from schools that lack graduate programs in the
biological sciences. For more information, contact: William R. Buzzi at
904.461.4011 or wrb@whitney.ufl.edu; or visit:
http://www.whitney.ufl.edu/reu/undergra.htm.