* 0353300
* Travel Grant to 5th International PhD Symposium in Civil Engineering; June 17-19, 2004; Delft, The Netherlands
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2003,10/31/2004
* Reginald DesRoches, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Mccabe
* 10/31/2004
* USD 17,600.00

Travel Grant to 5th International PhD Symposium in Civil Engineering TU Delft,
The Netherlands ,CMS project 0353300

PI: Reginald Des Roches, GA Tech

This proposal is to provide travel fellowships for approximately 8-10 graduate
students to attend the 5th International PhD Symposium in Civil Engineering, in
Delft, The Netherlands, in June, 2004. The symposium is the 5th, in a sequence
of successful symposiums that began in 1996 in Budapest. The symposium is a
great opportunity to have students highlight the results of their research and
interact with students from all over the world. The objectives of the Symposium
are to: Provide a forum to exchange ideas and research results for PHD Students
Discuss the results of ongoing research Provide opportunities for PhD students
to establish scientific relationships Compare PhD programs in various countries
Excite students about academia in this critical stage of their careers

Students will be recruited from Universities all over the United States.
Attempts will be made to have a diverse group of students selected for the
fellowships (in terms of research topics, regional representation, and cultural
diversity). Special efforts will be made to attract talented students from
smaller and non-traditional universities, as well as students from
underrepresented groups. The broader impacts of the proposed travel grant are
that it will provide graduate students an opportunity to exchange ideas and
research results with PhD students from all over the world. This experience will
help excite students about civil engineering and academia at this very critical
stage in their careers.