* 0353640
* Research Training Group in Noncommutative Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2004,06/30/2009
* Alain Connes, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2009
* USD 742,085.00

Classic geometry such as algebraic geometry can be studied through commutative
algebra. Noncommutative geometry is the study of the geometry and analysis of
``noncommutative spaces'' through operator algebras. Noncommutative geometry has
important applications to many areas of mathematics including analysis, topology
and geometry of manifolds, knot theory, mathematical physics. More recently,
deep connections to number theory have been established.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The breadth and technical nature of this subject has made
it difficult for beginners to navigate to its frontiers. The noncommutative
geometry group at Vanderbilt will establish a program of training PhD students
and postdoctoral associates in the area of noncommutative geometry. In addition
to the regular training program (such as courses and seminars), an important
component of the program is the annual noncommutative geometry spring institute.
The purpose of this school/conference is to train students and postdocs in
noncommutative geometry and operator algebras. Several mini-courses will be
given by leading experts and there will be additional research talks on recent
progress in the subject. In addition the spring institute will provide a forum
for young researchers to discuss their work with senior scientists.&lt;br/&gt;