* 0353440
* Mentoring and Induction Support for Urban Secondary Science and Mathematics Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2011
* David Radford, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 07/31/2011
* USD 4,406,710.00

The University of Alabama at Birmingham, the University of Houston, the
University of Memphis, Birmingham City Schools, Memphis City Schools, and
Houston ISD will implement and evaluate a program for the support and induction
of secondary science and mathematics teachers into urban school systems. Goals
of the five year project include:

o develop and implement models for beginning science and mathematics teacher
induction and support o determine which model(s) are most effective in urban
environments. o enhance the content knowledge and pedagogical skills of
secondary science and math teachers o increase beginning teachers' understanding
of urban classroom and community environments o prepare experienced teachers as
mentors and teacher leaders in their schools and districts o contribute to the
research-based understanding of preparing and supporting science and mathematics
teachers in urban systems.

INTELLECTUAL MERIT: This project will use rigorous research methods to
investigate an important question: How can we provide better support for
beginning teachers in urban settings to reverse the large attrition rate and to
improve science and mathematics instruction? Project partners have extensive
background in working with urban schools and conducting research.

BROADER IMPACT: The project will directly impact 120 - 180 beginning secondary
science and mathematics teachers and 72 mentor teachers and improve the learning
experience for over 67,500 students in three urban school systems. Because of
the large minority population served, the project will have a major impact on
underrepresented ethnic groups. The project partners are nationally established
in education and are poised to widely disseminate findings and products.

