* 0353994
* REU Site for Undergraduate Research in Accelerator, Nuclear and Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* David Cinabro, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2008
* USD 397,533.00

Wayne State University offers an REU program to bring disadvantaged students
from the Detroit Metro Area to national laboratories over the summer.
Opportunities for students are offered at Brookhaven National Laboratory,
Fermilab, and at Cornell University's Laboratory for Elementary and Particle
Physics. Similar opportunities also exist for in-service teachers through an RET
component of the program. WSU recruits a uniquely diverse group of students,
largely from underrepresented segments of society. The program consists of a
preparation phase involving a one-hour course given over the winter to students
and prospective teacher participants (14 hours total). The course introduces the
students and teachers to the physical and mathematical concepts relevant for the
summer experience. The course also provides an introduction to the computing
environment of a large experiment, and a computer homework, which requires the
students to write and understand simple programs, produce some graphic output,
and write their own web page within a Unix environment. This preparation phase
provides the students with intensive faculty interaction, encouragement, and an
effort to make sure that student needs are met. Wayne State faculty then travel
with the students and teachers to Brookhaven, Fermilab, and Cornell in early
June to help them get settled and started. The participants merge with other
existing REU programs at each site for social activities, and lectures on
various scientific topics.