* 0353552
* Collaborative Research:  Multi-Product Assemble-to-Order Systems: Performance Optimization and Supply Chain Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2003,09/30/2005
* Jing-Sheng Song, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 09/30/2005
* USD 62,134.00

The objective of this research is to study the assemble-to-order (ATO) system,
which is a hybrid of make-to-stock at the component (subassembly) level and
assemble-to-order (or, configure-to-order) at the end-product (final assembly)
level. The usual inventory-service tradeoff, a key factor in supply chain
management, becomes even more prominent in the ATO system, as each customer
order typically involves a large number of components, and the stockout of any
component will cause a delay in supplying the order. Quantitative analysis of
the ATO system, in general, is difficult as the production-inventory dynamics
among the components are highly correlated, driven by a common demand stream.
The research will focus on developing bounds and approximations based on various
notions of stochastic order, and use these as surrogate performance measures,
such that the resulting optimization problems possess special structures, which
in turn lead to efficient algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ATO system is an
appealing business process that provides both mass customization and quick
response to order fulfillment, and hence plays an important role in a wide range
of industries, internet commerce in particular. The research is expected to
generate new knowledge and insights to the mathematical foundation and basic
properties of ATO systems, and to enhance supply chain management technologies
in the design and analysis of such systems.&lt;br/&gt;