* 0353199
* 0Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Electronic Coupling in Metalloporphyrin Dimers and Trimers
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2008
* Robert Cave, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 05/31/2008
* USD 255,000.00

Professors Hal van Ryswyk and Robert Cave of Harvey Mudd College are supported
by the Inorganic, Inorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program for their joint
experimental and theoretical research on electronic coupling in a series of
mixed-valence metalloporphryin dimers, which can be tailored to vary the degree
of coupling. Inorganic materials synthesis will be carried out using solid-phase
techniques followed by spectroscopic characterization, including Stark
spectroscopy, of the charge-transfer bands of these compounds. The theoretical
approach applies the Koopman's Theorem-Generalized Mulliken-Hush approach (KT-
GMH) to calculate the coupling elements for these systems by semiempirical,
Hartree-Fock, and Density Functional Theory-based methods. This collaborative
experimental and theoretical effort will lead to a detailed understanding of the
charge transfer characteristics of these systems, and provide stringent tests of
the KT-GMH approach. The results will provide a firmer basis for new materials
components, biomimetic models, and catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;The development of new
theoretical chemistry tools thoroughly tested by experimental models is a
critical step toward improving our understanding of large-scale charge-transfer
systems. The metalloporphyrin oligomers studied under this award are attractive
candidates for a wide range of materials science applications, with potential
uses in molecular scale electronics, sensors, optical devices, and solar energy
conversion schemes. Undergraduate students will receive multifaceted training in
materials synthesis and characterization together with electronic structure
calculations of metalloporphorin dimers and trimers.