* 0353412
* Nurturing Mathematics Dreamkeepers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2012
* Ron Tzur, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2012
* USD 3,692,090.00

"Nurturing Mathematics Dreamkeepers" is a five-year Teacher Professional
Continuum Research project that seeks to study a professional development
intervention for K-2 teachers centered on standards-based, culturally-relevant
pedagogy aimed at improving the mathematical performance of African-American
students. The study targets ten elementary schools in an urban school district
with a documented achievement gap between White American and African American
students. The research study will investigate: (a) the ways in which K-2
teachers draw upon their current knowledge (mathematical, cultural, pedagogical)
to make sense of African American students' conceptions; (b) how teachers might
advance their practice through understanding of the relationship between
students' cultural experiences and mathematical conceptions; and (c) to what
extent does this advancement bring forth solid foundations in mathematics among
all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will yield four major outcomes.
First, the project will influence mathematics achievement for approximately
1,000 African American K-2 students. Second, it will provide an empirically
grounded knowledge base and model of how teacher learning can impact the
achievement gap. Third, the creation of a cadre of mentor mathematics teachers
and school administrators prepared to support quality mathematics teaching and
learning will enhance infrastructure in the school districts served. Finally,
the project will nurture five graduate students who will become highly qualified
mathematics teacher educators as a result of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The professional development includes annual two-
week summer institutes and extensive follow-up support during the school year.
Close to 300 elementary school teachers and principals are targeted by this K-2
mathematics project. During the academic year, buddy-pairs of teachers will co-
teach mathematics lessons, hold a weekly two-hour reflective sessions and
participate in a weekly cohort session focused on teachers' pedagogical
concerns. The teacher buddy-pairs will increase each year creating a learning
community at each school. The learning community will meet each week at the
school site. Professional development content will focus on number sense within
the context of conception-based, culturally relevant pedagogy. Cultural relevant
pedagogy will be examined theoretically to allow teachers to develop new
awareness and practice of its principles to facilitate student success in
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design employs a case-controlled,
quasi-experimental study utilizing mixed methods. Over a two-year period, five
schools representing two cohorts of participants will receive "first order"
professional development from the project. Over the course of the third year, a
"second order" autonomous professional development experience will involve five
additional schools in the same school district. Another five additional schools
in which no teacher participates in the project will serve as comparison. Data
sources include videotapes of classroom practice, videotapes of professional
development sessions, teacher surveys, case studies, mini-interviews of students
and written assessments for students in grades
1-2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;