* 0353831
* NSF-Europe:  Photonics, Plasmonics and Molecule-Based Nanomaterials: Preparation, Design, Properties Optimization and Device Aspects
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2009
* Mark Ratner, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/2009
* USD 1,700,000.00

This project is a joint research and education program between the Materials
Research Institute at Northwestern University (NU) and the National
Microelectronic Research Center (NMRC) at the University College, Cork, Republic
of Ireland. The project addresses design, synthesis, characterization,
fundamental understanding, and optimization of molecule-based nanostructured
optical materials for the fabrication of photonic devices with a special
emphasis on ultra-high speed optical switches. The approach is to study how new
? (2) and ? (3) materials with (or without) plasmon field enhancement can
increase the speed and efficiency of photonic switches. Special focus is placed
on the synthesis and self-assembly of unusual new ? (3) materials based on
fullerenes, metal oxides, novel metallomacrocyles, and nanoparticle resonant
field-enhanced p-conjugated polymers having large third- order optical
responses. Another focus is on the study of enhanced susceptibilities in excited
molecular states for switching. The fundamental scientific aim of this effort
involves the preparation, measurement and understanding of nonlinear responses
in metastable excited triplet states. The anticipated application is in optical
computing and signal processing, based on an enhanced nonlinear response
predicted in such metastables. New molecular chromophores, including those with
twisted p -systems, will be designed and synthesized. The long-term objectives
of the joint program include the development of ultra-compact photonic and
plasmonic integrated circuits including ultra-fast (near-sub-picosecond) optical
switches using nonlinear effects in nanostructured materials. The project also
will advance theoretical understanding of photonic effects in molecular
materials. Involvement in the program will enrich the research and education
environment of students, teachers, and their colleagues. &lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses fundamental research issues associated with
electronic and photonic materials having technological relevance. An important
feature of the project is the strong emphasis on education, with emphasis on
integration of research and education, and an international collaboration
providing both scientific and educational benefits. These include: 1.
Interdisciplinary and International research opportunities. 2. The experience of
integrating research with education. 3. Science content and curriculum
development. 4. Outreach and global dissemination of research and education
information. 5. Summer Research Program for science teachers and under-
represented students-collaborators will host science teachers and under-
represented students in their laboratories to perform summer research. Under the
proposed program, these summer participants will also be involved in educational
exchange programs between Northwestern University and the NMRC in Ireland. This
NSF project is a Cooperative Activity in Materials Research between the NSF and
Europe (NSF 02-135). The project is being carried out in collaboration with the
University College, Cork, Republic of Ireland.&lt;br/&gt;