* 0353480
* Understanding Post-Exposure Risk Management Decisions: How Affect and Uncertainty Modulate Risk Appraisals and Subsequent Risk Management Choices
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2003,11/30/2004
* Joseph Arvai, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 11/30/2004
* USD 84,288.00

Research involving people's responses to risk exposure reveals two sharply
contrasting trends. The first is a post-exposure wake-up call, which results in
a heightened awareness of risk and a strong motivation to invest in actions
designed to reduce future exposure. The second is a post-exposure letdown, with
people feeling safer because an adverse but low-probability risk event has taken
place, thereby lowering their perceived risk of future exposure. Natural hazards
(e.g., floods and forest fires) often elicit this second response, leading to
the rapid reconstruction of communities in previously affected areas and the
misreading of probabilities as predictions (e.g., so that the near-term
occurrence of a 1-in-100 year event leaves residents feeling safe for the next
century). One result of these two opposing trends is that risk-mitigation
actions undertaken by communities and government often focus on near-term,
reactive responses (e.g., requiring fire-resistant building materials in
recently burned areas) to the neglect of long-range research and planning
efforts (e.g., adaptive management responses) that could significantly reduce
uncertainty through learning more about the likelihood and nature of future
hazards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Destructive forest fires in the Pacific Northwest
during the summer of 2003 provide a time-limited opportunity to investigate how
exposure to catastrophic risk influences decision makers' interpretation of
uncertainty and their affective responses to future risk-management choices.
Using structured interviews and surveys with key participants (community
residents, technical experts, decision makers) in both burned and unburned
areas, we will examine how information is evaluated, manipulated, and used
during the process of making risk-management decisions. We believe that both
misinterpretations of uncertainty and altered appraisals of risk conspire to
impede long-term learning and the implementation of adaptive management
responses when they are most needed. Research findings should advance
understanding of affective processes and help to identify priority factors that
decision makers use to interpret uncertainty. The broader impacts of the
proposed research include the design of decision aids to improve post-exposure
risk-management strategies, thereby reducing injuries to humans, environmental
losses, and property damage resulting from future risk events.