* 0353377
* The Professional Learning Community Model for Alternative Pathways in Teaching Science and Mathematics (PLC-MAP)
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Cathleen Loving, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 08/31/2011
* USD 3,076,978.00

"The Professional Learning Community Model for Alternative Pathways in Teaching
Science and Mathematics (PLC-MAP)" is a partnership of the North Harris
Montgomery Community College District (NHMCCD), Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU),
and ten public school districts in the Greater Houston area representing urban,
suburban and rural areas. The goals of the five-year project are to 1) develop a
Professional Learning Community (PLC) model for engaging science and education
researchers from a university with science and mathematics faculty at community
colleges to increase the number, quality and diversity of middle school and high
school mathematics and science teachers; 2) apply design-based research to
assess the effectiveness and replicability of the PLC model; and 3) disseminate
replicable project and research findings. This project is building on the
successful NSF-funded Information Technology in Science Center for Teaching and
Learning (ITS Center) to create a Professional Learning Community model for
engaging university science researchers and ITS Science Education Specialists
with community college faculty in preparing well-qualified teachers through a
community college-based alternative certification program.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research focus is to determine the impact of the PLC model on
teacher quality and quantity using a designed-based research model in which
development of the model and research on the effectiveness of that model take
place through continuous cycles of design, enactment, analysis and redesign.
Research activities are designed to determine to what extent participants in the
PLC model increase the use of effective information technologies, authentic
inquiry experiences and authentic assessment to teach science and/or
mathematics. They are also determining the extent to which participation in the
PLC model results in reduced teacher attrition during the internship and the
induction years, whether there is a difference based on ethnicity/race and the
extent to which participation results in reduced mentor teacher and NHMCCD
attrition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;