* 0354658
* Collaborative Research: FRG: Time Reversal Techniques in Wireless Communications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2008
* USD 178,900.00

Proposal: DMS-0354658 PI: Liliana Borcea PI: Institution: Rice University Title:
Collaborative Research: FRG: Time Reversal Techniques in Wireless Communications

ABSTRACT

This Focused Research Group project is a closely knit Math-EE collaboration that
involves, in addition to the PI's, several students and postdoctoral visitors.
Our goals cover physical channel modeling, experimental measurements, algorithm
design and simulation of wireless communication systems in large delay spread
environments. Physical modeling will help understand large delay spread channels
in wireless environments. Experimental measurements will use a new, specially
designed by this research group, wireless time reversal sounder to verify
theoretical time reversal predictions. Mathematical algorithm design will deal
with equalization complexity, working with imperfect channel estimates, pre-
coding, etc., that arise in such problems. Systems simulations will help
understand overall performance of time reversal communications in different
deployment scenarios.

In time reversal, signals transmitted with a time reversed filter back propagate
and focus tightly in space-time near the intended receiver. The phenomena rely
on large delay spread (rich multipath) channels. The space-time focusing is even
more tight and robust when the propagation medium is randomly inhomogeneous.
Recent experimental and theoretical studies have firmly established this
remarkable effect and have motivated applications to detection, imaging and
communications. We believe that these space-time focusing properties of time
reversal can lead to a new class of wireless communications systems with
significant advantages over current approaches. This technique converts a
problem in wireless posed by multipath (which induces fading) into an
opportunity for improved performance. There are many potential applications of
these ideas in commercial wireless as well as in specialized systems, such as
communication systems that demand low probability of intercept.

Lead Proposal: 0354674 PI: G. Papanicolaou Institution: Stanford University





