* 0354189
* EMSW21-VIGRE Project: VIGRE-II - "Integrated and Mentored Program of Research and Education in Statistical Sciences" (IMPRESS)
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2010
* Thomas Gerig, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 07/31/2010
* USD 2,650,000.00

EMSW21 VIGRE Project: Integrated and Mentored Program of Research&lt;br/&gt;and
Education in Statistical Sciences (IMPRESS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NC State
Department of Statistics' second VIGRE program (IMPRESS) will continue
development of the model training program for statisticians begun under the
Department's first VIGRE award (VIGRE-I). Through participation of
undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral trainees in faculty-mentored
teams, our VIGRE program places problem-solving, research, consulting, and
communication at the core of the learning process. Project IMPRESS will continue
and expand upon the program of ambitious mentoring, research skills training,
and practicum courses developed under VIGRE-I. IMPRESS will encourage
participation by quantitatively-oriented students from diverse backgrounds and
with diverse prior training, thus resulting in a net gain for the mathematical
sciences of students from both traditional and under-represented student groups.
IMPRESS will enhance the quality of statistics education at NC State and,
through national dissemination, increase the number and improve the quality of
statistical scientists in the professional workforce and the academy. The
intellectual merits of our VIGRE program have been and will be manifest in the
significance of the VIGRE trainees' and their mentors' contributions to
statistical theory, methods and applications. Equally important are the indirect
effects that the program will have on the conduct of data-dependent research in
numerous fields of science and technology. Well-trained statisticians skilled at
interacting with scientists from other disciplines are crucial to the advance of
science. The human and societal impacts of Project IMPRESS include the current
and future impact of our trainees' research on the conduct of science in
numerous fields of science and technology, an increase in the number of
statistically-trained scientists, and a broadening of the composition of the
next generation of statistical scientists in terms of gender, ethnicity, and
prior academic background.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;