* 0354557
* Advanced Computing and Programming in the Mechanical Engineering Curriculum
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2003,08/31/2006
* Brianno Coller, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2006
* USD 207,915.00

The objective of this proposal is the meaningful integration of advanced
computing knowledge and techniques into the undergraduate mechanical engineering
curriculum. The vehicle for this integration is the creation of an innovative
and engaging advanced computing track or specialization for mechanical
engineering students. The first implementation will be at the University of
Illinois at Chicago; however, the project will be developed for portability, so
that deliverables, especially a new capstone course, will greatly aid other
schools in implementing curricular changes tailored to their particular needs.
It will thus impact students well beyond the UIC
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is motivated by the lasting roles that
computing and information technologies have claimed in mechanical engineering:
embedded microprocessors have become commonplace in engineered systems, and the
enterprise of engineering design and testing have been migrating to virtual and
simulated environments. These trends underscore the fact that good computing
practice is becoming as important to engineers as good laboratory practice and
sound mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal addresses the fact that the
undergraduate engineer's training in programming has evolved little over the
last few decades. And, while students are being exposed to powerful commercial
software tools at an increasing rate, the underlying fundamental computational
principles are generally overlooked.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
may be summarized by the following list of outcomes, which will be assessed by
an independent evaluator to determine if the activity is a
success:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcome # 1: Instill advanced computing and
programming skills. Mechanical engineering students will learn skills and
concepts that are normally only taught to computer scientists: object-oriented
programming, data structures, algorithm design, graphical interfaces, large
scale scientific computing, and more. A capstone course, which constitutes the
centerpiece of the proposal, will integrate the computer science topics with
mechanical engineering science and mechanical engineering
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcome # 2: Develop better engineers. Although
students will be learning computer science, the goal is to make them better
engineers. Since engineers can only use what they know, the investigators
hypothesize that these students will be better equipped for the information age,
recognizing how IT tools and concepts can be used and exploited in the design of
mechanical and thermal/fluid devices and systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcome
#3: Engage minority middle school students. The investigators capitalize on
great opportunities for middle school students to participate in the project in
a meaningful way: as pilots of virtual aircraft the undergraduates design. The
students are exposed to the exciting world of engineering, learning the
important roles of high-level mathematics and
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcome #4: Create a portable product. The final
objective of the project is to create a deliverable: the foundation for an
advanced computing track that mechanical engineering departments at other
institutions may adopt and adapt to suit their own purposes with relative ease
and little cost. The capstone course, in particular, can be used for this
purpose. We shall produce a considerable amount of software infrastructure and
educational materials to distribute freely over the web and we have a strategy
to publicize it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators' areas of expertise span
much of the broad discipline of mechanical engineering. The team is complemented
by a computer scientist, a specialist in software engineering. They are well-
positioned to create the valuable educational experience for mechanical
engineering undergraduates at UIC and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;0&lt;br/&gt;