* 0354335
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Microcracking and Damage Evaluation by Laser Speckle Shearing Interferometry.
* O/D,OISE
* 08/26/2003,08/31/2004
* Mohamed Seif, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2004
* USD 9,103.00

0001581&lt;br/&gt;Seif&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This award is to
support a collaborative project by Dr. Mohamed A. Seif, Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Northern Illinois University (NIU), Dekalb, Illinois, and Dr.
Mohammad R. Shaalan and Dr. Usama Khashaba, both of the Department of Mechanical
Power Engineering, Zagazig University, Zagazig, Egypt. The project is intended
to develop and demonstrate a novel automated non-destructive evaluation (NDE)
technique, that of laser speckle shearing interferometry. The technique should
be capable of determining flaws and initial development of microcracking and its
subsequent propagation in different materials. The sensitivity of the method and
four significant factors in final failure, namely the number and character of
the flaws, the load environment, the residual stress level, and the mechanism of
failure of the material, will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The
US PI has special expertise in implementing NDE and using laser measurements in
experimental mechanics. Dr. Shaalan and Dr. Khashaba have expertise in
experimental design, reliability analysis, and data analysis. The two sides have
complementary expertise and facilities at their disposal for this research. The
project should lead to simpler, more reliable, and less expensive techniques for
determining the integrity of complex structures used in applications requiring
high reliability, such as aviation structures and critical components in
industrial applications. The project will involve a US graduate student at NIU,
providing that person with an international research experience. This proposal
meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual
interest. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program,
which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out
these cooperative activities. &lt;br/&gt;