* 0354807
* Paleobiology of the Doushantuo Formation: Multiple Taphonomic Windows into the Late Neoproterozoic Biosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2003,07/31/2006
* Shuhai Xiao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2006
* USD 150,573.00

Paleobiology of the Doushantuo Formation: Multiple Taphonomic Windows into the
Late Neoproterozoic
Biosphere&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
focus on the Neoproterozoic Doushantuo Formation (550 - 600 Ma) in South China.
The Doushantuo Formation was deposited across the Yangtze Platform in South
China during a critical geological time interval, - probably after the
Neoproterozoic climatic crises but before the Ediacaran radiation of macroscopic
animals. The Doushantuo Formation is also known to contain three extraordinarily
clear taphonomic windows preserved in phosphorites, cherts, and carbonaceous
shales. These complementary taphonomic windows allow us to understand the
taphonomic bias associated with each taphonomic pathway and, in combination,
they provide a more complete picture of the Neoproterozoic
biosphere.&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this study is to improve our knowledge about
the early evolution of multicellular organisms by further documenting
phosphatized, silicified, and carbonaceous biotas in the Doushantuo Formation,
to understand the constraints imposed by these different taphonomic pathways by
comparing and contrast these taphonomic windows, and to expand the investigation
of Doushantuo paleobiology into deep-water facies. The PI and his colleagues
will conduct extensive fieldwork on the Doushantuo Formation in the next three
years in order to understand its distribution, sedimentary environment, and
paleobiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;