* 0354892
* Sulfides and Disulfides of Di- and Polymetallic Carbonyl Complexes: Precursors to Nano-Catalysts and Nano-structured Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Richard Adams, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 06/30/2008
* USD 396,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
supports Professor Richard D. Adams at the University of South Carolina to
synthesize new metal cluster complexes containing sulfide, disulfido and related
chalcogen ligands for use in preparing new nanoscale metal sulfide materials
with novel physical and catalytic properties. Investigations will include
structural characterizations of metal carbonyl sulfide and disulfide complexes
and reactivity studies of small, unsaturated organic molecules and metal-ligand
groups at the sulfur atoms. Studies of reactivity at the metal atoms toward
donor ligands and small organic molecules will also be undertaken. These
compounds will be used as precursors for new nanoscale materials with novel
physical and chemical properties that should lead to a deeper understanding of
nanoscale material properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal sulfides play key
roles in materials science: in phosphors, in lubricants, as catalysts, in
semiconducting and even superconducting materials. This research will lead to
the synthesis of new inorganic materials and nano-materials that will exhibit
novel properties for catalysis and semiconductors. Students will be trained in
the design, synthesis and characterization of inorganic and organometallic
compounds, and in the use of modern analytical techniques, such as infrared
spectroscopy, x-ray crystallography, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy,
cyclic voltammetry and other types of electronic spectroscopy measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;