* 0354072
* The Florida A&amp;M University Inter-Disciplinary Research Experience for Undergraduates
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2005,03/31/2009
* Roselyn Williams, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 03/31/2009
* USD 190,269.00

The Florida A&amp;M University (FAMU) will sponsor a Research Experience for
Undergraduates titled, the Florida A&amp;M University Inter-Disciplinary
Research Experience for Undergraduates (FAMU-IREU). Participants will have the
opportunity to conduct research in areas of economic, governmental, scientific,
and societal interests that require substantial mathematical and scientific
theory. They will use scientific computer software packages that are commonly
used for academic and industrial research. Participants will be chosen from the
areas of chemistry, biology, physics, computer science, engineering, economics
and mathematics. Participants will work in teams or as individual investigators.
Each team will develop a research paper that includes computer simulations and
analyses. Professors from FAMU and practitioners from industrial or governmental
organizations will serve as project directors. The FAMU-IREU Program will be
held eight weeks from June through July. Each participant will receive $1,500.00
for housing, meals and travel to the University and a stipend in the amount of
$2,500.00. The point of contact person is Dr. Roselyn Williams, Department of
Mathematics, Florida A&amp;M University, Tallahassee, Florida 32307, PH (850)
599-3595, E-mail rwilliams3@famu.edu