* 0354308
* EMSW21-MCTP - The SUM Project: A Statistics Undergraduate Mentoring (SUM) Program
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2011
* Matthew Richey, Saint Olaf College
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,309,490.00

The Statistics Undergraduate Mentoring (SUM) Project at St. Olaf College will
demonstrate how four-year institutions can successfully recruit and mentor
undergraduate and post-doctoral associates in statistics. The project goals are
to increase the number of undergraduates from four-year colleges who attend
graduate school in statistics and to increase the number of PhDs in statistics
who pursue careers at four-year colleges. Statistics concentrators will form the
core group of undergraduates for this project and are expected to increase from
the current 20 - 35 students in the program. Efforts to recruit undergraduates
will focus on increasing the awareness of incoming students about the
opportunities for and benefits of statistics courses. Our approach to attracting
and retaining statistics students is to create a collaborative environment
between statistics and other disciplines. A Center for Interdisciplinary
Research (CIR) will be established where undergraduats, post-doctoral
associates, and faculty mentors will collaborate on statistical aspects of
professional and undergraduate research with faculty and students from other
departments on campus. Statistics students will staff the CIR under the
mentorship of faculty directors. Other students will participate in
Interdisciplinary Research Teams (IRTs) of undergraduate summer researchers
formed by combining statistics students with summer research students from other
disciplines. Two summer research students will be supported on IRTs in the first
year and four during each year 2-5. In addition, one student per year will work
with a faculty mentor to develop statistical modules associated with courses in
other disciplines (e.g., biology) over the 5 year period. A central feature of
the SUM Project is the integral involvement of two consecutive post-doctoral
associates in years 2-3 and 4-5. Each post-doctoral associate will assist in
running the CIR, teach a variety of undergraduate statistics courses, work
closely with students in inter-disciplinary research projects, and continue to
develop their own research program. Post-doctoral associates will be recruited
during years 1 and 3. Recruiting for post-doctoral associates will include
visits to graduate programs in statistics and biostatistics. Efforts to attract
post-doctoral students from underrepresented groups will be enhanced by St. Olaf
College's membership in the Consortium for a Strong Minority Presence. The
success of the program will be disseminated directly by undergraduates attending
graduate school, post-doctoral associates securing tenure-track positions in
other institutions, a summative workshop, publications in professional journals
and presentations at national conferences. &lt;br/&gt;Four-year colleges
represent a valuable but not fully exploited resource for filling the pipeline
to statistics graduate programs. We hope to attract students from other
disciplines to advanced statistics by additional efforts demonstrating the
relevance of statistics to their discipline. By integrating active participation
in research with course work, students will be well prepared and enthusiastic
about post-graduate study in statistics. The post-doctoral recruiting efforts
will raise awareness of undergraduate education as a viable career option
thereby enlarging and enhancing the pool of potential undergraduate statistics
educators. The post-doctoral fellows' fresh perspectives will vitalize the
program through their participation in summer IRTs, internships, community
building, and course development. Furthermore, the post-doctoral associate will
play a crucial role in mentoring of statistics undergraduate students. All of
the SUM Project activities will be specifically designed for implementation at
four-year institutions. The Project goals and activities will be in line with
the resources and mission of four-year colleges. &lt;br/&gt;