* 0354674
* Collaborative Research: FRG: Time Reversal Techniques in Radar and Radio Communications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* George Papanicolaou, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2008
* USD 863,569.00

Proposal: DMS-0354674&lt;br/&gt;PI: George Papanicolaou&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Institution: Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research: FRG:
Time Reversal Techniques in Wireless
Communications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Focused
Research Group project is a closely knit Math-EE collaboration that involves, in
addition to the PI's, several students and postdoctoral visitors. Our goals
cover physical channel modeling, experimental measurements, algorithm design and
simulation of wireless communication systems in large delay spread environments.
Physical modeling will help understand large delay spread channels in wireless
environments. Experimental measurements will use a new, specially designed by
this research group, wireless time reversal sounder to verify theoretical time
reversal predictions. Mathematical algorithm design will deal with equalization
complexity, working with imperfect channel estimates, pre-coding, etc., that
arise in such problems. Systems simulations will help understand overall
performance of time reversal communications in different deployment
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In time reversal, signals transmitted with a
time reversed filter back propagate and focus tightly in space-time near the
intended receiver. The phenomena rely on large delay spread (rich multipath)
channels. The space-time focusing is even more tight and robust when the
propagation medium is randomly inhomogeneous. Recent experimental and
theoretical studies have firmly established this remarkable effect and have
motivated applications to detection, imaging and communications. We believe that
these space-time focusing properties of time reversal can lead to a new class of
wireless communications systems with significant advantages over current
approaches. This technique converts a problem in wireless posed by multipath
(which induces fading) into an opportunity for improved performance. There are
many potential applications of these ideas in commercial wireless as well as in
specialized systems, such as communication systems that demand low probability
of intercept.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Companion Proposal:
0354658&lt;br/&gt;PI: Liliana Borcea&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Rice
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;