* 0354862
* CRREL-Operations
* GEO,OPP
* 09/30/2003,09/30/2015
* Donald Albert, Department of Army Cold Regions Research & Engineering Lab
* Contract Interagency Agreement
* kate ruck
* 09/30/2015
* USD 6,887,106.00

This amends an existing Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) by making an award to the
U.S. Army Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory (CRREL) for
engineering services to the United States Antarctic Program's (USAP).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following tasks are included:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support to USAP&lt;br/&gt;Perform review, oversight, and
short-notice, limited scope engineering tasks, including written comments or
letter reports in response to taskings. $32,800.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Review and
Engineering Critique of Polar Drill Development&lt;br/&gt;Provide polar-specific
engineering and logistics critique and review to the USAP drill development
contractor. $30,500.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Safe Sea-Ice Thickness for Vehicle
Travel&lt;br/&gt;Develop an engineering-based and generalized set of guidelines
to govern vehicle travel on sea ice. $43,400.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wind Turbine
Induced Seismic Noise&lt;br/&gt;Determine the vibration emitted by commercial
wind turbines and investigate whether this source of noise would affect the
performance of the Global Seismic Network (GSN) station QSPA operating at the
South Pole. Phase I is estimated at $65,400.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ETL for USAP
Runways&lt;br/&gt;Expand the Air Force protocol developed for the Pegasus runway
to address the sea ice runway and skiways and establish a draft ETL for routine
runway evaluation and AF certification of the sea ice runway.
$34,000.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;McMurdo to South Pole Traverse
Development&lt;br/&gt;Collaborate with USAP and other specialists and experts to
address engineering issues pertinent to traverse development, including: GPR
training, surveys and analysis; assistance on route selection and refinement;
and performance evaluation of traverse vehicles. $343,700.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Similar services have been provided by CRREL and their
contractors for many years. The services have always been timely, cost
effective, and professional. It is expected that this work will be accomplished
in a similar manner. CRREL is a government agency, not associated with the NSF
or the support contractor. CRREL has no interest in the support contract that
could constitute a conflict of interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the reasons
stated above it is in the best interest of the NSF for CRREL to continue with
the ongoing tasking. This award is recommended for the amount of $549,800 as
estimated by CRREL to be funded from operations funds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;