* 0354857
* Net-Shape Manufacturing  of Powder Components by Electrophoretic Deposition and Sintering
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2004,04/30/2009
* Eugene Olevsky, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
*  Elliott Francis
* 04/30/2009
* USD 175,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop an experimental-theoretical multi-
scale approach whose key aspect is the optimized integration of the ambient
temperature assembly by electrophoretic deposition and the high temperature
consolidation by sintering such that functionally structured powder materials
are produced by a synergistic net-shape-enabling technological sequence. The
proposed approach assumes tailoring of the material structure at both macro and
meso-scale levels by electrophoretic deposition which allows the production of
net-shape particulate materials with required functionally graded structures,
rendering the wanted final shape and the desired meso-structure after
consecutive sintering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developed methodology should
provide a basis for the fabrication of a wide range of functionally structured
powder component systems such as bio-implants, electronic circuits, MEMS
components, sensors, etc. with enhanced properties. The collaborative component
of the program includes interactions with Sandia National Laboratories, the
international collaboration with National School of Engineering, France, and
collaboration with local industries that have been actively involved in the
modeling and deformation processing of powder material components. The program
will contribute to the advancement of the Materials and Manufacturing Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;