* 0354215
* International Conference on Advanced Membrane Technology (II); Irsee, Germany; May 23-28, 2004
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2004,01/31/2005
* Ralph Yang, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Douglas D. Frey
* 01/31/2005
* USD 25,000.00

Proposal Number: CTS-0354215

Principal Investigator: Ralph Yang

Institution: Polytechnic University of New York

Context (within which proposal was reviewed):

External peer review was waived in accordance with NSF guidelines regarding
support for conferences, symposia, and workshops (PAM V.B2.m). Funding is
recommended.

Analysis (rationale for decision):

Travel grant awards will be provided to U.S. speakers, authors of papers, and
young academics participating in the International Conference on Advanced
Membrane Technology (II), to be held in Irsee, Germany, on May 23-28, 2004.
Membrane-based technology has grown to be a major technology within the last
decade. Many of the recent developments were made in the European countries and
Japan. It is an important area for industrial competitiveness as well as
collaboration. The purpose of the Conference is to discuss the latest
advancements in membrane technologies. The researchers in the membrane field
have diverse background, mainly in chemical engineering, chemistry, material
science, biomedical and environmental engineering. In terms of the broader
impacts, it is important to provide a needed forum through this conference to
bring researchers with different backgrounds and from different countries
together for disseminating and exchanging the latest scientific information. It
will provide an opportunity for developing international collaboration for the
U.S. participants. The grant will provide for 15-20 partial travel grants.
Travel awards will be made based on the following considerations: (1) scientific
or technological merit of the peaker/participant; (2) availability of other
sources of travel funding; (3) professional qualifications relative to age and
position; (4) institutional and geographical distribution.

