* 0354068
* REU Site:  SCEC Undergraduate Summer in Earthquake Information Technology (SCEC/UseIT)
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2004,07/31/2007
* Thomas Jordan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Diana R. Rhoten
* 07/31/2007
* USD 364,721.00

Institution: University of Southern California&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0354068&lt;br/&gt;PI: Thomas H. Jordan&lt;br/&gt;Title: REU Site: SCEC
Undergraduate Summer in Earthquake Information Technology
\(SCEC/UseIT\)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes a new REU site at
the Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC), University of Southern
California. The undergraduate research interns will use advanced IT tools to
solve interdisciplinary earthquake research problems; bring together the usually
separate fields of undergraduate study in computer science and engineering with
the geosciences; and introduce non-geoscience majors to the practical problems
of reducing earthquake risk. The SCEC already has in place an undergraduate
research program under an Information Technology Research (ITR) award, and this
project will be a natural outgrowth of that effort. The student research will be
organized around the LA3D platform, an open-source, object-oriented
visualization system written in Java, that can display earthquakes, faults, and
volumetric geological structures in 3D. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF support
will fund 12 interns/year for 3 years. The students will make field trips to
fault systems in Southern California as well as to other advanced research
facilities. They will receive training in making research presentations and in
writing research publications. &lt;br/&gt;