* 0354817
* Closing the Mathematics Achievement Gap of African American Students: A Conference on the Issues
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2004,05/31/2005
* Quentin Lawson, National Alliance of Black School Educators
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 05/31/2005
* USD 113,755.00

Closing the Mathematics Achievement Gap of African American Students:
&lt;br/&gt;A Conference on the Issues &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The National
Alliance of Black School Educators (NABSE) and the Benjamin Banneker
&lt;br/&gt;Association (BBA), in collaboration with The McKenzie Group (TMG),
propose a four-month &lt;br/&gt;initiative to develop a broad-scale action
agenda to improve mathematics teaching and learning &lt;br/&gt;for all students,
but particularly students of African American descent. As the first stage of a
&lt;br/&gt;broader plan to improve science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) &lt;br/&gt;achievement nationwide, the mathematics initiative
seeks funding to convene a conference of &lt;br/&gt;nationally recognized
researchers, policymakers, and practitioners to develop an integrated,
&lt;br/&gt;research-based design for closing the achievement gap, as well as a
framework for implementing &lt;br/&gt;appropriate programmatic and policy
strategies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project will advance
knowledge and understanding of effective strategies &lt;br/&gt;and challenges
for increasing K-12 African American mathematics achievement, as well as
&lt;br/&gt;promote collaborate among the array of organizations committed to
conducting action-research &lt;br/&gt;to close the African American mathematics
achievement gap. NABSE and BBA, two leading &lt;br/&gt;advocacy and professional
development organizations committed to K-12 STEM reform, along &lt;br/&gt;with
TMG.s prior experience with STEM technical assistance, provide a solid grounding
for this &lt;br/&gt;research and development (R&amp;D) effort. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The development of formal post-conference discussion
and concept papers &lt;br/&gt;will broaden the impact beyond the institutions
and organizations represented by conference &lt;br/&gt;participants.
Furthermore, the combined memberships of over 7,500 African American
&lt;br/&gt;educators from school districts throughout the United States, Canada,
and the Caribbean will &lt;br/&gt;provide a powerful professional network for
sharing the conference publications and findings &lt;br/&gt;and directly
impacting classroom instruction. NABSE.s 98 regional affiliates that are located
&lt;br/&gt;within BBA.s six regions will also provide venues for continuing
dialogue and collaboration at &lt;br/&gt;the regional and local levels. Both
organizations will use their electronic communications &lt;br/&gt;networks that
include websites and email listservs and their independent national conferences
to &lt;br/&gt;further support these efforts. Finally, the overarching goal of
increasing African American &lt;br/&gt;mathematics achievement will contribute
to national education goals of improved K-12 student &lt;br/&gt;achievement in
mathematics