* 0354174
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Mathematics for Undergraduates and Teachers
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Terry Kiser, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 06/30/2008
* USD 199,516.00

The REU/RET in mathematics at California State University, Chico targets
secondary teachers with a strong interest in mathematics or statistics and
undergraduates students who have completed their junior year. For six weeks of
each summer, eight participants, including two teachers, will work in two
research teams on problems selected from the following mathematical fields: Knot
Theory, Number Theory, Statistics, Mathematical Modeling, and Dynamic Geometry.
Depending on the field, projects may be appropriate for students from scientific
disciplines other than mathematics.

The research experience is intended to give participants an appreciation for the
breadth and depth of mathematics and its applications, while providing
undergraduates an opportunity to improve their communication skills and
providing in-service teachers an experience which will deepen their
understanding of mathematical content and inspire pedagogical innovation in
their classrooms. By working on open problems in mathematics, participants will
experience the excitement of exploration, discovery, analysis, proof, and
systematization that are part of the mathematician's world. While much of
mathematics is accessible only after years of study, the field is rich enough to
allow for a fuller mathematical experience at the undergraduate level.

For further information regarding the REU/T in Mathematics contact Dr. Thomas
Mattman by phone at (530) 898-5345, by e-mail at TMattman@CSUChico.edu, or visit
our website: http://www.csuchico.edu/math/mattman/REUT.html