* 0354819
* Fluxes in Advective and Transition Boundary Layers
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2004,05/31/2008
* Larry Mahrt, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley F. Smull
* 05/31/2008
* USD 378,199.00

These investigators will use measurements that were made by an instrumented
aircraft and by surface towers in a recent project at North Park, Colorado to
study the ways in which variability in the land surface affects transport of
heat, moisture, and momentum in the atmospheric boundary layer overlying that
surface. Most studies of the boundary layer have examined daytime conditions
when surface heating leads to well-developed turbulence and predictable
transport, and most studies have been conducted over uniform terrain. This study
will instead focus on the transition from nighttime stable conditions to daytime
convective conditions and will use measurements from a region where there is
significant surface heterogeneity resulting from interspersed patches of grass
and brush. Heterogeneous surface conditions such as these are very common, so
the study will provide valuable new information on realistic boundary layers.
The investigators note that heterogeneity influences the surface fluxes and the
development of the boundary layer in ways that are not simply deduced from the
properties of boundary layers over uniform terrain or even terrain with
discontinuous transitions. Some specific hypotheses are offered to guide the
analyses of this data set, including that the impact of surface heterogeneity is
expected to be greatest under stable conditions when the eddy size is smallest
and that transient modes such as pulsating drainage flows or mesoscale features
in the wind field frequently alter the surface flux patterns and net time-
average flux. The research will establish a basis for improved representation of
transport processes in boundary layers over inhomogeneous terrain and so should
influence future models of weather and climate.

The investigators plan several steps that will facilitate use of their results.
A web site will be used to provide access to data and results, and a workshop
will be held to help inform potential users including water management and
Forest Service personnel. The project will also help develop capabilities for
similar studies in the future through the support and education of a graduate
student. These steps should help publicize the results from their research among
modelers and other potential users.