* 0354916
* Research in Strong-Interaction Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2004,07/31/2008
* Robert Perry, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 07/31/2008
* USD 574,699.00

Title of Project: Research in Strong-Interaction Theory Principal Investigators:
R. J. Furnstahl, B. C. Clark, S. Jeschonnek, R. J. Perry The study of a wide
range of problems involving strongly interacting systems is proposed. The
projects proposed fall into several broad categories, ranging from studies
directly involving quark and gluon degrees of freedom, to effective theories of
the strong interaction at low energies, to analyses of strong-interaction
experiments. Intellectual merit: The transition from hadronic degrees of freedom
to quark-gluon degrees of freedom will be studied though increasingly
sophisticated models of quark-hadron duality and by investigating short-range
structure in light nuclei through improved theoretical tools for disentangling
the nuclear ground state information from coincidence electron scattering data.
These projects have strong and direct ties to the experimental program at
Jefferson Lab. Other projects revisit QCD sum rules, which exploit another facet
of quark-hadron duality. The renormalization group tools developed in the light-
front field theory program are largely redirected toward low-energy effective
field theories. Effective theories of nuclear systems, which are governed by
low-energy quantum chromodynamics (QCD), are being developed from two
directions. From one side, fundamental work extending effective field theories
(EFT) for nucleon-nucleon, three-body systems, and many-body systems is
proposed. In parallel, from the other side, are projects to improve
phenomenological descriptions of realistic nuclear systems to reduce model
dependence. The efforts complement each other and both will impact forefront
problems in nuclear physics, such as the study of nuclei far from stability.
Renormalization group methods play important roles in each category. The goal of
model independence is naturally coupled with the recognition of universal
aspects of the physics, which in turn enhances interactions with other
disciplines. Ongoing efforts to develop relativistic descriptions of a wide
range of nuclear reactions and nuclear structure (e.g., global optical
potential, nuclear densities, meson-nucleus scattering, inelastic reactions)
will take advantage of EFT input. Reliable extractions of neutron densities will
be made for more nuclei, and the optical potentials will be extended to higher
energies and applied to studies of parity violation. Broader impacts: The
training received by undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral
research associates in carrying out the proposed activities contributes directly
to the building of a diverse scientific workforce. The mix of analytical and
numerical computation our students and postdocs must employ is excellent
preparation for both academic and industrial research. Activities funded by an
REU supplement will actively involve undergraduates in research; all previous
REU students in the group who have graduated are either working in industry, or
business, or enrolled in professional or graduate school. The group is committed
to diversity in science and has successfully mentored several members of under-
represented groups, including four who have obtained faculty positions. Several
proposed projects provide data to the Nuclear Data Center at Brookhaven National
Laboratory. Direct benefits to society include the development of global optical
potentials, which are being used to estimate cross sections that are important
for understanding long-term radioactive waste storage, and calculations of
nuclear cross sections, which are used in predicting dosimetry for patients in
radiation therapy.

