* 0354113
* NSF-Europe: Mechanical Properties of Thin-Film Active Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Michael Dennin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* David A. Brant
* 06/30/2008
* USD 540,000.00

This project funds the US component of an international collaboration between
theorists (University of Massaschusetts, Amherst and the Vrije Universiteit in
Amsterdam) and experimentalists (University of California, Irvine and the Vrije
Universiteit) to study the material properties of biopolymer networks (F-actin)
driven by molecular motors. A better fundamental understanding of the material
properties of such systems will help to elucidate the materials properties of
the cytoskeleton of eukaryotic cells and facilitate the development of novel,
biomimitic materials based on cytoskeletal design motifs. In order to both
enable the direct observation of the strain field within the network and to draw
inferences from the data regarding the cytoskeleton coupled to the lipid
membrane of the cell, these experiments will be performed at the surface of a
Langmuir monolayer. To develop the required experimental techniques the
collaboration involves experts in both F-actin/molecular motors and Langmuir
monolayers. Their experimental work will be done in close collaboration with
theorists who are developing a new model of the deformation properties of
semiflexible gels. The theorists will work closely with their experimental
colleagues to further refine microrheology techniques for use in this system
(and, by extension, in intracellular microrheological experiments) as well as to
develop predictive models of the relationship between the microstructure and
motor activity of the active gel and its rheological properties. There will be a
strong educational component of this work, as it will serve as the training
ground for a new breed of scientists that are capable of working across the
disciplines of physics and biology. Young scientists at all levels of their
career, undergraduate, graduate students, and post-doctoral researchers, will be
involved in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project funds the US
component of a joint US-European collaboration. One of the exciting efforts
underway in nanoscience is the adaptation of bio-machines or bio-materials for
technological applications. To accomplish this, one must first understand the
physical properties underlying the function of the biological systems. This
research focuses on a particular subset of biomaterials: active materials. In
active materials, the response of the material to external forces or distortions
depends on the state of internal active elements, such as motor proteins. This
project will systematically study an active material consisting of three parts:
a surfactant monolayer at the air-water interface; a network of protein fibers,
known as actin, that are attached to the monolayer; and motor proteins connected
to the actin network. Central to this project is the interaction between theory
and experiment, as new techniques for making local measurements of mechanical
properties need to be developed. There will be a strong educational component of
this work, as it will serve as the training ground for a new breed of scientists
that are capable of working across the disciplines of physics and biology. Young
scientists at all levels of their career, undergraduate, graduate students, and
post-doctoral researchers, will be involved in the project.&lt;br/&gt;