* 0355481
* Characterizing Keyhole Plasma Intensity and Absorption Mechanisms for Improving High Speed, Very Deep Penetration Laser Beam Welding
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/18/2003,12/31/2005
* Jay Tu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Lynn Realff
* 12/31/2005
* USD 185,990.00

The objective of this research is to advance the fundamental understanding of
high speed, very deep laser welding processes by estabishing a quantitative
descriptions of the welding plasma. Laser material processing has rapidly
replaced or complemented many conventional manufacturing techniques in
production lines. As industrial lasers become capable of delivering very high
power, 10KW to 20KW, economically, they open up applications to weld sheet
metals over 10 mm thick at speeds over 2 m/min. One of the most critical issues
in very high power laser welding is to control and overcome violent plasma
generated during welding. Excess plasma can absorb, reflect, or refocus the
laser beam resulting in insufficient penetration, burn-through, irregular weld
shape, or contamination of the beam delivery optics.

The PI has formed a close research collaboration involving Purdue University,
Osaka University, Japan and Caterpillar, Inc. in an attempt to provide a more
complete picture of plasma and its effect on laser absorption mechanism. The
theoretical modeling will focus on characterizing plasma electron temperature
and density inside the keyhole which is a capillary into the workpiece created
by the laser beam. Experiments will be conducted mainly at Osaka University and
affiliated industrial laboratories using state-of-the-art 2KW CO2 and 8KW diode-
pumped Nd:YAG lasers. In addition to advancing the fundamental understanding of
high energy laser interactions with materials, this collaboration will provide
an effective opportunity to bring the experience and expertise in laser welding
of the Osaka University group together with the academic research group at
Purdue and the industry partner, Caterpillar. This will promote technology
transfer to the industry as well as training for industry practioners.