* 0355433
* Optimizing the Regional Distribution of Organ Procurement Organizations
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2004,03/31/2008
* Mark Roberts, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 03/31/2008
* USD 317,999.00

This project addresses the design of regions for organ transplantations. Over 82
thousand Americans are currently waiting for an organ transplant, and this
number is still increasing. By optimizing regions for organ transplantation this
research will increase the quality of the matches. Furthermore, by explicitly
modeling equity issues, this research can be used to ensure that all groups have
fair access to organs for transplants. The previous work will extend in three
important directions. The first will model the complex nature of organ
transplantation carefully to estimate the expected number and quality of organ
transplants within each potential region. This will involve both demographic and
physiological modeling. The second will consider fairness within an organ
transplantation system. This is roughly equivalent to the notion that all
citizens should have comparable access to organs. The notion of equity is often
in conflict with medical efficiency. This research will consider various ways of
balancing these competing interests. The third will develop methods for solving
the large-scale integer programs arising in these studies. Borrowing ideas from
previous work, particularly airline planning, we will develop state-of-the-art
optimization methods for solving these difficult problems. We will use a branch-
and-price framework, using specialized techniques for branching and solving the
sub problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For purposes of liver transplantation, the
United States is currently divided into 59 OPOs, which are aggregated into 11
regions. Organs are more likely to stay in the OPO and region where they
originate. Due to the hierarchical nature of organ transplantation, the
composition of these regions can greatly affect the number and quality of organ
transplantations, as well as other concerns, such as fair access to organs for
all. From the point of view of medical efficiency, an ideal region has a high
population so many matches are possible, but is geographically compact, so that
organs need not travel long distances. However, employing such regions tends to
leave the sparsely populated parts of the country with significantly lower
access to organs. This proposal addresses the following question: How should the
OPOs be organized into the best set regions, considering both medical efficiency
and equity? The focus will be on the liver transplantation, but the results will
apply to other organs.&lt;br/&gt;