* 0355575
* Self-Learning of Decision Rules for Process Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2004,07/31/2008
* Eugene Tuv, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Cerry M. Klein
* 07/31/2008
* USD 200,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop a widely-applicable, automated
method to learn decision rules from the data in a sensor network. The decision
rules that are learned will detect anomalies from the normal operating
environment when neither the normal operations nor the anomalies to be detected
are pre-specified. The learner will also incorporate categorical as well as
numerical data, identify contributors to a decision-rule signal when it occurs,
and adapt the rules over time as requirements for the sensor system change.
Basically, it will adapt itself to the characteristics of the normal
environment, handle categorical and numerical data, self-train, and then detect
anomalies. Measures of variable importance will be developed to provide guidance
to diagnose a detected signal. Such measures will also be used to adaptively to
improve the number of variables that can be incorporated into a solution.
Preliminary experiments will be expanded to test the learner with simulated and
real data. The learner will be compared to traditional, optimal solutions when
they exist and then evaluated under more stressful conditions in which
traditional solutions fail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success of this project will
provide network intelligence that is inexpensive and easy to install, maintain,
and mange. These results can be used to eventually develop an embedded module
(intelligence) that can be made available in sensor-network infrastructures. The
flexibility of the derived decision rules can incorporate highly nonlinear
models. This flexibility and the conceptual simplicity of the approach, along
with the computational resources now widely available, can generate a surge of
interest in this automated approach. The methods can be useful to manufacturing
and in areas such as biological, civil, and transportation monitoring. Also, the
measures for variable importance can be applied to interrogate other learning
algorithms in complex applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;