* 0355536
* Collaborative Research:  Wire Sawing - Mechanics and Design Space Exploration
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Abhijit Chandra, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2008
* USD 361,277.00

The research goals of this project are to understand the fundamental mechanics
of the long wavelength waviness in wire sawed silicon wafers and to investigate
the conditions for diamond pull-out from diamond coated wires. The implications
of such pull-outs on surface quality and integrity of wire sawed wafers will
also be investigated. A combination of analytical and numerical simulations will
be pursued. A fluid-structure interaction model will be developed for long
wavelength waviness generation, and a coupled thermo-mechanical analysis will be
pursued for predictions of diamond pull-out conditions. Simulation results will
be verified against experimental observations under laboratory conditions.
Verified mechanistic models will then be utilized to develop integrated process
models and control algorithms for the wire sawing
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current wire sawing method of wafer slicing
leaves a long wavelength waviness on the wafer surface that must be corrected by
an expensive lapping process. If successful, this project will improve the wire
sawing process to greatly reduce the induced waviness, thereby reducing the need
for lapping, and enhancing the cost effectiveness of wafer production. Abrasive
pull-out affects the performance of grinding wheels, and a mechanistic model of
this phenomenon will aid in grinding process design as well. These results will
be of considerable value to the integrated circuit industry, particularly as the
industry goes to bigger wafer diameters and finer circuit structures.