* 0355390
* Number Theory and Allied Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2009
* W. Dale Brownawell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2009
* USD 115,450.00

Abstract for award DMS-0355390 of
Brownawell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses primarily on
establishing function field&lt;br/&gt;analogues of major conjectures in
transcendence theory which are&lt;br/&gt;currently far out of the reach of
methods in the classical setting of&lt;br/&gt;the complex numbers. The first
step (joint with Papanikolas) will be&lt;br/&gt;the analogue of the converse of
the Shimura-Deligne relations on the&lt;br/&gt;periods of abelian varieties.
This will extend joint work with&lt;br/&gt;Anderson and Papanikolas precisely
determining the linear relations on&lt;br/&gt;monomials in special Gamma values.
Other topics will involve&lt;br/&gt;independence of divided derivatives of
periods, transcendence and&lt;br/&gt;variation of characteristic through powers
of a fixed prime, and&lt;br/&gt;investigation of applications of interpolation
matrices. Another&lt;br/&gt;direction will be to approach Nesterenko's theorem
for Ramanujan's&lt;br/&gt;functions based on the investigator's independence
criterion. Lastly,&lt;br/&gt;a ``final'' version of the arithmetic Liouville-
Lojasiewicz inequality&lt;br/&gt;is
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As has been understood since
the middle of the nineteenth century,&lt;br/&gt;rational functions in one
variable behave amazingly like the rational&lt;br/&gt;numbers. Questions in this
setting are fascinating in their own&lt;br/&gt;right, and often they are easier
to resolve than their classical&lt;br/&gt;analogues. This project pursues an
extension in several well-defined&lt;br/&gt;settings in function fields of the
basic premise of all transcendence&lt;br/&gt;investigations since Hermite: There
are no surprising algebraic&lt;br/&gt;relationships. By that we mean that all
algebraic relationships&lt;br/&gt;between numbers that one might care are
consequences of some extremely&lt;br/&gt;basic underlying
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;