* 0355460
* Science Weekend -- A Planning Grant
* EHR,DRL
* 03/15/2004,02/28/2005
* Ira Flatow, ScienceFriday, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 02/28/2005
* USD 49,900.00

Ira Flatow has been producing SCIENCE FRIDAY for over a decade. The series is
now rated among the top ten news programs carried by NPR and is carried by over
200 stations. In spite of this success, the audience, though large, is limited
to those people who can listen on Friday afternoon. In addition, the program is
not carried on some stations because it does not fit their weekday program
format. However, in conversations with many station managers, Flatow has learned
that many stations that do not now carry the series do understand the value of
science to their listeners and would include a science program in their
schedules if one were made available to them for broadcast on weekends. The
purpose of this planning proposal is to develop the parameters for a SCIENCE
WEEKEND series. Since weekend programming many times is not like programming on
weekdays, it will be necessary to find out more about the length and format that
stations most prefer and to establish key partnerships to assure the broadest
impact of a weekend program.

Specific tasks to be conducted in the planning phase include:

1. Surveying public radio stations about their preferences for format, length,
and broadcast day for SCIENCE WEEKEND 2. Identifying key programming elements to
be included in a pilot program 3. Recording, editing and producing a pilot
program 4. Getting assessments of the pilot from public radio station managers
and programmers 5. Evaluating the pilot with members of the target audience 6.
Securing a network partner to serve as a distributor for the program 7. Creating
partnerships with teaching and other educational institutions to participate in
the outreach efforts of the project 8. Developing an evaluation strategy to
assess the impact of SCIENCE WEEKEND on the audience

