* 0355380
* Analysis and Gap Monitoring for Improving Micro Electro Discharge Machining (EDM) Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2004,08/31/2008
* Kamlakar Rajurkar, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/2008
* USD 202,500.00

This grant provides funding for the development of experimental data, and
qualitative and quantitative modeling of the emerging technology of micro
Electrical Discharge Machining (EDM) process for enhancing its application
potential in electronics, automotive, medical and aircraft and aerospace
industries. The developed data and models will provide basic information for
selecting appropriate values of parameters such as current, voltage,
capacitance, work and tool materials, feed and dialectic medium for obtaining
optimal performance in material removal rates, surface integrity, and tool wear
rates in actual industrial settings. The research will be performed on a state-
of-the art Micro-EDM available at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. The
modeling effort involves integration heat transfer due the electric discharge
and dielectric fluid (with its temperature and viscosity variation) flow at the
gap using a technique called Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics
(SPH).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
lead to a better understanding of the selection pf parameters for optimal
productivity and performance of micro EDM process for many industrial
applications. The modeling effort will also lead to an enhanced knowledge of the
physical processes occurring at the inter electrode gap and their influence on
the process performance. This, in turn, will also provide impetus to apply
developed techniques and tools to other similar micro machining process such as
micro Electrochemical Machining (ECM) and Micro Ultrasonic Machining (USM). The
hardware and software developed during this project will be implemented in
undergraduate and graduate courses at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and
will also be posted on the web for easy access by all interested professionals.