
* 0070665
* The Center of the Division Ring of pxp Generic Matrices
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/01/2000,04/06/2000
* Esther Beneish,WA,Eastern Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Helen G. Grundman
* 10/31/2002
* USD 69,435.00

The main objective of the proposed work is to investigate the following problem.
Let p be a prime. Is the center, Cp, of the division ring of p x p generic
matrices stably rational over the base field? This is an old problem which has
been studied extensively over several decades, in particular for its connections
to important problems in other fields, such as geometric invariant theory and
Brauer groups. If G is a finite group, and M is a ZG-lattice, then F(M) denotes
the quotient field of the group algebra of the abelian group M written
multiplicatively. Procesi and Formanek have shown that Cn is isomorphic to the
fixed field under the action of Sn of F(M) for a specific ZSn-lattice M. The
findings of the investigator can be briefly described as two reduction steps.
Let p be a prime. First, the investigator has shown that under certain
conditions induction-restriction from Sp to the normalizer N, of a p-sylow
subgroup H of Sp, does not affect the stable type of the field.. Second, the
investigator has proved that if we twist the Sp-action by a 1-cocycle a in
Ext1SP(J(A), L*), then Cp is stably isomorphic to La(J(A))Sp, where A is the
root lattice, L=F(ZG/H) and, J represents induction-restriction from Sp to H.
Note that now we are inducing from H which is a cyclic group of order p. The
cocycle a corresponds to an element of the relative Brauer group of L over LH.
The importance of this result lies in the connection, described by Saltman.,
between fixed fields under twisted H-actions and corresponding fixed fields
under twisted Sp-actions. The above results naturally lead to the study of
a-twisted actions on fields, and this is also an area the investigator will
study; more precisely actions induced from subgroups. The investigator will be
also working on Noether's problem which is naturally related to the above
question. In particular the investigator will study its connections with
monomial and a-twisted group actions and on fields.

The focus of this project is to investigate the following problem. Let p be a
prime number. Is the center of the division ring of p x p generic matrices
stably rational over the base field? Generic matrices over a field F are n x n
matrices whose entries are independent variables. This problem has been studied
extensively over several decades. Its importance lies in part, in its
connections to problems in many other fields such as, geometric invariant
theory, representation theory of algebras, and Brauer groups. Invariant theory
and representation theory are classical mathematical fields whose results are
also used in applied mathematics and physics. Brauer groups are a fundamental
structure in the study of central simple algebras. The importance of this
problem also lies in the fact that matrices, which are rectangular arrays of
elements, are an essential tool for storing data. Little is known about this
problem. Positive results have been proved for the primes 2, 3,5 and 7, the
first of which was found in 1883 by Sylvester.
