
* 0070628
* Metaplectic Forms and Cryptography
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, THEORY OF COMPUTING
* 07/01/2000,04/26/2002
* William Banks,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2004
* USD 84,084.00

William D. Banks

This research will focus on two somewhat distinct areas of number theory.
First, the investigator will continue to study the Whittaker-Fourier
coefficients of metaplectic forms, with a view to seeking new arithmetical and
analytical applications in number theory, such as improved average value results
for L-series attached to n-th order Hecke characters, and generalizations of the
Bump-Hoffstein conjectures for L-functions on GL(n). Second, the investigator
and his colleagues will continue their joint research in number of areas of
cryptography, including the development of efficient identification schemes, new
techniques of encryption, and further results in the theory of pseudorandom
functions.

Automorphic forms (such as those associated to elliptic curves) play an
important and central role in modern number theory, allowing the powerful tools
of complex analysis to come to bear on arithmetical questions. Metaplectic forms
are a natural (though more mysterious) generalization of automorphic forms whose
construction intimately depends on very deep results of class field theory (in
particular, the higher order reciprocity laws). While the study of metaplectic
forms in still in its infancy, the results of this proposed research will prove
to be very exciting. The second part of this proposal focuses on cryptography,
the rapidly developing field of mathematics/computer science that deals
primarily with information security. The investigator and his colleagues plan to
continue their work on identification schemes for use with credit/smart cards,
encryption algorithms, and questions related to the theory of pseudorandom
functions.


