
* 0070427
* Collaborative Research: Vector Bundles on Projective Spaces
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2000,03/19/2002
* Prabhakar Rao,MO,University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2004
* USD 84,591.00

abstract

The investigator and his colleagues study small rank vector bundles on
projective spaces. New and simplified constructions are obtained both in finite
and in zero characteristics. In the case of rank two bundles, these
constructions on projective four space are valid only in positive
characteristics. The investigator and his colleagues work on the question of
extending these constructions to characteristic zero. This is related to the
deformation theory of these bundles. They investigate whether these bundles can
be deformed from positive to zero characteristic. The deformation theory of such
bundles also has applications to questions regarding degenerating sums of line
bundles and the existence of exotic components of the Hilbert scheme.

The investigator and his colleagues give explicit constructions of objects
called vector bundles. Vector bundles are devices which encode algebraic
information about huge numbers of geometric figures like curves and surfaces.
With their explicit knowledge of vector bundles, the investigator and his
colleagues can then construct geometric figures with desired properties. The
work is done using matrices which are easily implemented on computer algebra
systems. Much of the work is done over finite fields which allows the use of
computers to give exact answers. Problems involving geometric modeling in the
real world require approximating the answers, one method being the use of such
finite fields. The project studies the interplay between geometric objects
existing in the real world (over fields of characteristic zero) and their
approximations over finite fields.


