
* 0070522
* Bad Reduction of Curves and Abelian Varieties
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2000,06/19/2002
* Dino Lorenzini,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia M. Wiegand
* 06/30/2003
* USD 76,497.00

One of the main problem in arithmetic geometry is the determination of the set
of rational solutions of a system of polynomial equations with rational
coefficients. One of the most successful technique in the study of such a set of
solutions is to reduce the equations modulo a prime p and to study first the set
of solutions of the latter system of equations. It turns out that in many
situations, it is possible to describe a canonical way of reducing the equations
modulo p. For instance, the canonical reduction of an abelian variety is called
its Neron model, and is the object of study in Lorenzini's first research
project. The canonical reduction of a curve is called its regular minimal model,
and is the object of study in Lorenzini's second research project. For all but
finitely many prime p, the canonical reduction is `good' and, as the name
suggests, such a reduction type can be better understood than the reduction at
the finitely many remaining primes. Our present understanding of the information
encoded in the canonical reductions that are not good (and not semistable) is
far from complete. Some very difficult problems arise when studying reductions
modulo small primes. One such difficulty can be stated as follows. A famous
theorem due to Grothendieck and others states that there exists a finite field
extension L/K such that the reduction of the initial equations viewed as
equations over L is either good or semistable. In other words, it is possible to
improve the reduction by extending the initial field. When p is large, the
extension L/K is totally understood once its degree is known: it is the unique
cyclic extension of that degree. When p is small and divides the degree of L/K,
there are infinitely many extensions of that given degree, and almost nothing is
known about the specific extension L/K needed to improve the reduction of the
initial equations. Lorenzini's proposed research will shed more light on this
and other special phenomena that arise when the reduction modulo a small prime p
is not `good'.

For centuries, human beings have been fascinated with solving diophantine
equations, named after the Greek mathematician Diophantus who lived in the third
century AD. The field of diophantine equations has taken on added significance
in the modern world as it finds applications in a variety of areas including,
for example, encryption. A diophantine equation is a mathematical expression in
several variables, say x and y. The central problem in the field is to find all
possible solutions where x and y are both whole numbers or both fractions. For
instance, the equation xy-10=0 has many solutions (e.g., x = y = square root of
10) but the solutions in whole positive numbers are in this case the divisors of
10, namely (x,y) = (1,10), (2,5), (5,2), and (10,1). While such an equation is
very simple, a slight modification, such as replacing 10 by a very large number
(for instance, one having 150 digits) renders the new equation extremely hard to
solve in practice. It is this fact, that it is so hard to solve such equations,
that is the key to many of the safest current military codes and data encryption
systems. The complexity of the determination of all solutions in whole numbers
or fractions of an equation increases with the power at which the variables
appear in the equation. For instance, the equation `x to the power n plus y to
the power n equals 1' was conjectured in the 17th century to have only two
solutions when n is any odd number greater than 1. (Those two solutions are
(x,y)=(1,0) and (x,y)= (0,1). This conjecture is called Fermat's Last Theorem
and was proved only in 1994. Since the time of the Greeks, mathematicians have
developed sophisticated tools to aid in solving equations. This investigator has
developed some such mathematical tools and is currently working on further
contributions to this field.
