
* 0070686
* Equidistribution of Algebraic Points and Arithmetic Invariants of Modular Curves
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2000,06/15/2001
* Emmanuel Ullmo,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2002
* USD 67,554.00

The investigator main topic is number theory. He is using Arakelov theory with a
special eye on modular forms and automorphic forms. He is studying
equidistribution phenomenas for sequences of algebraic points on varieties over
number fields. His main result is the discreteness of the set of algebraic
points of a curve of genus greater than one embedded in his Jacobian for the
Neron-Tate topology. He tries to have results in the direction of the Andre-Oort
conjecture concerning the possible Zariski closures of a set of points with
complex multiplication in the moduli space of abelian varieties.
Equidistribution of Hecke (obtained by the author and Clozel) is a step towards
equidistribution of Galois orbits of points with complex multiplication. In an
other direction, the investigator studies the arithmetic invariants of modular
curve from the Arakelov view-point.

Diophantine geometry is one of the most aesthetic subject of mathematics. Even
if the questions are phrased in a very elementary way: Find all the rational or
algebraic solutions of a system of polynomial equations; the solution to this
type of problems requires in general the most advanced techniques of
mathematics. This work explains that the set of algebraic points of a curve
(which is infinite) is not very big: We can think about it as a discrete set in
a natural arithmetic set.
