
* 0070912
* Graph and Digraph Minors
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/15/2000,06/06/2002
* Paul Seymour,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 05/31/2004
* USD 132,358.00

This is a grant for support for a graduate student only. The investigator works
on two main topics - Hadwiger's conjecture, and extensions of the graph minors
project.

(a) Hadwiger's conjecture (proposed in 1943) states that any graph not
contractible to the n-node complete graph should be colourable with n-1 colours.
For small n it is true - eg for n = 5 and n = 6 it is equivalent to the 4-colour
theorem. For all larger n it is open.

(b) The graph minors project, by Neil Robertson and the investigator, was a
major piece of work, spanning 23 long papers, which used graph structure theory
to settle several open questions. One of the most difficult steps of this was
proving that all graphs with large tree-width have large grid minors, and
recently Diestel et al have found a short, simple proof of this vital fact. As a
consequence, several conjectured extensions of the graph minors project now
appear feasible.

This work is in graph theory. A graph is a network of nodes, some pairs of which
are joined by links - such as, for instance, a telephone network, or a network
of plane connections. To design fast algorithms on graphs it is often important
to make use of special properties of the graph - for instance, perhaps it can be
drawn without crossings, or perhaps it can be built from very small graphs by
piecing them together in a tree-structure. Having such a useful, global
structure is closely related with with NOT containing certain substructures. The
first problem above asks whether the graphs with ANY given substructure excluded
are in some sense like those that can be drawn without crossings. The second
studies the theorem that all graphs not containing a grid-like substructure can
be expressed as a tree-structure of small graphs.
