
* 0071921
* Arithmetic Geometry of Diophantine Problems
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2000,04/23/2002
* Lucien Szpiro,NY,Research Foundation of the City University of New York
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2004
* USD 183,000.00

Abstract for 0071921- Szpiro

Technical description: This is a project in the arithmetic algebraic geometry of
diophantine problems. The PI is continuing his work which was successfully used
by Faltings in the solution of the Mordell Conjecture and by E. Ullmo, S. Zhang
and the PI in the solution of the Bogomolov Conjecture. The use of the modern
theory of heights has been very effective. The PI views the Equidistribution
Theorem as the solution to the problem of finding lower bounds for solutions of
algebraic equations. The question of finding effective upper bounds for
solutions of algebraic equations leads to many conjectures. Some are very well
known and may be unattainable (the abc conjecture, or the discriminant
conjecture for elliptic curves) but the PI has always believed that attacking
difficult problems is the secret of success in doing high-level mathematics. The
project will concentrate on:

a) The study of the degree of Belyi maps (these are coverings of the Riemann
sphere ramified in only 3 points and they characterize curves defined over the
field of algebraic numbers). b) The study of the Zariski closure of the non-zero
p-division points (for p big enough) in an abelian variety as a finite scheme.
c) The consequences for the Tate-Shafarevich group of recent results of the PI
and J. Pesenti on the discriminant inequality for potential good reduction. d)
Dynamical Systems (first on the Sphere then on towers of Shimura varieties): The
canonical height associated to these objects should lead to equidistribution
statements, for example for CM points (cf the work of Duke).

Non technical description: The PI and his collaborators are studying a subject
first investigated by Diophantus in ancient Greece: find the solutions in
integers of algebraic equations. The modern attack uses algebraic geometry,
analysis, and geometry. Many problems in the natural world (asking: How many
times? How to decipher?) require a solution in integers. This no doubt explains
why number theory, like physics, has been a constant motivation for the
development of mathematics.


