
* 0071967
* Sheaves on Affine Flags, Springer Fibers, and Representation Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2000,06/01/2000
* Roman Bezrukavnikov,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* William M. Snyder, Jr.
* 09/30/2003
* USD 60,400.00

Previous results of the investigator and collaborators establish a relation
between coherent sheaves on a Steinberg variety of a complex simple algebraic
group, and perverse sheaves on the affine flag variety of the Langlands dual
group. Since the latter are known, by the work of Kazhdan and Lusztig, to be
related to representations of quantum groups at a root of unity, and hence also
to representations of algebraic groups in prime characteristic, our results have
implications for that theories. They also indicate that there should be a
relation between the geometry of perverse sheaves on affine flag varieties, and
non-restricted representations of quantum groups or Lie algebras in prime
characteristics. The principal goal of the present project is to develop this
kind of relationship, thus providing a new tool for the theory of non-restricted
representations. It is expected, in particular, to yield a proof and a
conceptual explanation for recent numerical conjectures by Lusztig. The methods
and ideology of the present work are partly based on the geometric approach to
the Langlands program, due to Drinfeld. Another goal of the project is to
investigate consequences of the above mentioned results to that theory.

A key to new developments, and a source of inspiration in mathematics often lie
in discovery of parallelism (equivalence) between seemingly unrelated objects or
theories. Representation theory is a rich source of examples of that kind:
though formally being a branch of algebra, the modern theory relies heavily on
geometric disciplines, such as topology and algebraic geometry. The principle
goal of the present project is to develop geometric language for a branch of
representation theory where it has been lacking so far, namely the so called
theory of non-restricted modular representations. In the corresponding algebraic
constructions divisibility properties of integral numbers by a particular prime
number are relevant. The geometry apparently related to this deals with
particular infinite dimensional objects, encountered also in mathematical
physics (conformal field theory), and in number theory (Langlands duality
theory). This construction is expected to provide new tools for the above
mentioned branch of representation theory; in particular, it is expected to
yield a proof of certain conjectures by leading experts in the field.
