
* 0088930
* Equivariant Tamagawa Numbers/Deformation Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2000,05/21/2002
* Matthias Flach,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia M. Wiegand
* 06/30/2003
* USD 102,363.00

This is a project in Arithmetic Algebraic Geometry comprising two parts. The
first part deals with the study of values of L-functions of varieties (motives)
over number fields. In previous work the investigator and his collaborator have
extended the conjectures of Bloch Kato, Fontaine, Perrin-Riou to motives with
(possibly noncommutative) coefficients. At the same time they have established a
precise link between these conjectures and classical Galois module theory,
thereby generalizing various conjectures and theorems in this latter area to
arbitrary motives. With the conjectural picture firmly in place, the main task
now is to prove more cases. What seems within reach of current techniques are
Tate motives over number fields, CM elliptic curves (with CM by non-maximal
orders) and the adjoint of a modular form (with action of the integral Hecke
algebra). The last two are currently looked into by students of the
investigator. Equally within reach seems to be a proof of the compatibility of
the equivariant special value conjectures with the functional equation of the
L-function. The second part of the project is a rather concrete question in
deformation theory (of schemes, vector bundles or representations of profinite
groups). Using the theory of the cotangent complex one can define higher Kodaira
Spencer maps and the investigator proposes to study the injectivity of these
maps. In degree 1 this is known and leads to a criterion for smoothness of the
deformation ring. The case of most interest is degree 2 where a similar
injectivity would lead to a simple criterion for the deformation ring to be a
local complete intersection.

This is a project in number theory which has been part of the mathematical
heritage ever since the Babylonians discovered that there can be triangles with
all sides of integer length and one angle of ninety degrees. By the theorem of
Pythagoras this gives integer solutions of an algebraic equation. Modern number
theory still looks for integer solutions of algebraic equations but this search
is informed and enriched by much deeper connections with ideas from geometry and
topology than the ones alluded to in this introductory example. The theory of
special values of L-functions is a case in point. While defined by counting
solutions of equations modulo prime number it turns out that values of these
functions can sometimes be expressed in terms of integrals of differential
forms, or volumes of certain lattices. Nobody knows exactly why such a
relationship should hold. The examples one can prove all seem to rely on some
happy coincidences, although they follow a pattern that leads one to guess
("conjecture") what happens in general. This is much like the situation in an
experimental science. The investigator and his collaborator have generalized
this picture to situations where the system of equations has some additional
symmetries and they now try to collect further evidence for (or indeed falsify!)
their conjectures. As far as applications are concerned, number theorists would
probably agree that L-functions are a key concept in their field. On the other
hand, number theory as a whole no longer needs to be defensive about its
applicability, with much of cryptography and coding, on the internet and
otherwise, being based on its results.
