
* 0093542
* PECASE: Galois Representations and Modular Forms
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2001,04/29/2002
* Brian Conrad,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2007
* USD 249,975.00

The investigator's previous work on elliptic curves and Galois representations
leads in the direction of several questions which are ultimately concerned with
understanding the nature of Galois representations, either from the point of
view of geometry or deformation theory. One such problem is to find a conceptual
moduli-theoretic interpretation of the Coleman-Mazur eigencurve. The
investigator also proposes to study the problem of incorporating conditions such
as semi-stability (in the sense of Fontaine) in the deformation theory of Galois
representations, continuing a line of development growing out of the work of
Wiles. In a somewhat different direction, Buzzard has recently observed in
numerous examples that the slopes of eigenforms seem to possess much more
structure than conjectured by Gouvea-Mazur. These surprising observations do not
fit into any general framework, and the investigator proposes to determine the
general nature of such phenomena. In addition to studying these problems, the
investigator continues his efforts in the direction of supporting active student
interest in mathematics at the high school level. Through personal contacts at a
local school, he arranges regular meetings in which he leads informal group
discussions with students on an assortment of interesting mathematical ideas
(taken from a wide variety of disciplines: number theory, geometry, probability,
etc.). The idea is to expose students to important and interesting concepts
which are not usually encountered in the classroom but which can be presented in
an elementary context.

The investigator also provides these students with information about summer math
programs and research opportunities, in order that they can experience
mathematics as a living field of scientific inquiry. Number theory is the branch
of mathematics which is concerned with the properties of whole numbers. It
abounds in deep and unsolved problems, particularly concerning properties of
prime numbers and geometric objects called elliptic curves. Prime numbers and
the theory of elliptic curves also lie at the heart of modern cryptographic
systems, without which secure diplomatic transmissions and Internet commerce
would be impossible. The RSA cryptosystem and the elliptic curve factorization
algorithm are two such prominent applications in this context. Improvements in
our theoretical understanding of elliptic curves is expected lead to further
applications along these lines. The investigator's scientific work is concerned
with several questions naturally arising from the theory of elliptic curves, and
partly aims to continue the development the techniques that were used to
recently settle the Shimura-Taniyama Conjecture, one of the most important
problems in the theory of elliptic curves. The investigator also regularly
visits with local high school students, showing them important mathematical
ideas that are not usually encountered in school, such as the inner workings of
the RSA cryptosystem and the role of probability in the design of medical tests
for rare diseases. The investigator also provides these students with nformation
about summer opportunities for education, research, and work in mathematics, and
offers guidance for students who wish to take part in several prestigious high
school science research competitions. The Faculty Career Development Program
makes it possible for the investigator to continue his scientific work while at
the same time enabling him to give some high school students a deeper
appreciation for mathematics and its important role in modern society.
