
* 0099608
* Colorings and List Colorings: Contrasts and Similarities
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2001,04/11/2003
* Alexandr Kostochka,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 08/31/2004
* USD 103,203.00

A(n ordinary) proper coloring of a (hyper)graph is an assignment of colors to
the vertices of this hypergraph in such a way that no edge becomes
monochromatic. The chromatic number of a hypergraph is the minimum number of
colors used in a proper coloring. Finding proper colorings using only few colors
can be useful in many applications. The assignment of colors can model resource
allocation; the edges represent conflicts in usage of resources. Areas of
application include scheduling, database access, assignment of computer
registers, data clustering, computer aided design of printed circuits,
positional games, DNA sequencing, etc. The more general model of list coloring
allows to restrict the colors available for each vertex. Each vertex is assigned
a list of available colors. The color for each vertex must be chosen from its
list, but the constraints imposed by edges must still be satisfied by the chosen
coloring. List coloring can be used to model problems such as extension of
colorings of subgraphs. The list chromatic number of the hypergraph is the
minimum k such that whenever all lists have size at least k, it is possible to
choose a proper coloring from the assigned lists. A proper coloring with k
colors can be considered as a list coloring with all the lists of vertices being
the same (of size k). Thus, the list chromatic number of a hypergraph always is
at least the chromatic number. Although one might think that the most difficult
case of list coloring is when all the lists are the same (giving more conflicts
for colors), this is not always the case. Vizing and Erdos, Rubin, and Taylor
gave examples of 2 colorable graphs with arbitrarily large list chromatic
number. On the other hand, in some classes of (hyper)graphs the list chromatic
number behaves similarly to the (ordinary) chromatic number.

The main thrust of this project is to explore the analogs for list coloring of
many results about ordinary coloring. The issue is under what conditions there
are similar bounds for related list coloring and coloring problems. Upper bounds
on coloring parameters can lead to efficient algorithms; lower bounds impose
limits on what can be accomplished. One question is when the list chromatic
number actually equals the chromatic number. Another is how many edges are
needed to form a (hyper)graph with a given chromatic number, subject to various
additional conditions; here a list coloring analogue will also be explored. For
classes of graphs obtained using intersections of geometric objects of special
types, bounds on (list) chromatic number in terms of the maximum number of
pairwise adjacent vertices are sought. Many coloring problems have analogs using
lists, and this project will begin the exploration of many of these list
coloring problems. For example, many generalized coloring parameters have
bounded values on important classes of graphs such as the planar graphs (those
that embed in the plane without edge crossings). Do such colorings still exist
when the vertices are assigned color lists of bounded size? Most of the work is
planned to be done jointly with Douglas B. West (University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign)
