
* 0100400
* Extremal Combinatorics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2001,04/14/2003
* Tom Bohman,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2004
* USD 91,653.00

The investigator is interested in a wide range of questions from extremal
combinatorics and related fields. A common theme is the exploration of new ideas
for the construction of extremal objects; in particular, the investigator
suggests new ideas for constructions in the settings of Shannon capacity, the
lonely runner conjecture, and combinatorial discrepancy. In the area of Shannon
capacity, the investigator has developed a new construction for independent sets
in the powers of odd cycles that is, in a sense, asymptotically optimal. It is
hoped that the algebraic ideas used in this construction can be further
developed to give more insight into the Shannon capacities of odd cycles. The
investigator suggests a similar algebraic approach to a number of conjectures
(conjectures that follow from recent work of R. Holzman, D. Kleitman and the
investigator) concerning the extremal objects for the so-called lonely runner
conjecture. The research on combinatorial discrepancy is motivated by a
conjecture of Lovasz, Spencer and Vestergombi on the relationship between the
linear discrepancy and hereditary discrepancy of a hypergraph. In addition to
work on new constructions, this research includes questions in the fields of
random graphs and the combinatorics of cellular automata.

Questions considered in extremal combinatorics are of the form: `How large (or
small) can an object that lies in a particular discrete mathematical system and
satisfies a certain condition be?' We are usually interested in the size of
extremal objects for very large systems. Interest in such questions grew
extensively during the twentieth century. Pioneers of the field, such as Paul
Erdos, had posed many fascinating questions of this form and had devised
powerful methods for solving them even before the close connections between
extremal combinatorics and various other fields (including computer science,
statistical physics and information theory) had been discovered. Shannon
capacity is a prime example of the significant link between extremal
combinatorics and information theory. Shannon capacity gives a measure of the
zero-error performance of a noisy communications channel. The investigator has
developed new, near--optimal codes for some notoriously difficult channels, and
the proposed research includes further development of these codes with the goal
of determining the zero-error optimum of these channels. The study of cellular
automata has been part of the recent interaction between extremal combinatorics
and statistical physics. Cellular automata are discrete dynamical systems that
have been used to model a wide range of physical phenomena. The investigator
proposes research on the regularity of growth of certain cellular automata that
model crystal growth. This work is expected to have impact on our understanding
of the shapes achieved by these models and their randomized counterparts.
