
* 0100586
* Algebraic K-theory, Motivic Cohomology and Homology of Linear Groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2007
* Andrei Suslin,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2008
* USD 190,603.00

The proposal concerns the investigation of motivic cohomology of schemes and its
relationships to algebraic K-theory. One part of the project proposes an
investigation of generically contractible sheaves. The investigator intends to
use the properties of such sheaves in an attempt to show that Grayson motivic
cohomology coincides with Voevodsky one and hence Graysons construction gives
another approach to the dvelopment of the motivic spectral sequence. Another
part of the project concerns the Friedlander-Milnor Conjecture. The investigator
expects to develop new methods for the proof of the rigidity property for
homology of the finite general linear group. Finally the investigator plans to
figure out what if anything is missing in the proof of the Bloch-Kato Conjecture
modulo an arbitrary prime integer.

This research proposal is in the area of mathematics known as algebraic
geometry. The objective of algebraic geometry is to gain a deep understanding of
the geometric properties of solutions to polynomial equations -- while everyone
sees quadratic equations in school, equations of higher degree or more variables
become much more subtle. Yet, because computer and robot computations are
inherently finite approximations to the continuous "real world," understanding
polynomials is vital to such endeavors.
