
* 0140523
* Applications of the Hardy-Littlewood Method in Number Theory and Beyond
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2002,09/20/2006
* Trevor Wooley,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2007
* USD 197,313.00

This proposal highlights the role of the Hardy-Littlewood (circle) method as a
flexible tool that underpins progress in many areas of mathematics intersecting
with number theory. The proposer intends to pursue a number of investigations
that illustrate this intersubdisciplinary aspect of the method, concentrating on
applications in arithmetic geometry and combinatorics. First, the researcher
constructs a large class of examples of algebraic varieties, of relatively small
dimension in terms of their degree, that may be studied by means of the circle
method. Questions concerning the density of rational points and weak
approximation should be accessible, the intention being to shed light on
conjectures of Manin and others. In a second direction, the proposer applies
results from the modern theory of diophantine approximation in order to refine
Gower's recent explicit version of Szemeredi's theorem. In a more traditional
line of enquiry, the researcher investigates the distribution of the number of
representations of integers as sums of powers. The latter work enables higher
moments than the traditional mean square to be considered, leading to
multidimensional applications of previously inaccessible type.

Number Theory studies the properties of integers (``whole numbers''). Since
antiquity, the study of diophantine equations (equations to be solved in
integers) has formed a core component of Number Theory, and has recently
influenced the development of codes and cryptosystems (applied, for example, in
data storage systems such as compact disks and DVDs, communications systems and
banking security). The investigation of moment problems is a fundamental topic
for Fourier analysis, which in the larger setting plays a crucial role in
electrical engineering and communications. The circle method, in its modern
incarnations, provides a mechanism for transferring technology from one of these
areas to another, and this proposal pursues basic research that facilitates such
transfers.




