
* 0140378
* Euler Systems and Elliptic Curves
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2002,04/11/2006
* Karl Rubin,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2007
* USD 234,474.00

The investigator and his coworkers study elliptic curves, special values of
L-functions, and related topics. Some of the most interesting open questions and
conjectures in arithmetic algebraic geometry relate arithmetic invariants with
special values of L-functions. Iwasawa theory and Euler systems have proved to
be among the most successful tools for attacking these problems, by serving as a
bridge between the algebraic world and the analytic world. The investigator
continues to pursue this approach, by extracting additional information from
Euler systems and their "derivative" Kolyvagin systems. In another direction,
the investigator and his colleagues study ranks of elliptic curves, especially
the asymptotic distribution of ranks in families of quadratic twists.

Elliptic curves play a central role in many parts of mathematics including its
most applied areas. For example, elliptic curves are used in algorithms to
encrypt data for transmission, and for efficient digital signatures. In its most
basic form, an elliptic curve is a special kind of polynomial equation in two
variables. Historically number theorists are interested in finding solutions of
these equations in which the variables take values which are either whole
numbers, or fractions. The rank of an elliptic curve is a basic invariant which
measures the size of the set of solutions. The investigator and his coworkers
study ranks of elliptic curves and their interrelations with other mathematical
objects and concepts. These questions are related to the cryptographic
applications of elliptic curves, which come about by considering solutions in
which the variables take values in finite fields.
