
* 0200669
* RUI: Versal Deformations, Deformation Quantization, Moduli Spaces and Graph Complexes
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 05/01/2002,04/09/2002
* Michael Penkava,WI,University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2006
* USD 47,452.00

This project has three parts: (1) To study the versal deformations of A_\infty ,
L_\infty algebras, which are generalizations of Lie and associative algebras;
(2) To study the problem of deformation quantization of polynomial Poisson
algebras; (3) To address some problems in the study of the moduli space of
Riemann surfaces with marked points that arise from the combinatorial
equivalence of this space and the orbifold of metric Ribbon graphs. The first
part continues a program being carried out jointly with Alice Fialowski. The
second part is about generalizing a purely cohomological construction of the PI
and Pol Vanhaecke of the unique generic deformation quantizationof order three
which extends to a fourth order deformation. The third part, which is joint work
with Motohico Mulase, is more open-ended. Reasonable goals might be: to
establish a canonical orbifold diffeomorphism between the moduli space of
Riemann surfaces and the Ribbon graph complex; to give concrete
characterizations of the Strebel differential in some interesting cases; to
study solutions to the KP system determined by the correspondence between ribbon
graphs and Riemann surfaces over the algebraic closure of the rationals; to
describe in detail the correspondence between the homology of the Ribbon graph
comples, and the moduli space of Riemann surfaces with marked points.

This project consists of three problems in mathematics related to or motivated
by physics. The first problem is to study what happens when a very general kind
of algebraic structure, one that arises in both mathematics and physics, is
"deformed," for example by incorporating some special little twisting process
into the usual algebraic operation of multiplication. This investigation
continues collaborative work with a colleague in Hungary. The second problem
involves a different kind of deformation process applied to a certain class of
polynomial algebras. The third, and most open-ended problem, is about
investigating a remarkable and unexpected correspondence between an
algebraically defined geometric space and a differentially (as in calculus)
defined geometric object. This third part also provides numerous opportunities
for undergraduate involvement in research.
