
* 0200012
* Chow Groups of Projective Varieties
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2002,03/31/2004
* Chad Schoen,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2006
* USD 120,000.00

This project is concerned with the geometry of algebraic varieites. It builds on
past experience which indicates that much can be learned about the geometry of a
given algebraic variety by studying its Chow group. The Chow group is obtained
from the free abelian group on all subvarieties of a given variety by modding
out by the relation of rational equivalence. For algebraic curves the Chow group
is a close relative of the Jacobian. While the Chow group is known to have good
functorial properties, it is often very difficult to compute. Thus it is
difficult to gain access to the subtle and valuable information that it
frequently contains. This investigation focuses on three different aspects of
the problem of computing Chow groups. First the torsion subgroup of the Chow
group is being studied with an emphasis on the quotient by the subgroup
generated by cycles algebraically equivalent to zero. Secondly, the relationship
between the Chow group and singular cohomology with rational coefficients is
being investigated. The Hodge Conjecture is an important concern here. The
theory of Abelian varieties and techniques from classical algebraic geometry
will be brought to bear on this problem. The third line of investigation
involves the relationship between the Chow group and singular cohomology with
integrer coefficients. An ancient guidepost here was the so called Integral
Hodge Conjecture. It has turned out that the Integral Hodge Conjecture is false
in some instances. The extent of its failure is poorly understood, so the
principal investigator and a PhD student are working to clarify this.

To a significant extent, the value of basic research in algebraic geometry
results from the tendency of mathematicians to reduce problems in various other
fields of mathematics to problems in algebraic geometry. This tendency is due to
the ultimate simplicity of algebraic geometry, where remarkably effective
approaches to certain geometric problems have been developed with minimal
reliance on infinite processes. While the initial translation of a problem from
the physical world into mathematics frequently involves limits, derivatives,
integrals, and further notions involving infinite processes which go well beyond
ordinary calculus, mathematicians have learned to search for hidden aspects of
these problems which are essentially of an algebraic or finite nature. Neither
the task of translating real world phenomena into mathematical problems, the
task of discovering a hidden algebraic core in a problem formulated using
infinite processes, nor the task of solving this core problem using algebraic
geometry is often easy. Nonetheless, this lengthy process has led to profound
insights. For example, algebraic geometry and some of the algebraic varieties
studied by the principal investigator are of great interest to physicists in
their current attempts to unify quantum mechanics with the theory of gravity.
