
* 0200810
* Holomorphic G-bundles On Elliptic Fibrations
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 07/01/2002,05/26/2004
* Robert Friedman,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 228,375.00

ABSTRACT DMS - 0200810.

One motivation for this project comes from F theory/heterotic string duality. In
this duality, given the data of an elliptically fibered Calabi-Yau manifold, a
principal bundle over it with the appropriate structure group and connection,
and a B-field, which is roughly like a holomorphic 2-form, one expects to find a
new Calabi-Yau manifold fibered in elliptic K3 surfaces over the same base. A
second motivation is to understand some of the mathematical issues raised by the
first question, in a purely mathematical framework. These issues lead to a rich
set of questions concerning two or more commuting elements in compact Lie
groups, conjugacy classes in semisimple algebraic groups or complex Lie
algebras, the moduli space of semistable principal bundles over elliptic curves,
and the geometry of del Pezzo surfaces and K3 surfaces.

This project is concerned with the study of certain geometric structures arising
in mathematics and physics. One goal of this study is a mathematical
understanding of the relation between two physical theories of elementary
particles arising from string theory. The relationship is best expressed
mathematically by relationships between several geometric structures. These
relationships, and various generalizations, are also very interesting from a
mathematical point of view, because they are connected with the possible
symmetries of spaces in any number of dimensions and with geometric structures
connected with these symmetries.
