
* 0201423
* Birational Geometry and Rational Connectedness
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2002,04/17/2003
* Aise de Jong,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2004
* USD 61,069.00

This project concerns birational geometry of complex varieties and the study of
rationally connected varieties. The main objective is to study spaces of
rational curves on rationally connected varieties, with the goal of constructing
new birational invariants of these varieties and determining the relationship
between these varieties and unirational varieties. The secondary objective is to
develop further some of the techniques and tools of algebraic geometry: to
develop techniques for determining when moduli stacks are rationally connected,
to construct and study new compactifications of the space of smooth rational
curves in projective space, and to refine the Behrend-Manin stratification of
the Kontsevich moduli stack so that it detects mutliple covers.

Systems of polynomial equations in some collection of variables arise in every
branch of mathematics, science and engineering. Determining the solutions of
these systems of equations is of paramount importance. "Unirational varieties"
precisely correspond to those systems of equations where the set of solutions is
most easily described -- the set of solutions is the set of all outputs of some
sequence of polynomials with arbitrary inputs. So it is very important to
recognize which systems of equations correspond to unirational varieties. From
the point of view of geometry, a closely related notion is "rational
connectedness". This notion is far simpler to recognize in practice. Potentially
both notions are equivalent. If one could prove that both notions are
equivalent, this would give a simpler way to recognize which systems of
equations correspond to unirational varieties. The investigator intends to
continue his research of this problem.
