
* 0203947
* International Conference on Modern Algebra, May 21 - 24, 2002, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 04/01/2002,03/04/2002
* Mark Sapir,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia M. Wiegand
* 03/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

The purpose of the project is to organize the International Conference on Modern
Algebra in Vanderbilt University (Nashville, TN, May 21-24, 2002) in conjunction
with the 19th Shanks lectures. Professor Efim Zelmanov (Yale University), has
agreed to deliver the Shanks lecture. The conference will focus on several
fundamental areas of modern algebra and its applications: group and semigroup
theory, lattice theory and ordered tructures, model theory and universal
algebra. Current and future trends in modern algebra will be the general theme.
This grant will provide partial support for speakers, graduate students, post-
doctoral students, and younger faculty.

At a fundamental level, group theory, lattice theory, and model theory, the
topics of this conference, are tools for understanding and analyzing symmetries
and patterns in the world around us. For example, crystallography, the study and
analysis of crystals, used once for inproving transistors and used today for
studying protein structures, has advanced as group theory and lattice theory
have advanced. As another example, codes may be thought of as man-made patterns,
and as such advances in group theory, lattice theory, and model theory lead to
advances in cryptography and cryptanalysis.
