
* 0204628
* Quantum Field Theories on Algebraic Curves and Applications
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 06/01/2002,03/03/2006
* Leon Takhtajan,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2008
* USD 344,997.00

DMS-0204628 - Leon Takhtajan Abstract

The proposal is devoted to the study of quantum field theories on algebraic
curves from complex analytic and algebraic points of view. String theory is the
unifying theme of the complex-analytic part of the project. The main goals of
this part are: 1) geometric formulation of two-dimensional quantum Toda theories
associated with simple Lie algebras; 2) Fermi-Bose correspondence for compact
Riemann surfaces and closed smooth Jordan curves; 3) proof of general Kleinian
reciprocity on deformation spaces; 4) construction of the universal Weil-
Petersson potential for the universal Teichmuller space; 5) curvature properties
of the new Kahler metric on moduli spaces of punctured Riemann surfaces; 6)
explicit form of factorization formula for determinants of Laplace operators
acting on higher order differentials; 7) Faddeev-Popov ghosts for string field
theory of open strings. Symmetries and Ward identities for correlation functions
are guiding principles of the algebraic part of the project. The immediate and
long term goals of this part are: 1) proof of adelic Fermi-Bose correspondence
for vertex operators, complete construction of quantum field theory of
multiplicative bosons and proof of A. Weil's reciprocity law; 2) construction of
quantum field theories on algebraic curves in non-zero characteristic with
Artin-Schreier and Kummer theories as main examples, proof of Artin's
reciprocity law using quantum field-theoretical methods; 3) adelic formulation
of the WZW theory on algebraic curves in characteristic zero.

In mathematical development a pivotal role is played by ideas from physics,
originated in the study of the surrounding world. The last twenty five years
have been characterized by dramatic success in application of quantum fields and
strings to different areas of mathematics. The idea is to probe mathematical
objects by quantum theories and to measure their response in order to get new
information about the various mathematical properties of these objects. Usually
the output is encoded in terms of partition function and correlation functions
of physical theory, and the problem is to decode it back in mathematical terms.
The goals of this proposal are the following: 1) to extend further quantum-
theoretic method for the study of complex analytic properties of surfaces in two
dimensions and their families; 2) to develop a new systematic quantum-theoretic
approach for arithmetic surfaces and algebraic number fields (like the usual
field of rational numbers). Fundamental properties of these objects are discrete
and it is only natural to study them at a microscopic scale using quantum
theory. In particular, many classical mathematical results about fields of
algebraic functions and algebraic numbers, known as reciprocity laws, can be
interpreted as conservation laws (like conservation of energy) in quantum
theory. The main goal of the algebraic part of the project is to develop a new
approach based on quantum theory towards fundamental laws that are satisfied by
the very basic mathematical objects: algebraic numbers - solutions of algebraic
equations with coefficients being rational numbers, and algebraic functions -
solutions of algebraic equations with coefficients being rational functions.
Realization of the goals of the proposal will contribute to the fundamental
interface between mathematics and physics.
