
* 0228011
* Moduli of Pointed Curves and Relative Stable Maps
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/15/2002,07/08/2002
* Ravi Vakil,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2004
* USD 79,092.00

The investigator proposes to use Kontsevich's space of "stable maps" (originally
motivated by mathematical physics last decade) and related objects to tackle
problems in a variety of fields. Traditionally, the space of stable maps has
been studied using facts about the fundamental "moduli space of curves" defined
by Deligne and Mumford. The investigator proposes to conversely study the moduli
space of curves by studying maps from curves to varieties. Some of the proposed
work will likely rely on Jun Li's recent extension of Kontsevich's work, the
definition of a space of "relative stable maps" in the algebraic category.

It has long been known that nodal algebraic curves are a powerful tool in
algebraic geometry. They can be thought of as surfaces with holes (picture a
ball, a donut, or a french cruller) with pairs of points "glued together".
Earlier this decade, ideas from string theory in physics led to the introduction
of "stable maps", parametrizing certain kinds of maps of nodal curves into
another space. This development has proved to be incredibly fruitful, sparking
advances in a variety of fields. The investigator's area of research is the use
of these ideas in the field of algebraic geometry, in particular with
applications to many other fields (such as enumerative geometry, arithmetic
geometry, combinatorics, and physics).
