
* 0244660
* FRG: Random matrix models, zeros of L-functions, and arithmetic
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2003,11/15/2006
* David Farmer,CA,American Institute of Mathematics
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2008
* USD 989,823.00

Summary for award DMS-0244660

This project concerns deep connections between fundamental questions in number
theory, analytic properties of L-functions, and random matrix theory. The
investigators will undertake a series of projects aimed at establishing links
between arithmetic and the random matrix conjectures for zeros of L-functions.
These results will lead to significant progresson long-standing questions in
number theory. Conversely, progress onthese arithmetic questions will lead to
new results in random matrixtheory.

The work in this proposal will extend recently discovered connections between
problems in number theory and results in mathematical physics. Significant
progress is anticipated by exploring the relationship betweennumber theoretic
L-functions and the random matrix theory techniques developed by physicists.
This work will bring together researchers in different fields and, through the
participation of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, provide an
opportunity for stronger connections between these two research areas. It will
also introduce undergraduate students to nature of scientific research. Finally,
progress in this area will be presented at a workshop and conference in the
final year of the proposed work. Designed to introduce graduate students and
postdocs to new developments in these fields, these forums will map out the
progress made by this grant and prepare the participants to extend this work.


