
* 0300126
* Combinatorics and Analysis of Special Functions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/15/2003,06/20/2007
* Douglas Bowman,IL,Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 105,000.00

DMS-0300126 Bowman, Douglas

Abstract:

Title: Combinatorics and Analysis of Special Functions

This proposed project uses two classes of broad mathematical techniques,
combinatorics and analysis, to expand knowledge of special functions in two
ways. First it introduces new classes of special functions and catalogue their
properties. Second, it studies new properties of known special functions. In
particular, this project comprises ten subprojects. These include discovering
and classifying algebraic relationships between special values of
multidimensional polylogarithms, studying the combinatorics of shuffles and
their q-analogues, analyzing the almost everywhere behavior of the Rogers-
Ramanujan continued fraction on the unit circle, and studying continued
fractions with multiple limit values.

Special functions are those mathematical functions which have recurred often
enough that they have been distinguished with their own name and have had their
properties catalogued. Indeed, the famous mathematician Paul Turan once said
that special functions would be better named "useful functions". The most famous
examples are perhaps the trigonometric functions, which are of critical use in
all areas of technology. As time progresses and physical, technological, and
mathematical knowledge grow, the set of functions dignified with the term
"special" also gets larger. Additionally, new properties of functions already in
the pantheon of special functions are discovered and these properties are added
to the banks of human knowledge. This project investigates certain natural new
special functions as well as explores novel properties of known special
functions.


