
* 0300525
* Algebraic Cycles, K-Theory, and Representation Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 06/01/2003,04/08/2008
* Eric Friedlander,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 05/31/2009
* USD 324,999.00

DMS-0300525 Eric M. Friedlander

Friedlander proposes to investigate topics in algebra, geometry, and topology.
Each of these topics entail a synthesis of techniques and results from various
mathematical fields with the goal of progress toward solutions of fundamental
problems, and each has seen progress achieved by Friedlander and his
collaborators. Firstly, Friedlander proposes to investigate algebraic K-theory
and algebraic cycles on algebraic varieties, with the expectation that his
investigation will contribute both specific computations and general properties
of these fundamental invariants. Friedlander will seek to produce topological
constructions associated to objects arising in algebraic geometry which closely
reflect subtle aspects of algebraic cycles and algebraic K-theory. These
constructions, many planned in conjunction with Mark Walker, are envisioned to
involve a blend of techniques from stable homotopy theory and recent techniques
developed by Voevodsky for motivic cohomology. In particular, Friedlander plans
to investigate further the semi-topological K-theory of varieties and its
connections with algebraic and topological K-theory. The second topic involves
the introduction of new spaces determined by the representation theory of a
finite group scheme which provide a new perspective on cohomological support
varieties. The goal of this research, in part to be achieved in collaboration
with Julia Pevtsova, is to produce finer invariants in the general context of
finite group schemes which are accessible to computations and which extend our
understanding of (modular) representations. Finally, in joint work with Vincent
Franjou, Friedlander proposes to study the cohomology of polynomial bifunctors
with the aim of improving earlier computations by himself and others to cases
more closely related to questions in K-theory.

Mathematics continues to reveal beautiful relationships which are both useful
and surprising. This project involves the study of shapes (topology) which arise
as the solutions of polynomial equations. Such a study uses geometric insights
and algebraic manipulations, augmented by constructions and computations of many
mathematicians over the centuries. Some of the questions considered still seem
dauntingly difficult, but partial progress towards their solutions will lead to
advances in different branches of mathematics and mathematical physics. A second
aspect of this project is the study of formal algebraic objects which arise as
symmetries of familiar structures. Once again, geometry is blended with algebra
to provide motivation for questions to be asked as well as to suggest methods of
solution. A third aspect consists of efforts to maintain the strength of the
national effort in mathematics by mentoring graduate students and junior
faculty, by organizing mathematical meetings, by editorial efforts for journals
and special volumes, and by participation in the on-going discussion of policy
issues for the American Mathematical Society.




