
* 0301083
* Primes and divisors
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2003,03/25/2003
* Kevin Ford,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 11/30/2006
* USD 121,093.00

Abstract

Title: Primes and divisors

This proposal is concerned with three projects related to the distribution of
prime numbers and divisors of integers. The first project concerns continuing
investigations (jointly with S. Konyagin) of subtle inequities in the
distribution of primes in arithmetic progressions. Such problems are intimately
connected with the distribution of non-trivial zeros of Dirichlet L-functions
and the Riemann zeta function. The research focus is on further illuminating the
influence of hypothetical zeros of the L-functions having real part different
from 1/2. A second project deals with the limitations of sieve methods, which
are powerful techniques for bounding the number of primes (or numbers with a
bounded number of prime factors) in an integer sequence. The goal of the
proposer's work is an improved understanding of how the distribution of primes
in a sequence is influenced by the distribution of the sequence in arithmetic
progressions and the distribution of the sequence on numbers with an odd number
(respectively and even number) of prime factors. The final project is to improve
bounds for the density of integers possessing a divisor in a given interval, a
problem which is central to the theory of the distribution of divisors of
integers.

The study of prime numbers is more than 2000 years old, and the most important
problems revolve around how the primes are distributed. Besides applications to
many other branches of mathematics, prime number theory is crucial to modern
coding theory and cryptography, e.g. secure Internet communication. The proposed
research deals with questions concerning how the primes are distributed within
certain sets of integers, and questions on the related subject of the
statistical behavior of the distribution of divisors of numbers. The proposer
will involve graduate students, post-docs and/or talented undergraduate students
(REU) in these research projects.


