
* 0302310
* Research in Algebraic Combinatorics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2003,05/10/2005
* Michelle Wachs,FL,University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2006
* USD 120,657.00

Abstract for award of Wachs DMS-0302310

The PI continues her investigation of algebraic and topological aspects of
simplicial complexes associated with partially ordered sets (posets) and
monotone graph properties. The theory of poset topology, which grew out of the
famous 1964 paper of Rota on the Mobius function of a partially ordered set,
provides a deep and fundamental link between combinatorics and other branches of
mathematics such as topology, algebra and geometry. The significance of the
topological study of monotone graph properties was first demonstrated in Kahn,
Saks, and Sturtevant's 1984 proof of the prime power case of the evasiveness
conjecture in algorithmic complexity theory. There are three parts to this
project. In the first part, the PI explores connections between three
fascinating combinatorial complexes, which have appeared in the literature in
various contexts; namely the no-perfect matching complex, the 1 mod k partition
poset and a generalization of the Whitehouse tree complex. In the second part,
the PI continues her study of the matching complex, the chessboard complex and
variations. These complexes arose in diverse settings such as group theory,
discrete geometry and commutative algebra. In the third part, the PI continues
her work on some intriguing conjectures of Hanlon dealing with Lie algebra
homology. It is expected that the research in all three parts will involve the
development of new techniques in topological and algebraic combinatorics.
Algebraic combinatorics is an area of mathematics that seeks to establish
connections between combinatorics and fields of pure mathematics that involve
algebra. These interdisciplinary connections serve to enrich and advance
combinatorics and the other fields. Combinatorics is the science of counting,
arranging and analyzing discrete configurations. Communications networks and
phylogenic trees are examples of a fundamental discrete configuration called a
graph. Graphs and other discrete configurations arise in various fields of
mathematics, computer science, physics and biology. Combinatorial methods are
playing an expanding role in these fields.
