
* 0302892
* Homological Invariants of Modules Over Commutative Rings
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2003,05/28/2003
* Srikanth Iyengar,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2004
* USD 85,752.00

Abstract for the ward of Iyengar DMS-0302892

The investigator and his collaborators address a number of specific problems in
the homological theory of modules over commutative rings, and develop some tools
intended for further research in this topic. One example of the first aspect of
the project is the proposed study of the asymptotic behaviour of Betti numbers
of the Frobenius endomorphism. The paradigm for the results sought is Kunz's
theorem: local ring of non-zero characteristic is regular precisely when the
Frobenius endomorphism is flat. A second example concerns Koszul algebras: the
investigator will build on recent work with Herzog that was motivated by results
of Eisenbud, Floystad, and Schreyer on the relationship between linear strands
of resolutions over a polynomial ring and modules over its Koszul dual exterior
algebra. Some of the techniques proposed are derived from rational homotopy
theory, and a guiding light in this endeavour is the "Looking glass principle"
of Avramov and Halperin. However, many of the crucial results that govern it
have not been pinned down in the desired level of detail. Avramov and the
investigator propose a manuscript that fills this gap in the literature. The
project will also investigate the role of cellular approximations, staple to
topologists, in the context of commutative rings. In the second half of the 19th
century, David Hilbert discovered a close relationship between geometric objects
called varieties, and certain types of functions defined onthem. The latter form
algebraic gadgets called commutative rings. Over the last century, commutative
rings have arisen in combinatorics, topology, and other branches of mathematics.
They have also found applications in diverse fields like cryptography, pattern
recognition, and theoretical physics. This project seeks to apply techinques
from 'homological algebra' to study commutative rings. Topology has been a major
force in the development of homological algebra, although some of its roots can
be traced to geometry. Homological methods have proved remarkably efficacious in
tackling problems in commutative algebra; in turn, this has infused new ideas
into the subject.


