
* 0302043
* Abelian varieties and Neron models
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2003,07/10/2006
* Dino Lorenzini,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2007
* USD 105,000.00

DMS-0302043 Lorenzini, Dino J.

Abstract

Title: Abelian varieties and Neron models

One of the main problems in arithmetic geometry is the determination of the set
of rational solutions of a system of polynomial equations with rational
coefficients. One of the most successful techniques in the study of such a set
of solutions is to reduce the equations modulo a prime p and to study the set of
solutions of the latter system of equations. It turns out that, in many
situations, it is possible to describe a canonical way of reducing the equations
modulo p. When A/K is an abelian variety, this canonical reduction is called the
N\'eron model of A/K. This reduction is the object of study in Lorenzini's first
three research projects in this proposal. For instance, attached to any Neron
model is a finite group called the group of components. When the reduction is
purely additive, it is conjectured that there are only finitely many
possibilities for this group once the dimension g is fixed. Lorenzini's proposed
research will shed more light on this conjecture and on other special phenomena
that arise when the reduction modulo a small prime p is not `good.'

For centuries, human beings have been fascinated with solving Diophantine
equations, named after the Greek mathematician Diophantus who lived in the third
century AD. The field of Diophantine equations has taken added significance in
the modern world as it finds applications in a variety of areas, including
encryption. Since the time of the Greeks, mathematicians have developed
sophisticated tools to aid in solving equations. This investigator has developed
some such tools, and is currently working on further contributions to this
field.
