
* 0302456
* RUI: Graph Coloring Parameters: Their Interplay with Number Theory Problems and Applications to Broadcast Communications
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2003,01/24/2005
* Daphne Liu,CA,California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2007
* USD 135,000.00

We (the PI and collaborators) investigate two major topics. The first is about
fractional and circular coloring for distance graphs and their close connections
to two number theory problems, namely, the density of integral sequences with
missing differences and the parameter involved in the "lonely runner
conjecture". We apply these connections to enhance the study of both coloring
problems and problems in number theory. In addition, we investigate the circular
chromatic number for Kneser graphs, with an emphasis on the reduced Kneser
graphs. The second major topic is motivated by the channel assignment problem.
We study distance two labeling, by using circular distance two labeling as an
effective tool, and we extend the study to multi-level distance labeling (or
"radio labeling"), for broader practical applications.

Graph coloring problems have attracted researchers for more than a century. This
is partially due to fascinating connections among various coloring parameters
and connections to problems in other fields, and partially due to their abundant
practical applications. The PI and her collaborators investigate several graph
coloring problems including fractional coloring, circular coloring, and
colorings motivated by the channel assignment problem. Both fractional coloring
and circular coloring can be regarded as generalizations of the conventional
vertex coloring, and have been studied extensively in the past two decades.
Research on connections among these coloring parameters and problems in number
theory not only provides new insight into, but also advances the knowledge in
these fields. Likewise, research on variations of the channel assignment
provides models to practical applications, and broadens the current study on
various types of distance labeling (coloring). A major collaborator to the
project is Xuding Zhu, National Sun Yet-Sen University, Taiwan.


