
* 0303529
* Representations of infinite-dimensional Lie algebras and related topics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2003,05/30/2007
* Edward Frenkel,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2009
* USD 397,795.00

Principal Investigator: Edward Frenkel Proposal Number: 0303529 Institution:
University of California-Berkeley

Abstract: Representations of infinite-dimensional Lie algebras and related
topics

The principal investigator proposes to conduct research in the following areas:
local Langlands correspondence for affine Kac--Moody algebras; vertex algebras
and quantum groups; cohomology of the sheaves of differential operators on the
moduli stacks of bundles on curves. In the traditional local Langlands
correspondence one wishes to describe smooth representations of a reductive
group over a local non-archimedian field, such as the field of formal Laurent
power series over a finite field, in terms of the Galois group of the local
field and the Langlands dual group. When we replace the finite field by the
complex field, we are naturally led to loop groups and loop Lie algebras and the
central extensions of the latter, i.e., the affine Kac-Moody algebras. The
principal investigator wishes to describe the categories of Harish-Chandra
modules over an affine Kac-Moody algebra in terms of geometric data associated
to the dual group. More specifically, the principal investigator intends to
prove that the derived category of a certain category of modules over an affine
algebra is equivalent to the derived category of the category of quasicoherent
sheaves on the Springer fiber of a nilpotent element of the Langlands dual Lie
algebra. In addition, the principal investigator proposes the construction of an
extension of the W-algebra associated to an arbitrary simple Lie algebra to a
vertex algebra, which carries an action of the dual group by vertex algebra
automorphisms. He intends to prove that the category of representations of this
vertex algebra is equivalent to the category of representations of a quantum
group associated to the Langland dual Lie algebra. Finally, he intends to
compute the cohomology of the vacuum representation over an affine Kac-Moody
algebra and to relate it to the cohomology of the sheaf of differential
operators on the moduli stack of bundles on an algebraic curve.

A lot of effort has been made over the last thirty years in the development of
the Langlands Program which ties together seemingly unrelated structures in
number theory, automorphic representations and algebraic geometry. The principal
investigator expects that uncovering the Langlands duality patterns in the new
setting of affine Kac-Moody algebras and more general vertex algebra will
significantly enhance our understanding of the Langlands correspondence, which
to this day remains a mystery. In particular, the Langlands correspondence is
elevated in this case to the level of categories and therefore one can see a
much finer structure than was previously possible. It is hoped that the
interdisciplinary nature of this proposal will serve to advance discovery and
understanding of representation theory of affine Kac-Moody algebras and vertex
algebras by relating them to the Langlands Program, and at the same time will
stimulate the development of the Langlands Program by bringing in new insights
from geometry.
