
* 0400640
* Arithmetic and Representation Theory of Reductive Groups over Local and Global Fields
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2004,06/03/2004
* Gopal Prasad,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 135,000.00

Abstract for NSF-award number DMS-0400640 of Prasad

Abstract: Gopal Prasad's primary focus has been study of reductive Lie and
algebraic groups--mostly on problems which have either geometric or number
theoretic origin. He has been investigating questions about certain interesting
subgroups, for example, arithmetic subgroups or other large (Zariski-dense)
subgroups which arise in geometry or number theory. It would be important to
determine all normal subgroups of these groups. Over interesting fields like
local and global fields, there are conjectures of Kneser-Tits and Margulis-
Platonov which provide a description of normal subgroups. These conjectures have
been settled in the affirmative for many class of groups. However, there still
remain some very interesting groups for which these conjectures are open. Prasad
plans to study these groups. For arithmetic groups, the famous "congruence
subgroup problem" is the question whether any normal subgroup of finite index
contains a congruence subgroup. The most successful approach to settling this
problem has two parts: (1) Computation of the "metapectic kernel". (2)
Centrality of the congruence subgroup kernel. A very precise computation of the
metaplectic kernel for all groups has been done in Prasad's joint work with
M.S.Raghunathan and A.S.Rapinchuk. On the other hand, the centrality of the
congruence subgroup kernel is still unknown for some important class of groups.
Prasad's goal is to investigate these groups and also find a conceptually better
proof of the centrality in the known cases. He will continue his collaboration
with A.S. Rapinchuk on this project. Another topic on which Prasad will work on
is the representation theory of reductive p-adic groups. Prasad has been
interested in classification of irreducible admissible representations where his
goal is to obtain a classification in terms of theory of "types". A begining in
this direction, for general reductive groups, was made in his joint work with
Allen Moy--the geometric techniques which they introduced in representation
theory have turned out to be very useful. Prasad plans to continue his research
towards classification of admissible representations.

The set of symmetries of many geometric and number theoretic objects form a
group. For studying these geometric and number theoretic objects, it is
important to study their groups of symmetries. Prasad has been studying problems
related to these groups and their subgroups. These problems have number
theoretic or geometric origins and therefore their solution will have important
applications to these areas. Prasad proposes to work on the Kneser-Tits and
Margulis-Platonov problems which provide conjectural description of normal
subgroups; both the problems have been settled for a large class of groups but
some challenging cases remain open. Prasad also proposes to continue his work on
the famous congruence subgroup problem where he and his collaborators
Raghunathan and Rapinchuk have made many important contributions. In another
direction, Prasad proposes to work on the representation theory of reductive
p-adic groups. Representations of these groups arise naturally in various
contexts and their study is an important component of the Langlands program in
modern number theory. The geometric methods which Prasad and Allen Moy
introduced in the area have turned out to be very useful. Prasad proposes to
refine these methods to give a complete classification of all admissible
representations.
