
* 0400507
* Combinatorial Structures for Permutation Enumeration and Diagonal Harmonic Modules
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2004,07/26/2004
* Jeffrey Remmel,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2007
* USD 105,000.00

The PI plans to pursue research in three different areas. First the PI plans to
extend the work of Brenti, Remmel, Beck, Langley, Wagner and others who have
used certain homomorphisms from the ring of symmetric functions to a polynomial
ring F[x], for an appropriately chosen field F, to find new generating functions
for permutations statistics. Recently discovered methods by the PI and his
students have produced many new applications of these methods which allow one to
find generating functions for 321-avoiding permutations, alternating
permutations, and permutation enumeration statistics for various subgroups of
the wreath product of a finite group with the symmetric group. The PI plans to
systemize and extend such methods. Second, the PI plans to study the
combinatorics of various submodules of the ring of diagonal harmonics which is
intimately connected with the theory of Macdonald polynomials. The work of
Garsia, Haiman, Haglund, Loehr and the PI have lead to combinatorial
interpretations of the Hilbert series and the generating function for the
occurrences of the alternating representation in the character of such
submodules under the diagonal action in terms of counting various classes of
labeled Dyck paths according to certain statistics. More recently, Haiman,
Haglund, Loehr, Remmel and Ulyanov have given a conjectured combinatorial
interpretation of the coefficient of a monomial symmetric function in the
Frobenius series of the ring of diagonal harmonics. The goal of the PI's
research in this area is to prove some of these conjectures and to give a full
combinatorial interpretation of the Frobenius series of the ring of diagonal
harmonics. Finally the PI also plans to work on (p,q)-analogues of rook theory
and various extension of rook theory and the theory of enumeration of spanning
forests of various directed graphs studied by Egecioglu, Williamson and the PI.

This project is concerned with various problems which arise in the study of
algebraic combinatorics. In particular, the goal of this project is to increase
our understanding of how various classical combinatorial structures such as
permutations, lattice paths, spanning trees and placements of non-attaching
rooks on generalized chess boards play a fundamental role in helping us
understand certain algebraic structures. Conversely, in algebraic combinatorics,
one wants to understand how various algebraic structures can give new insights
into the theory of these classical combinatorial structures. The three main
areas of research proposed in this project, namely the theory of permutation
enumeration, the theory of the ring of diagaonal harmonics and rook theory are
all active areas of research were there is a beautiful interplay between
algebraic and combinatorial methods.
