
* 0400678
* Collaborative Research: Local Newforms for GSp(4)
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2004,07/30/2004
* Ralf Schmidt,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 10/31/2004
* USD 102,345.00

This research is about a theory of new- and oldforms for irreducible admissible
representations of the algebraic group PGSp(4,F), for F a nonarchimedean local
field of characteristic zero. The first objective of this research is to prove
the main conjecture, supported by extensive evidence, which asserts that a
generic representation admits a nonzero vector fixed by a paramodular group of
some level; that at the minimal level such a vector is unique up to nonzero
scalars; and that at the minimal level a suitable normalization of such a
vector, called a newform, computes the L-factor of the representation. The
second objective is to prove a precise conjecture about the structure of the
spaces of oldforms in a generic representation, i.e., the spaces of vectors
fixed by paramodular groups of level exceeding the minimal level. The third, and
final, objective is to investigate whether a version of the main conjecture
holds for nongeneric representations at the level of L- or A-packets.

Briefly summarized, number theory is the part of mathematics concerned with the
study of integral solutions to algebraic equations. Though the problems of
number theory often can be simply stated, solutions may require extensive
theoretical development and input from other parts of mathematics. Broadly
characterized, this research seeks to tie together, in a useful and new way, two
parts of number theory. The first part, the theory of automorphic
representations, allows the formulation of comprehensive conjectures and proofs;
however, automorphic representations are abstract. The second part, the theory
of Siegel modular forms, is important for examples and applications; on the
other hand, Siegel modular forms can hide important general phenomena. By
developing the theory of local new- and oldforms for PGSp(4) this research will
make it easier to systematically and conceptually construct Siegel modular forms
from automorphic representations, and thus may lead to work that draws on the
strengths of both theories. This research crosses several subdisciplines of
mathematics, and to facilitate this and other work this project will create a
freely accessible database on the World Wide Web about the existing literature
on GSp(4).


