
* 0401468
* Division Algebras and Field Invariants
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2004,04/08/2008
* David Saltman,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2009
* USD 255,000.00

NSF proposal: ``Division algebras and field invariants'' P.I.: David J. Saltman

Fractions of integers, which we all learned about in the early grades, form a
system called a ``field''. But this field is not large enough, since in this so
called ``rational'' field you cannot take the square root of 2, or write down
pi. It has become, therefore, a truism that we need to study all fields. But
even the study of all fields is not encompassing enough, because in physics, or
when using matrices, one finds one must study objects which are field-like, but
which are noncommutative, meaning A times B might not equal B times A. Such
objects are called division algebras. The question, in the largest sense, that
this grant considers is the classification of all division algebras in terms of
the better understood fields, with particular reference to the ``center'' of the
division algebra, which is inside the division algebra and is a field. Coupled
with the center is the ``degree'' of a division algebra, which is a positive
integer that measures how much bigger the division algebras is as compared to
its center. Division algebras are an old subject, with a great deal of
information known when the center is one dimensional. For example when the
center is close to the rational field, any division algebra is known to be so
called ``cyclic'', which means there is a very good description in terms of
fields. The focus of this proposal is the study of division algebras whose
centers have dimension 2. For example, a major focus is the case where the
center comes from a curve over a p-adic field, a very special case of a 2
dimensional field. In this case, not all division algebras are cyclic, but the
proposers hopes to use algebraic geometry to show that when the division algebra
has degree a prime integer, and the center comes from a p-adic curve, then
cyclicity does hold.

Perhaps the most important tool in studying division algebras is Galois
cohomology, because the set of all division algebras with fixed center F form a
group isomorphic to the second Galois cohomology group with unit coefficients.
Since second cohomology can be hard to compute, often one attacks this group by
using ramification. In more detail, any discrete valuation defines a map to a
first cohomology group, and by using all possible discrete valuations one hopes
to capture the division algebras. In special cases this is known to work, for
example for rational field or the fields arising from p-adic curves. In both
cases, one shows, or hopes to show, cyclicity by showing there is a cyclic
Galois extension which splits all the ramification of the division algebra. This
leads to a more fundamental question. If D is a division algebra of prime
degree, is there always a cyclic field extension, of the same degree, which at
least splits all the ramification?
