
* 0401239
* Graph Homomorphisms, Stochastic Networks, Discrete Mass Transport
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2004,05/27/2004
* Prasad Tetali,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2008
* USD 148,386.00

This proposal has three components. The first describes recent collaboration
with Kavita Ramanan (Carnegie-Mellon University) and David Galvin (postdoc,
Microsoft) on Gibbs measures, with applications to stochastic networks.
Motivation from these and related networks raises new and qualitatively
different questions concerning regions of phase uniqueness and coexistence,
which are being investigated. The second component describes ongoing research
with Sergey Bobkov (University of Minnesota) on modified versions of logarithmic
Sobolev inequalities and applications to convergence to stationarity of finite
Markov chains. This work is carried over to more recent research activity with
graduate student, Marcus Sammer and colleague, Wilfrid Gangbo on discrete
transportation problems. In particular, the final component is on developing
discrete calculus to study aspects of mass transport, Ricci curvature, and
understanding connections between various relavant inequalities -- the
transportation inequality, Talagrand's inequality, the entropy inequality and
logarithmic Sobolev type inequalities. In continuous settings (such as on R^n or
on Riemannian manifolds), there are intimate connections between the above-
mentioned 2nd and 3rd topics; however these are yet to be established to
satisfaction in the discrete settings of finite metric measure spaces. Due to
the richness in applications, we find development of such an analogous theory
worthwhile and fruitful.

The proposal intends to explore the behavior and performance of
telecommunication (and other data) networks under recently-suggested models of
multicasting and unicasting on large grid-like structures. Preliminary
investigations of the PI and collaborators demonstrate that the introduction of
unicast calls brings in a certain symmetry breaking into the system, and lets
the system carry a higher load of multicast calls before the system succumbs to
call-blocking due to the influence of what might be imposed on the boundary of
the large (grid-like) region. Related questions address understanding the spread
of information (genetic or otherwise) and the spread of disease in tree-like and
grid-like environment. These and other research objectives outlined in this
proposal are of interest to researchers in analysis, combinatorics, probability,
information theory, statistical physics and the theory of computing. One of the
main motivations for the PI comes from computational and applied problems of
combinatorics and discrete probability. An overarching theme of the proposal is
also to explore in depth the role of information theoretic techniques in
discrete probability and computing. The PI fully hopes his extended
collaboration with his coauthors in these disparate research topics contributes
to the cross-fertilization of mathematical ideas, modeling, and techniques,
while promoting the educational component of research.
