
* 0401098
* RUI - Combinatorial Methods in Representation Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2004,04/29/2004
* Thomas Halverson,MN,Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2007
* USD 122,278.00

The goal of this project is to use combinatorial methods to solve problems in
the field of matrix representations of groups and algebras, and, conversely, to
use representation theory to produce new results in enumerative combinatorics. A
main focus of each project is to construct and understand irreducible
representations and characters. The algebraic structures under investigation
include symmetric groups and Weyl groups, the finite general linear group and
other finite Chevalley groups, partition algebras, and Hecke algebras. These
structures often come as pairs acting on vector spaces and commuting with each
other; for example the symmetric group and the partition algebra commute with
each other on tensor space and a Chevalley group and its Hecke algebra commute
on a flag variety. This duality allows us to bring known information from one of
the algebraic structures to bear on the study of its partner. The combinatorial
structures used here include symmetric functions, partitions, tableaux, integer
matrices, and graphs. This project will engage undergraduate students in all
aspects of the research. Algebraic combinatorics is an ideal way to introduce
young mathematicians and scientists to research, because it uses accessible
combinatorial objects, which can be created, analyzed, and manipulated by
students who do not have of a large amount of advanced training. At the same
time, these objects enhance the fundamental understanding of important
constructs from algebra, geometry, and topology.

The algebraic objects under investigation in this project represent various
kinds of symmetry. These include symmetries of physical objects --- such as
molecules, crystals, knots, or tensegrities --- and symmetries of complicated
systems, such as physical models of energy transfer, large sets of ranked data,
or symmetry in the organization of digital image data. Representation theory
``represents" these symmetries using matrices (rectangular arrays of numbers ).
In a given problem, there are usually a large number of these matrices and they
also are usually large in dimension (size). A major goal of combinatorial
representation theory is to find ways to simultaneously decompose these large
matrices into their constituent building blocks and then to analyze the building
blocks using concrete structures which can be manipulated by hand and by
computer. This is analogous to understanding a complicated molecule by
decomposing it into the various atoms that make it up and then carefully
analyzing those atoms. Since the early 20th century, representation theory has
held a prominent role in theoretical mathematics. Furthermore, it has had an
enormous impact on physical chemistry, particle physics, and knot theory. In
recent years, the areas of application of representation theory have grown to
include data analysis, digital image processing, coding theory, and engineering.


