
* 0402044
* Problems in Automorphic Forms, Arithmetic and Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2004,06/08/2006
* Dinakar Ramakrishnan,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 210,000.00

Abstract for award DMS-0402044 of Ramakrishnan

The general theme of this proposal is the study of the ubiquitous cusp forms in
various contexts. The four specific problems proposed deal with the arithmetic,
analytic, geometric and group theoretic aspects of these fundamental objects. To
elaborate, the first problem asks if certain four dimensional Galois
representations attached to cusp forms are irreducible, and such results are
unknown in dimensions bigger than 3. The second problem deals with obtaining
*exact* averages of twisted L-values of holomorphic cusp forms, and the ensuing
implications for class numbers and a diophantine question. The third problem
suggests that in special but pervasive instances (like for the Delta function),
there should be Calabi-Yau varieties which geometrically realize the associated
motives and hence the L-functions, which encode the statistical properties of
Frobenius traces. The fourth problem is concerned with the *-selfdual
representations of reductive groups G admitting involutions *, and asks for a
study of a certain sign attached to cusp forms on G.

This project will investigate certain mysterious and deep relations Between
automorphic functions, which are continuous and pulchritudinous, and discrete
objects like the integers and their building blocks, namely the prime numbers,
which exhibit haunting statistical properties. Automorphic functions encode
enchanting symmetries occurring in nature like the waveforms on a disk. The
discrete tones therein have alluring arithmetical meanings. Often mathematicians
and physicists build generating functions out of discrete collections of
numbers, and the pressing problem is to know if these functions admit hidden
symmetries, that is, if they are describing the tones of automorphic functions.
If they do, then miraculous benefits emerge. Exploiting them is a worthy
endeavor, and there are many gold mines yet to be discovered.




