
* 0456445
* Double Affine Hecke Algebras
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Ivan Cherednik,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2009
* USD 144,999.00

Double Affine Hecke Algebras Ivan Cherednik

The aim of the project is to study double affine Hecke algebras (DAHA) and their
representations, especially those with applications in harmonic analysis. The
focus is the structure of the polynomial representation of DAHA, its
decomposition and special quotients for generic q, at roots of unity and for
unimodular q. The main examples are finite dimensional quotients of the
polynomial representation generalizing the Verlinde algebras from conformal
field theory; infinite dimensional and non-semisimple quotients are a natural
next step. Deep connections to the classical theory of affine Hecke algebras,
the theory of Kac-Moody algebras, and modern mathematical physics are expected.

Lie groups and Lie algebras formalize the concept of symmetry in the theory of
special functions, physics, geometry, and combinatorics. In a similar way, DAHA
are candidates for a formalization of the notion of the Fourier transform. In
the simplest one-dimensional case, they are directly related to the celebrated
sl(2). There are indications that they serve the multidimensional theory of
Fourier transform better than Lie and Kac-Moody algebras. DAHA are also a source
of new unitary infinite dimensional theories, that, presumably, will find
fundamental applications in mathematics and physics, the theory of special
functions and combinatorics. There are other important directions of the DAHA
theory, mainly of algebraic nature, but unitary representaions and Fourier
analysis remain of high priority.
