
* 0456615
* Topics in analytic number theory and applications
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2005,06/07/2005
* Alexandru Zaharescu,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2008
* USD 104,991.00

This proposal comprises three major projects and several additional smaller
projects. The first of the three main projects concerns the approximation of
real numbers by rationals, a classical subject of research in number theory.
Over the past few decades many authors have applied ad hoc methods to obtain
highly nontrivial bounds for the approximation by rationals whose denominators
belong to particular types of sequences, such as the sequence of prime numbers,
or the sequence of squares. The proposer believes that results of this type
should hold in a much more general context, and he hopes to prove a universal
result for general sequences that is of nearly the same quality as the results
that have been obtained in the literature for special sequences. The second
project concerns the distribution of zeros of L-functions, a vast area of
research motivated by the Riemann Hypothesis and its generalizations. In
particular, the so-called pair-correlation for the sequence of such zeros has
received much attention in recent years because of surprising connections with
phenomena arising in quantum chaos and the theory of random matrices. The
proposer plans to investigate a new type of pair correlation, in which a second
sequence is introduced, in the hope of obtaining new results by exploiting the
added flexibility provided by the second sequence. The third project is to apply
methods and tools from number theory to certain problems in mathematical
physics, in particular, the so-called Lorentz gas and the Sinai billiard
problem.

This project falls in the area of number theory, one of the oldest subjects of
mathematics which in recent years has received renewed interest due to newly
found applications (e.g., to cryptography and coding theory), unexpected
connections with physics (such as the theory of quantum chaos and statistical
mechanics), and major unsolved problems (such as the Riemann Hypothesis, one of
the seven "million dollar" problems in mathematics). The proposed research is
concerned with several problems that fall at the interface of number theory and
mathematical physics and build upon ongoing work by the proposer and his
collaborators. It is hoped that deploying the powerful methods and tools of
number theory to these problems will lead toinsights and results that
specialists have not been able to obtainand which will be of interest to a broad
range of researchers, both in mathematics and in physics.


