
* 0457481
* Variation of Selmer Groups of Elliptic Curves
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2005,04/09/2007
* Karl Rubin,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2010
* USD 265,200.00

Elliptic curves are increasingly important not only in number theory and
arithmetic algebraic geometry, but also in cryptography and related
applications. Some of the most interesting and important open questions about
elliptic curves are the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture and other questions
about ranks, Selmer groups, and L-functions. In this project the investigator
and his colleagues plan to study how the rank of an elliptic curve varies in
certain families of number fields, especially the subfields of Iwasawa towers
and the family of all quadratic fields. The investigation will make use of many
different techniques, including algebraic, p-adic, and analytic tools.

Elliptic curves play a central role in many parts of mathematics including its
most applied areas. For example, elliptic curves are used in algorithms to
encrypt data for transmission, and for efficient digital signatures. In its most
basic form, an elliptic curve is a special kind of polynomial equation in two
variables. Historically number theorists are interested in finding solutions of
these equations in which the variables take values which are either whole
numbers, or fractions. The rank of an elliptic curve is a basic invariant which
measures the size of the set of solutions. The investigator and his coworkers
study ranks of elliptic curves and their interrelations with other mathematical
objects and concepts. These questions are related to the cryptographic
applications of elliptic curves, which come about by considering solutions in
which the variables take values in finite fields.
