
* 0457022
* Regular Algebras
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2005,08/03/2009
* Michaela Vancliff,TX,University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Zongzhu Lin
* 07/31/2010
* USD 102,000.00

This award supports the research of Michaela Vancliff to work in non-commutative
algebra, with special emphasis on problems arising from the theory of regular
algebras and non-commutative algebraic geometry. She is interested in the
graded-module category viewed as a geometric space, with certain graded modules
playing the role of geometric objects. The linear geometric modules (point
modules, line modules, etc) are parametrized by so-called linear schemes.
Vancliff plans to study how the structure and role of higher-dimensional linear
schemes generalize the structure and role of point schemes. She intends to
produce algebro-geometric techniques that allow the easy construction of regular
algebras of global dimension four that have finitely many points and a one-
parameter family of line modules; such techniques would allow researchers in the
field to easily create examples on which to test their conjectures. An
underlying theme of her research is to classify the line schemes that arise for
"generic" quadratic regular algebras of global dimension four. Vancliff is also
interested in connections between this type of geometry and that of various
Poisson-geometric structures.

Systems of polynomial-style equations and their solutions play a critical role
in almost every scientific field, such as statistical mechanics, elementary-
particle physics, quantum mechanics, robotics, crystallography, networking, etc.
Often, the solutions cannot be found by experimentation, and often they are not
numbers but are functions (e.g., differential operators or matrices), and so, in
general, they do not commute. The science of seeking methods that find all
solutions to any system of polynomial-style equations in non-commuting variables
is called non-commutative algebra. To find the solutions, the main idea is as
follows. One associates to such a system of equations a certain algebra; one
that encodes all the properties of the original equations. Associated to this
algebra are modules, and these encode all the properties of the original
solutions. Hence, in order to find all the solutions, one should find all the
modules for the associated algebra. In many of the applications, the algebras
that arise in this way tend to share certain properties; they are called regular
algebras and are the main focus of Vancliff's projects. One of the goals of non-
commutative algebraic geometry, the subfield in which Vancliff works, is to use
geometric techniques to find certain modules (point modules, line modules, etc)
of the regular algebra, and then to use those modules to find the modules giving
the solutions to the original system of equations. Vancliff's underlying goal is
to improve on these geometric techniques and to understand better how they
relate to the structure of the category of modules.


