
* 0500202
* L-functions and equations
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/01/2005,09/08/2006
* Andrew Wiles,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2010
* USD 419,736.00

The first main theme of the proposal is the study of points on curves of genus
1, more particularly points which are defined over solvable extensions of the
ground field. This is joint work with Ciperiani and aims to prove that for genus
1 curves defined over a totally real number field there are always points
defined over a solvable extension of the base field. In the first instance we
are aiming to prove the existence of such points while assuming that there exist
points over all p-adic fields, but this condition should be easy to remove. We
note that we do not wish to assume anything about the rank of the Jacobian of
the curve. The second theme of the proposal is to continue a study of the
problem of non-solvable base change. For the moment the intent is to restrict
attention to the case of holomorphic forms on GL(2).

There are two main problems being investigated in this project. The first
problem is to try to extend the ideas used in the nineteenth century to
understand equations. For equations of one variable it was shown by Abel and
Galois that those of degree five or more do not have easy general formulas like
the ones for quadratic equations. The reason for this was that the solutions to
equations of degree four or less always live in what are called solvable
extensions i.e. those extensions obtained by successively extracting square
roots, cube roots etc. Surprisingly it is not known whether the same is true for
equations with more than one variable. The first aim of this project is to show
that many of the simpler kinds of equations in two variables do in fact have
these simple kinds of solutions. Many constructions in number theory at the
moment require the assumption that the equations involved do have such simple
solutions. The second part of the project is an attempt to extend a particular
and very important one of these constructions to the situation where the
equations involved do not have any simple solutions.
