
* 0500638
* Algebraic and topological combinatorics of posets
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2005,06/01/2005
* Patricia Hersh,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2009
* USD 101,595.00

The investigator will develop and apply combinatorial methods for studying the
topological structure of simplicial complexes and cell complexes arising in
combinatorics and related fields. A major focus is to deal with complexes of
more general topological type than many of the prevalent methods within
combinatorics were designed to handle, e.g. in new techniques for proving
connectivity lower bounds. The investigator will continue her ongoing effort to
develop techniques for constructing discrete Morse functions with few critical
cells, with emphasis on order complexes of partially ordered sets and on related
free resolutions (both for monomial ideals, and also for resolving a residue
field over a monomial or toric ring). Substantial improvement, at least for
order complexes, will likely require better understanding of the very rich
structure governing gradient paths between critical cells. In related work, she
also plans to study Poincare' series for free resolutions over monomial and
toric rings, for instance trying to better understand for toric rings which such
Poincare' series will be rational. She also intends to study modular elements in
(non-geometric) lattices and to try to generalize lexicographic shellability to
skeleta of complexes, motivated again by potential applications to constructing
small free resolutions and also to bounding graph chromatic number (via better
understanding of characteristic polynomial).

Topological combinatorics, and in particular connectivity lower bounds, have in
the past been used to determine and verify complexity theory lower bounds on the
running time for certain types of algorithms, to deduce results in commutative
algebra about relations among polynomials via the theory of free resolutions,
and also to give lower bounds on the number of colors needed to color the
vertices of a graph in such a way that no two vertices sharing an edge are the
same color. The investigator is interested in further developing combinatorial
techniques (such as a recently introduced discrete version of Morse theory) for
studying topological structure, letting potential applications guide the way.
Morse theory is a classical theory which analyzes the topological structure of
an object by viewing the object progressively from bottom to top, keeping track
of essential data at those moments in time where fundamental changes in
structure take place; recently Robin Forman introduced a discrete version of
this seemingly inherently continuous notion. One of the investigator's major
focuses is to develop to practical machinery for making this theoretically very
powerful tool convenient to use on real (and in many cases very complex)
examples.
