
* 0500751
* Crystals, level zero representations and the Littelmann path model
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2005,08/10/2005
* Vyjayanthi Chari,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2009
* USD 125,000.00

The project addresses questions in the representation theory of affine Lie
algebras and their quantum analogs. The problems to be studied are motivated by
applications to mathematical physics and combinatorics. One of the goals of the
project is to make a rigorous connection between combinatorial results on
crystals and the corresponding results on representations of the affine Lie
algebra. This involves studying the category of finite dimensional
representations of the affine algebra, the closely related current algebra and
the quantum analogs of these algebras for generic values of the quantum
parameter. This category of representations is not semisimple and exhibits
features similar to modular representation theory. This is an important
motivation for the study of Weyl modules and of extensions between irreducible
representations of these algebras undertaken by the project. The study of Weyl
modules and the conjecture on their dimension made by Chari and Pressley is
related to the conjectures of Feigin and Loktev on the fusion product of finite
dimensional irreducible representations of a simple Lie algebra coming from
their study on conformal field theory . It is expected that the results on the
Weyl modules and their quotients the Kirrillov/Reshetikhin modules will provide
further insight into and also lead to generalizations of the conjectures and
constructions of Feigin and Loktev. An important open problem is to determine a
character formula for the irreducible finite dimensional representations of the
quantum affine algebras analogous to the Weyl character formula. A first step is
to study this problem for the Kirrillov/Reshetikhin modules and the project
pursues this by seeing if a conjecture of Dorey made in his study of affine Toda
field theories is correct for these modules.

The representation theory of affine Lie algebras and the quantum algebras is an
area where there is intense research activity. It has had significant impact on
other branches of mathematics such as number theory, knot theory, combinatorics
to name a few. It has had fruitful interaction with mathematical physics, in
affine Toda field theories, and in solvable models in statistical mechanics
where the tensor product of representations of affine algebras conjecturally
describes the interactions or fusing of particles. The PI's study should confirm
some of these theories and also have applications in the representation theory
of affine Lie algebras of positive level and vertex algebra constructions of
such representations.
