
* 0500557
* Representation Theoretical Methods in the Theory of Special Functions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2005,07/30/2007
* Adriano Garsia,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2008
* USD 153,633.00

This project is in two separate major research areas. The general Theory of
m-Quasi-invariants and the Theory of Macdonald Polynomials. m-Quasi-invariants
originally arose in the study of particle dynamics but have emerged as a truly
fascinating Algebraic Combinatorial subject. For each Coxeter Group G there is
an associated one parameter family of subspaces which interpolates between the
ordinary polynomial ring and the ring of G-invariants. The m-Quasi-Invariants of
$G$ are simply polynomials which, upon the action of the difference operator
corresponding to a reflecting hyperplane of G, they produce a factor that is
divisible by the equation of the reflecting hyperplane raised to the power 2m+1.
This theory has been extensively developped, from the algebraic point of view,
in fundamental papers by Feigin-Veselov, and Felder-Veselov, and culminated in
certain conjectures which were proved by Etingov-Ginsburg in 2002. Jointly with
N. Wallach the PI discovered that several constructs associated to $m$-quasi-
invariants, such as the associated Baker-Achieser function, encode some truly
remarkable combinatorial properties of the corresponding Coxeter group. The
present project is to explore the theory from the combinatorial point of view.
The early successes obtained in the study of the simplest cases of the dihedral
groups strongly suggest that such a study should be conducive to significant
discoveries in various areas of Mathematics ranging from Combinatorics,
Representation Theory and the Theory of special functions.

Since its 1988 discovery, the Macdonald symmetric function basis has
progressively emerged as a central element in the connection between
Representation Theory and the Theory of Symmetric Functions. After more than a
decade of research in the Theory of Macdonald polynomials, the PI, M. Haiman and
collaborators have been led to a variety of conjectures in Representation
Theory, Algebraic Geometry, Combinatorics and Symmetric Function Theory. Efforts
in proving these conjectures have yielded fundamental facts and methods in each
of these areas. Recently J. Haglund discovered and in collaboration with Haiman
and Loehr proved a remarkable purely combinatorial formula for a suitably
modified family of Macdonald polynomials. This discovery opens up a variety of
research problems involving some of the conjectures which up to quite recently
appeared inaccesible. The Pi plans to dedidcate a substantial portion of the
projected research effort in this area in collaboration with his PhD students.

The proposed work, involves extensive computer explorations and transfer of
information across several mathematical boundaries, from Representation Theory
to the Theory Special Functions and then to Combinatorics. These transfers
provide an invaluable vehicle of discovery, since results and mechanisms which
may be quite obvious in one of these areas often translate in highly non trivial
and unexpected facts in one of the other areas. It should be mentioned that
symbolic manipulation software such as MAPLE and MATHEMATICA combined with the
present generation of fast processors have literally transformed many branches
of mathematics into experimental sciences. Moreover computer data can be
successfully used not only in the discovery of results but also in the
construction of proof. The two basic projects that are the focus of the planned
research are also highly suitable for the training of young researchers and the
opportunity that it provides them to discover and experience the manner in which
research can be carried out in the 21st century. Thus all the research problems
created by this project are invariably brought in the the class room to be
shared with students and collaborators.


