
* 0500616
* Asymptotic Enumeration of Tilings of Lattice Regions With Holes: A Finer Analysis Under Various Boundary Conditions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2005,04/03/2007
* Mihai Ciucu,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 106,122.00

This proposal is concerned with the asymptotic enumeration of tilings of lattice
regions with holes. More specifically, using work of Fisher and Stephenson as
its starting point, it studies the interaction of the holes when all the
leftover portion is tiled, via a certain averaging over all such possible
tilings, called the joint correlation of the holes. In earlier work, the
proposer proved that the case of triangular holes on the triangular lattice is
governed, for large separations between the holes, by a law closely resembling
the superposition principle of electrostatics, where holes correspond to charges
of magnitude equal to the difference between the number of unit triangles of
each orientation they enclose. In the current project, the proposer presents a
program of research problems that extend his previous work in some new,
interrelated directions. One of these problems concerns generalizing the
superposition principle for correlation to the case when the holes can be
arbitrary (not necessarily connected) unions of lattice triangles of side two.
Another problem considers a finer analysis of the correlation, namely the study
of its variation under small displacements of individual holes. The proposer
conjectures that these finer changes are also governed by a superposition
principle, analogous to the superposition principle for the electric field in
electrostatics. A third problem is concerned with studying boundary effects.
Besides the core research program outlined above, the proposer also intends to
study the symmetry classes of perfect matchings of a certain family of graphs on
the lattice determined by the tiling of the plane by squares, regular hexagons
and regular dodecagons, and determine to what degree a parallel he found between
the perfect matchings of these graphs and the intensively studied plane
partitions extends when considering the action of symmetry groups.

This research is in the general area of Combinatorics. One of the goals of
Combinatorics is to find efficient methods of studying how discrete collections
of objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely
important to modern communications. For example, the design of large networks,
such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in
computer science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of
combinatorial research. The specific problems in this project are instances of
the dimer model of statistical physics. A basic illustration of this is the
real-world process (relevant to the study of of lubricants) of adsorption of a
liquid, consisting of two-atom molecules---the dimers in the model---along the
surface of a crystal, whose fixed atoms form a lattice pattern, with any two
neighboring positions capable of holding one molecule, and any given crystal
atom being involved in the adsorption of at most one molecule. The main issue in
this setting is the asymptotic behavior of the quantities that are studied
(speciffically, the number of different ways the surface of the crystal can be
covered by molecules). In some of the instances we encounter, the usually more
difficult problem of determining quantities exactly turns out to allow progress
in the asymptotic study.
