
* 0500823
* Commutative Algebraic Aspects of Birational Algebraic Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2005,06/11/2009
* Karen Smith,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2011
* USD 219,002.00

This project focus on problems at the interface of commutative algebra and
algebraic geometry. Specifically, several commutatative algebraic approaches to
problems in higher dimensional birational algebraic geometry are proposed. These
include building on the PI's prior work on ideal cores to prove a conjecture of
Kawamata's on the existence of a global section for any ample line bundle on a
smooth projective variety which is adjoint to an ample bundle. It also includes
the development of the theory of multiplier ideals in the singular setting, and
a study of the commutative algebraic properties of jet schemes, especially for
combinatorially rich cases such as monomial schemes.

The work proposed here is part of the broader landscape of research in "pure"
algebraic geometry and commutative algebra, the fields that study the geometric
objects (called algebraic varieties) that can be described by polynomial
equations. These fields provide the underpinnings of several important areas of
applications of mathematics to problems in government and industry. Examples
include error-correcting codes based on algebraic varieties, and computer-aided
design (CAD) which "draws" geometric objects on the computer screen by plotting
pieces of algebraic varieties. While this project does not address specific
current problems in applications, it does contribute to the healthy thriving
infrastructure of the subject necessary to support applications in the future.
Furthermore, it is expected that several of trainees in this project will
continue later with more applied aspects of the subject by moving to positions
in industry and government (such as the National Security Agency).


