
* 0500873
* Hecke Algebras and Complex Reflection Groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/15/2005,08/09/2005
* Pramod Achar,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2009
* USD 98,874.00

A complex reflection group is a finite group of transformations of a complex
vector space that is generated by reflections (i.e., finite-order
transformations that fix some hyperplane pointwise). Recent work by a number of
people has revealed surprising parallels between these groups and real
reflection groups, or even Weyl groups: specifically, they give rise to a number
of representation theoretic objects, such as Hecke algebras and generic degrees,
even though there is no algebraic group in the background whose representation
theory is being described. Broue and others have conjectured the existence of
mysterious, unknown objects called "spetses" as the source of these phenomena.
The aim of this project is to extend this view: one specific goal is to
construct an analogue of the Springer correspondence for complex reflection
groups. Our techniques ought to yield uniform accounts of certain structures
coming from Hecke algebras of complex reflection groups, and perhaps point the
way to developing a general framework in which to study these groups, in the
spirit of Coxeter theory.

A square matrix is called a reflection matrix if (a) some power of it is the
identity matrix, and (b) all but one of its eigenvalues is 1. A reflection group
is a finite group of matrices in which every element can be written as a product
of reflection matrices that are also in the group. Reflection groups of real-
valued matrices, first studied in depth by Coxeter in the 1930's, have long
played a vital role in many areas of mathematics: perhaps most importantly, the
structure and representations of a large class of Lie groups are closely
governed by certain real reflection groups (the so-called Weyl groups).
Reflection groups of complex-valued matrices, in contrast, are much less well-
studied, but recent work by a number of people has shown that they exhibit a
number of disparate and surprising parallels with real reflection groups, or
even with Weyl groups. In this project, we propose to further develop the
analogy with real reflection groups, specifically by studying the structure of
certain related objects called Hecke algebras. In the process, we hope the point
the way to a uniform explanation for these phenomena, and perhaps to a structure
theory for the complex reflection groups themselves.
