
* 0509607
* Midwest Algebra, Geometry and their Interactions Conference; Notre Dame, IN; October 8-11, 2005
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2005,02/15/2005
* Claudia Polini,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2007
* USD 20,000.00

The investigators are organizing the Midwest Algebra, Geometry and their
Interactions Conference (MAGIC05) at the University of Notre Dame during the
period October 8-11, 2005. The meeting will highlight and showcase the recent
work done in the areas of Algebraic Geometry and Commutative Algebra but it will
also focus on their applications in and interactions with neighboring fields.
Particular attention will be paid to bringing together groups, namely geometers,
algebraists and applied mathematicians, who normally do not interact in
conferences, and in this way generate new collaborations.

The conference will be organized in a series of plenary lectures and some
shorter talks organized in parallel sessions. Among the topics that will be
discussed by top experts at the conference, at a level accessible to an audience
of graduate studens, we list: algebraic combinatorics, cryptography and coding
theory, liaison theory, Hilbert functions, Hilbert schemes, homological methods,
numerical methods, Rees algebras, resolutions of singularities, singularity
theory, tight closure, and vector bundles.

We will strive to provide an opportunity for graduate students and researchers
in postdoctoral positions to be exposed to the best recent work in these areas,
and to become acquainted with the top experts as well as with their peers.

We remark that in order to promote Mathematics among the diverse population of
Notre Dame students as well as among the non-academic community, the conference
will be enhanced by a public lecture on the importance and ubiquity of
Mathematics in everyday life. The lecture will be delivered by Professor Bernd
Sturmfels.
