
* 0527945
* Integers Conference 2005
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2005,06/24/2005
* Bruce Landman,GA,University of West Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2006
* USD 6,000.00

The University of West Georgia (formerly known as the State University of West
Georgia) will be host to the Integers Conference 2005, a conference in the areas
of combinatorics and number theory. The conference will follow the style of the
successful "Integers Conference 2003," also held at the University of West
Georgia. The Conference will also honor Professor Ronald Graham, on the occasion
of his seventieth birthday. The 2005 conference will be somewhat larger than
that of 2003; in particular, it will cover four days rather than three. The
conference will attempt to serve as a catalyst for significant collaborative
projects among mathematicians and computer scientists representing the areas of
additive number theory, multiplicative number theory, probabilistic number
theory, combinatorics, combinatorial optimization, game theory, and Ramsey
theory. There will be four plenary speakers: Doron Zeilberger, Joszef Solymosi,
Daniel Goldston, and Neil Hindman. There will also be approximately sixty
20-minute invited talks.

The conference will gather mathematicians, graduate students, undergraduate
students, and others interested in combinatorics or number theory. It will
include student research talks, and promote interaction among research
mathematicians representing the spectrum of "career stages," from the talented
undergraduate to the internationally distinguished researcher. Various areas of
expertise will be represented from the general area of discrete mathematics.
Leading experts will present their latest work, and there will be much
collaboration among participants. The research areas have many applications,
including cryptography, genetics, neural networks, mathematical biology, radio
frequency assignment for mobile telecommunications, coding theory, sequences for
communications applications, and interconnection networks.
