
* 0536962
* Representation Theory and Double Affine Hecke Algebras
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2005,05/08/2008
* Bogdan Ion,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2009
* USD 86,034.00

he PI intends to undertake a combinatorial study of structures arising from
affine algebras with applications to representation theory, mathematical physics
and q-series. The primary combinatorial objects are crystal graphs on the one
hand and rigged configurations on the other hand. Crystal bases provide a
combinatorial description of the deep theory of crystal bases of modules over
quantized universal enveloping algebras developed by Kashiwara and Lusztig: As
the quantum parameter q tends to zero, these bases are described precisely by
the crystal graphs encoding nearly all the essential algebraic data. Rigged
configurations on the other hand encode the particle structure of the underlying
physical model and lead to fermionic formulas. It is proposed to study the
crystal structure on rigged configurations and to tackle the long-standing
problem of a combinatorial expression for the fusion coefficients. These studies
will have applications to q-series, in particular the Bailey lemma, the X=M
conjecture, and the theory of symmetric functions.

There are several ways of solving certain models in statistical mechanics,
namely via the corner-transfer-matrix method and the Bethe Ansatz. Even though
the two methods lead to very different looking answers, they describe the same
solutions. From the mathematical perspective this suggest that there exists a
one-to-one map between the two indexing sets that describe the solution. The
elements in the index set corresponding to the corner-transfer-matrix method are
called crystal bases. The elements in the index set corresponding to the Bethe
Ansatz are called rigged configurations. The PI proposes to study the map
between the two indexing sets, its properties and generalizations in detail.
This will have applications in many diverse areas of mathematics and physics,
such as representation theory, combinatorics, and statistical mechanics.
