
* 0555880
* Algebraic Combinatorics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Combinatorics
* 07/01/2006,05/05/2010
* Sergey Fomin,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2011
* USD 420,814.00

The project focuses on the study of combinatorial structures arising in algebra
and geometry, with an emphasis on the theory and applications of cluster
algebras. Cluster algebras, discovered by the investigator in collaboration with
A.Zelevinsky, are a class of commutative rings which have found applications in
several mathematical disciplines, including representation theory, Teichmueller
theory, discrete dynamical systems, total positivity, Lie theory, tropical
geometry, and enumerative and geometric combinatorics. The investigator develops
general structural theory of cluster algebras and related combinatorial
constructions, and applies it to the study of concrete classes of cluster
algebras arising in various applications.

The original motivation for this project comes from several classical areas of
mathematics listed above. The main tools come from combinatorics, including
combinatorial topology, algebraic and geometric combinatorics, and the theory of
root systems. Combinatorics deals with discrete objects such as finite sets,
graphs, permutations, partial orders, etc. Many continuous phenomena allow for a
discrete representation, lending themselves amenable to combinatorial methods of
study. It is often the case that identical or similar combinatorial structures
underlie seamingly unrelated mathematical entities, revealing hidden connections
between them and allowing to transport insights and techniques from one
discipline to another. One case in point is the theory of cluster algebras,
which are the main focus of this project.
