
* 0555755
* Extremal combinatorics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2006,08/19/2010
* Richard Wilson,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2011
* USD 68,250.00

The proposed project covers a range of important problems in extremal
combinatorics, principally those motivated by the Turan problem, which has led
to many developments in the theory of graphs and hypergraphs. Here the ultimate
goal is to determine the Turan numbers of complete hypergraphs, an open problem
that mathematicians have battled with for over sixty years. Recently there has
been a lot of progress in this area, so it is an exciting topic for future
research. The PI is considering a variety of ways to extend the scope of this
area, such as the study of rainbow Turan numbers, which not only have natural
combinatorial motivations, but also have impressive potential applications in
additive number theory. Another direction is investigating an old conjecture of
Erdos on the number of edges one must delete from a triangle-free graph to make
it bipartite. A second area being studied is the theory of set systems with
restricted intersections, which has a rich history in combinatorics, and has
also found applications to computer science, particular in the theories of
complexity and communication. The PI is continuing his study of the structural
properties of large intersecting systems, and investigating a conjecture of
Ahlswede, Cai and Zhang on cross-intersecting systems. The concepts of trace and
VC-dimension play a central role in many areas of statistics, discrete and
computational geometry and learning theory. The quantitive character of these
problems is poorly understood, and this project addresses a conjecture of Anstee
and Sali that offers some hope of improving this situation.

As an area of pure mathematics, extremal combinatorics is in the happy position
of being relatively accessible to a wider audience. It also finds a wide number
of direct applications both to other areas of mathematics and other academic
disciplines, and thus makes its influence felt indirectly as these disciplines
in turn apply the theoretical power of combinatorics in more practical settings.
Its impact on computer science is particularly striking, and its ideas also make
contributions to such diverse areas as physics, electrical engineering,
bioinformatics, economics, and internet modelling. The proposed project covers a
range of important problems in extremal combinatorics, principally those
motivated by a question of Turan, an open problem that mathematicians have
battled with for over sixty years, which has led to many developments in the
theory of graphs and hypergraphs. Recently there has been a lot of progress in
this area, so it is an exciting topic for future research. The PI is considering
various ways to extend the scope of this area, including a rainbow variant that
has impressive potential applications in additive number theory. A second area
being studied is the theory of set systems with restricted intersections, which
has a rich history in combinatorics, and has also found applications to computer
science, particular in the theories of complexity and communication. The
concepts of trace and VC-dimension play a central role in many areas of
statistics, discrete and computational geometry and learning theory. The
quantitive character of these problems is poorly understood, and this project
addresses a conjecture of Anstee and Sali that offers some hope of improving
this situation. In addition to research, the PI is conducting educational
activities in his role as an instructor in mathematics at Caltech, including
developing and teaching courses to disseminate cutting-edge research techniques
in combinatorics, and mentoring students on their own projects.


