
* 0555750
* Noncommutative Geometry and Cherednik Algebras
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2006,05/24/2010
* J. Tobias Stafford,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2012
* USD 344,610.00

This project concerns the theory and application of ``noncommutative projective
geometry'' or the interaction of projective algebraic geometry with
noncommutative algebra. Roughly speaking and by analogy with the commutative
situation, the category of graded modules modulo torsion over a noncommutative
graded ring of quadratic, respectively cubic growth should be thought of as the
noncommutative analogue of a projective curve, respectively surface. This
intuition has lead to a remarkable number of nontrivial insights and results in
noncommutative algebra. Indeed, the problem of classifying noncommutative curves
(and noncommutative graded rings of quadratic growth) can be regarded as settled
and the motivating theme behind much of this proposal will be to understand
noncommutative surfaces. A large class of these algebras can be classified in
terms of the ``naive'' blow-ups developed in collaboration with Keeler and
Rogalski. Although these blow-ups are constructed in a manner reminiscent of
commutative blowups, and depend upon geometric data, their structure is quite
unlike the classical objects. A major portion of the project will be to further
understand these objects and to extend their applications. The other major theme
of the project will be in applications of this general theory to specific
classes of algebras. A particularly useful technique, here, is to ``complete''
the category of modules over a noncommutative algebra to those over a graded
algebra and then to apply noncommutative projective geometry. This has, for
example, been used to relate rational Cherednik algebras in type A to Hilbert
schemes, and to Haiman's work on the n! conjecture. The project will continue
this research to gain a deeper understanding of these important algebras and
their relation to other areas of mathematics, for example to integrable systems
and to the study of invariant eigendistributions on symmetric spaces.

Algebraic geometry, which is one of the oldest areas of modern mathematics, has
its origins in the study of polynomial equations; for example a plane curve is
the set of solutions of a polynomial equation in two variables. This leads to a
rich interplay between that geometric object and the (commutative) algebra of
the associated polynomials. Noncommutative algebra, which is a much younger
subject, also has its origins in the theory of equations, in this case matrix
equations, and in recent years has become increasingly important in many areas
of mathematics (for example the theory of differential equations) and physics
(Heisenberg's uncertainty principle is a classic illustration, but more subtle
non-commutativity occurs, for example, in string theory). It has become apparent
in recent years that there are definite, though often rather subtle, geometric
structures hidden in these noncommutative objects and the interplay between the
two has led to a rich theory, actually several theories, in their own right.
These are collectively called noncommutative geometry.
