
* 0555678
* Some problems in algebraic geometry with connections to string theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/15/2006,04/08/2011
* Sheldon Katz,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2012
* USD 171,001.00

A series of problems are proposed in algebraic geometry, inspired by string
theory. Some problems in string theory relating to algebraic geometry are also
proposed. These include the study of algebro-geometric invariants related to
topological string amplitudes: Gromov-Witten, Gopakumar-Vafa, and Donaldson-
Thomas invariants, all conjecturally related to each other. Particular problems
include a rigorous definition of Gopakumar-Vafa invariants and their
generalization from Calabi-Yau threefolds to more general threefolds, their
computation in examples, and verification of the GW-GV correspondence, beginning
with toric varieties and contractible curves. These invariants will be extended
to threefolds which are not Calabi-Yau. Computational methods for Gromov-Witten
and Donaldson-Thomas invariants are proposed. Several connections to physics
will be pursued, including black hole entropy techniques.

The project is a continuation of the exciting process of cross-fertilization
between string theory in physics and geometry in mathematics. In string theory,
the fundamental particles of nature are small vibrating strings, and physical
properties depend on the geometry of the space that strings propagate in, much
as the shape of a drum affects the sound that it makes. Physically relevant
properties can be determined by calculations in pure geometry, in this instance
calculations of intrinsic interest in mathematics. When physical methods of
duality provide more than one mathematical model, a consequence is a deep
unexpected insight into geometry. In this project, the PI will develop tools to
investigate the mathematical validity of some of these predictions and will
expand the geometric investigation beyond the physically relevant context. The
PI will apply also geometric techniques to advance understanding of string
theory, especially as it describes the statistical mechanics of a black hole.
The primary mathematical content is the counting of curves in curved spaces
called Calabi-Yau threefolds which form the small extra dimensions in string
theory.
