
* 0556174
* Intersections of special cycles on Shimura varieties
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2006,04/03/2006
* Benjamin Howard,MA,Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2009
* USD 85,666.00

DMS-0556174 Benjamin Howard

The principal investigator is studying generalizations of the Gross-Zagier
theorem, relating intersection multiplicities of special cycles on Shimura
varieties to central values and central derivatives ofautomorphic $L$-functions.
The original theorem of Gross and Zagier expresses the arithmetic intersections
of complex multiplication points on modular curves in terms of Fourier
coefficients of a certain explicit modular form. Gross and Zagier use this to
deduce a relation between the Neron-Tate heights of Heegner points on modular
Jacobians and derivatives of L-functions. Results and conjectures of Borcherds,
Gross-Kudla, Hirzebruch-Zagier, Kudla-Rappoport-Yang, and Zhang suggest that the
Gross-Zagier theorem is merely the simplest cases of a much broader theory
relating arithmetic intersections of special cycles on Shimura varieties to
Fourier coefficients of modular forms. Such a theory would yield results toward
generalized forms of the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture, e.g. the Bloch-
Kato conjectures. Toward this end, the principal investigator is studying two
generalized forms of the Gross-Zagier theorem. The first project is to extend
the original Gross-Zagier theorem to include intersections of special points on
modular curves with additional level structure. Such a result would yield new
cases of the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture for abelian varieties attached
to modular forms with nontrivial nebentype. The second project is a part of a
vast series of conjectures of Kudla concerning the arithmetic intersections of
special cycles on Shimura varieties of orthogonal type. The case of interest to
the principal investigator involves the computation of intersection
multiplicities on a class of Shimura surfaces which includes the classical
Hilbert modular surfaces, and the comparison of these intersection
multiplicities with Fourier coefficients of automorphic forms.

In the field of arithmetic geometry certain there are certain curves, surfaces,
and higher dimension analogs which play a central role. These objects are called
Shimura varieties, and are interesting at least in part because they encode
arithmetic information (i.e. properties of the integers and rational numbers) in
a geometric form. These Shimura varieties contain inside them many interesting
objects of lower dimensions. For example the one-dimensional Shimura varieties
come equipped with a family of special points, the two-dimensional Shimura
varieties come equipped with both special points and special curves on the
surface, three-dimensional Shimura varieties have special points, curves, and
surfaces inside them, and so on. One way in which the geometry of these objects
encodes arithmetic information is through ntersection theory. If, for example,
one takes a Shimura surface and two special curves lying on the surface, then
one may simply count the number of times that the two curves intersect one
another. Work of Hirzebruch and Zagier, dating back to the 1970's, shows that
these geometrically defined intersection numbers agree with sequences of numbers
arising in arithmetic. This connection between geometry and arithmetic was later
exploited by Gross and Zagier to prove fundamental results about elliptic
curves, objects of great importance both in pure math (e.g. to the proof of
Fermat's last theorem) and in cryptography. The principal investigator is
working to extend some of the theory to higher dimensions by computing the
intersection numbers of a surface with a family of curves, all inside of a
three-dimensional Shimura variety, and comparing these with numbers arising from
arithmetic. The principal investigator expects that this will lead to proofs of
special cases of some long-standing and important conjectures in number theory.
