
* 0556091
* Minmax relations for graphs
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/15/2006,06/12/2006
* Guoli Ding,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2010
* USD 101,406.00

Minmax relations for graphs Abstract

A graph is a mathematical model for various networks, including communication
networks, transportation networks, and social networks. Many important network
parameters, like the capability, flexibility, and reliability, are often very
difficult to compute. The goal of this project is to identify graphs for which
some of these parameters are efficiently computable. To accomplish this, the PI
proposes to study the structure of optimal solutions. These structural results
are fundamentally important and they will have numerous applications on
computing many related graph parameters.

To be precise, the PI proposes to study the following three fundamental problems
in combinatorial optimization: 1. To characterize graphs for which the clutter
of (edge-sets of) odd st-paths is ideal/Mengerian. This problem generalizes the
ordinary matching problem as well as the ordinary edge-disjoint paths problem.
2. To characterize graphs for which the clutter of (vertex-set of) odd circuits
is ideal/Mengerian. This is a problem very closely related to the t-perfect
graph problem, which arises naturally in the study of stable sets in graphs. One
of the goals of this project is to discover the connections between these two
problems. 3. To characterize perfectly 2-edge-connected graphs. This is a
problem originated from the study of the Traveling Salesman Problem. One of its
attractive properties is that being perfectly 2-edge-connected is preserved
under the "dual" of the induced-minor relation, which is a graph containment
relation preserved by many important graph properties. All the proposed problems
are fundamental and attractive. They resemble the perfect graph problem in many
ways: they all involve beautiful minmax relations, they all have polyhedral and
algorithmic implications, and they all generalize many known results.
