
* 0600400
* Modular Forms and Number Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 07/01/2006,06/16/2006
* Matthew Boylan,SC,University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 09/30/2009
* USD 109,930.00

DMS 0600400 Matthew Boylan

In the last few decades, modular forms have been studied intensely. They
naturally occur as generating functions for many diverse objects of arithmetic
interest such as L-values (in arithmetic geometry and elsewhere), representation
numbers of positive definite quadratic forms, and partitions. Most prominently,
modular forms were key players in Wiles' recent proof of Fermat's Last Theorem.
In this proposal, the investigator proposes to study a variety of arithmetic
objects whose generating functions have modular properties. For example, he
expects to study the congruence properties and distribution in residue classes
of partitions, algebraic parts of central critical values of modular
L-functions, singular moduli, values of Gaussian hypergeometric functions, class
numbers of number fields, and certain invariants attached to elliptic curves and
motives. In doing this project, he expects to use, for example, p-adic
techniques and techniques involving Galois representations and combinatorics.

The area of the proposed research is in number theory. Number theory is a
classical subject; some of the objects of interest to the investigator were also
studied by Euler and Gauss. One such object, the partition function, is
particularly simple to define: it counts the number of ways to write a positive
integer as a sum of smaller positive integers. However, as is often the case in
number theory, many of the natural questions on the arithmetic of the partition
function have proved to be rather difficult. Major advances in our understanding
of this function rely on sophisticated modern techniques in modular forms, such
as those suggested by the proposed research.
