
* 0600349
* Algebraic Approaches to Flow and Cycle Conjectures for Graphs
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2006,06/12/2006
* Dirk Vertigan,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2008
* USD 69,992.00

Algebraic Approaches to Flow and Cycle Conjectures for Graphs.

Abstract:

This proposed project will focus on applying certain algebraic ideas in an
attempt to prove the major open conjectures about flows and cycle covers in
graphs. The ultimate goal is to prove all of the major open conjectures about
flows and cycle covers in graphs, while the realistic expectation is to produce
plenty of good mathematics in the attempt. Two big conjectures in this area are
Tutte's 5-flow conjecture (T5FC) and the Cycle Double Cover Conjecture (CDCC) of
Szekeres and various strengthenings of CDCC, including the Orientable Five Cycle
Double Cover Conjecture (O5CDCC) of Archdeacon and Jaeger, which implies both
T5FC and CDCC and many other strengthenings of CDCC. These in turn are all
implied by the PI's Petersen-or-K_4 Flow Conjecture (P10vK4FC), the proof of
which is the ultimate goal of the proposed project.

These conjectures, which are very well known to graph theorists, especially T5FC
and CDCC, are in the same family of mathematical problems as the Four Color
Theorem (4CT) which is even much more widely known to mathematicians and the
general public. Most research on these problems depends primarily on
combinatorial graph theoretic techniques. The novelty of the PI's approach is to
apply many algebraic, as well as topological, ideas in addition to all the usual
combinatorial graph theoretic ones.


