
* 0600425
* Algebraic geometry over finite fields
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2006,06/23/2008
* Aise de Jong,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2009
* USD 145,284.00

The project will focus on three related areas of research in algebraic geometry
over finite fields. First of all we intend to attack Artin's conjecture that the
Brauer group of a projective surface over a finite field is finite. Here do Jong
will study especially elliptic surfaces and surfaces with ample cotangent
bundle. Secondly, de Jong will study the arithmetic fundamental groups of curves
over finite fields. Here the main questions are concerning the dynamic of the
Verschiebung on the moduli spaces of bundles, the growth of the fundamental
group, and the distribution of the Frobenius elements in the fundamental group.
And thirdly, in an ongoing collaboration with others (Starr, Hassett, Tschinkel,
et al) de jong will study the geometry of moduli spaces of rational curves on
higher dimensional varieties. Here of particular interested are in finding
applications to other areas of research. Meanwhile, with the goal of making it
easier for graduate students and newcomers to work on these problems, de jong
intends to run a web-site where collaborative development of introductory texts
on the topics is done.

The area of mathematics that this proposal finds itself in has seen a lot of
progress in the last decade. Nonetheless there are many important problems
outstanding. Perhaps the most exiting of these is Artin's conjecture mentioned
above. Among other things it implies the Birch-Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture for
elliptic curves over function fields of curves over finite fields. An example of
such a field is the field of rational functions in one variable over a finite
field. Many famous classical number theoretical questions have their analogue
for such function fields, and a number of these, such as the Riemann Hypothesis,
have been shown to be true in the function field case. The reason for this is
that people can study curves and more generally do algebraic geometry over
finite fields, to prove the conjectures. In this project we will study geometric
approaches to Artin's conjecture, for example by thinking about moduli of vector
bundles over curves and surfaces over finite fields.
