
* 0600973
* Algebra and Combinatorics of Free Structures
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/15/2006,08/14/2006
* Marcelo Aguiar,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2010
* USD 109,689.00



This project will deal with a variety of algebraic objects that have arisen
recently in different areas such as Hopf algebra theory, combinatorial
representation theory, the theory of operads, free probability theory, and
renormalization theory in mathematical physics. It should be regarded as an
extension of the classical work on the theory of free Lie algebras and its
interplay with the representation theory of the symmetric group. Through the
eyes of operad theory, the objects we deal with are free algebras of various
kinds. Addressing this property is fundamental in understanding the role played
by these objects in the other theories. Freeness is also responsible for the
rich combinatorics exhibited by these objects. Part of the goal of the project
is to make the algebraic structure as explicit as possible, which often leads to
interesting combinatorial constructions. Conversely, the project will make use
of algebraic properties to unify and generalize important constructions in
combinatorics. Some of these free algebras have found applications in free
probability theory, while others are at the basis of renormalization theory. All
of them are closely related to symmetric functions and the representation theory
of the symmetric group. A common feature is the existence of Hopf algebraic
structures, which are often also free in one sense or another. Exploiting this
structure is another central feature of the project.

Combinatorics provides a tool for handling subtle algebraic structures.
Understanding these structures is important in various areas of recent interest
both in pure mathematics (free probability theory, representation theory) as
well as in mathematical physics (renormalization theory). This project plans to
deepen our understanding of the rich combinatorics underlying various free
algebraic structures. The PI will introduce graduate students to this area of
research and make international contacts and collaborations in Europe, Latin
America, and India.


