
* 0600909
* Perverse Sheaves in Representation Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2006,04/12/2006
* David Nadler,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2009
* USD 93,442.00

The research program centers around topological questions in algebraic geometry
and representation theory. The focus is on the categorical structure of sheaves
on singular algebraic varieties. Particular emphasis is placed on loop spaces
and other varieties arising in the geometric Langlands program. Several
directions of study are considered. The first project applies ideas from the
geometric Langlands program to the representation theory of real groups. It
develops a geometric form of harmonic analysis for moduli spaces of real bundles
on a Riemann surface. The main goal is to further open the representation theory
of real groups to the powerful tools of algebraic geometry. The second project
seeks to extend the representation theory of loop groups to noncompact groups.
Potential applications include the geometric quantization of spaces of flat
connections on Riemann surfaces, and the resulting construction of new
topological 2+1 dimensional quantum field theories. The third project aims to
develop an ``elementary" microlocal theory of perverse sheaves. As a first step
in this direction, it seeks an obstruction theory for local systems on the
complement of a singular divisor.

Representation theory is the mathematical study of symmetry. Some of the most
important phenomena involve places where there is a breakdown of symmetry. For
example, many surprising combinatorial formulas result from writing a highly
symmetric quantity in terms of contributions from asymmetric pieces. In
geometric representation theory, one of the primary tools to measure the
breakdown of symmetry is the theory of perverse sheaves. These are complicated
objects which detect dynamic aspects of singularities, the locus where symmetry
breaks down. The research program described here aims to understand perverse
sheaves and their role in representation theory. It seeks to apply perverse
sheaves to forms of symmetry which arise in physics. In particular, it aims to
develop a geometric version of harmonic analysis and representation theory for
symmetries involving loops on a space. The project also seeks elementary ways to
think about perverse sheaves from a dynamic perspective.
