
* 0600122
* RUI: Galois Module Structure of Galois Cohomology
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/15/2006,07/11/2006
* John Swallow,NC,Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2010
* USD 115,000.00

DMS 0600122 John Swallow

This project engages the PI and collaborators at all levels in the quest to
derive field-theoretic consequences of the Bloch-Kato Conjecture using the
Lyndon-Hochschild-Serre exact sequence. Prior results have already been applied
to generalize Schreier's formula in Galois cohomology and establish connections
with the cohomological dimension of pro-p quotients of absolute Galois groups,
with Demuskin groups, and with the Elementary Type Conjecture. Undergraduate
components, including the continued involvement of undergraduates in research
and the offering of MAA minicourses on the teaching of Galois theory to
undergraduates, will enhance the national curricular infrastructure. A co-
authored text, providing an accessible transition from Kummer theory to Galois
module structure, will introduce the subject to a wider audience, treating the
structure first of the multiplicative groups of fields modulo a prime and then
more generally of Galois cohomology and Milnor K-theory. The disciplines of
algebra and number theory reach back as far back as the Greeks and still offer
substantial challenges in understanding the number systems, called fields, used
today. Although the sheer variety and complexity of fields is daunting, their
structure can be studied by investigating their rearrangements: the possible
ways in which one number in a field may be substituted for another, without
altering the conclusions of certain calculations. A startling fact is that from
no more than the knowledge of these possible rearrangements, a great deal may be
learned about the fields themselves. This point of view, going back less than
two centuries, leads today to the search for all logically possible
rearrangements of each field. For the discipline of algebra, the completion of
this quest is much like the classification of the living world into genera and
species, the determination of the periodic table of elements, or even the
understanding of all existing genes. Over twenty years ago, some simply stated
---but nevertheless fairly mysterious---logical limitations on the structure of
fields were conjectured in the last century by Bloch and Kato. Very recent work
has established that these limitations do in fact hold, making them something
like a regulation manual for the internal operation of fields. As a result, this
is an exciting time for field theory, and the eventual consequences will include
not only the solution of other problems in mathematics proper but also new
perspectives in related disciplines, such as cryptography.
