
* 0601051
* Algebraic K-Theory and Motivic Cohomology
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2006,04/13/2006
* Andrei Suslin,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2010
* USD 114,589.00

Suslin proposes to investigate topics in motivic cohomology theory. These topics
are of principal importance for the development of the cohomology theory of
schemes and each has seen progress during the recent years in the works of
Suslin and his collaborators. Firstly Suslin plans to eliminate the perfectness
assumption in the basic requirements of motivic cohomology theory and to define
the corresponding tensor triangulated category of motivic complexes over
arbitrary fields. The second topic is an attempt to get a new and clearer proof
of the main duality theorem which would work for schemes over arbitrary fields
(and not only over fields of characteristic zero as the current proof does).
Next Suslin plans jointly with A. Merkurjev to generalize the previous
computation of the motivic cohomology of Severi-Brauer varieties to the case of
generic splitting fields of higher symbols. Probably the most interesting and
important part of the grant proposal is an attempt to compare the algebraic
cobordism theory developed by Morel and Levin with the algebraic part of the
cohomology theory constructed by Voevodsky. Here the plan is to use the
machinery of framed sheaves developed by Voevodsky.

The main objective of mathematics is to provide an accurate picture to the
physical world or at least an appropriate approximation of that picture. From
this point of view algebraic varieties are of principal importance, first they
are relatively easy to understand since they are just defined by polynomial
equations, next they usually give a rather accurate approximation to other
shapes, most importantly they do appear naturally in quite a lot of subjects
from theoretical physics to coding theory. That's why algebraic geometry - the
theory of algebraic varieties is so important for the development and
applications of mathematics. This project is devoted to the study of certain
fundamental problems of motivic cohomology theory - a relatively new and very
quickly developing branch of algebraic geometry. Geometry is blended with
algebra and topology in this part of mathematics, ideas and methods to be used
come equally from all these directions. As part of the broader impact of this
grant proposal let me point out that I intend to involve graduate students into
the work over some parts of this grant proposal thus allowing them to get into a
fast developing and quite important field of mathematics.
