
* 0601367
* The Circle Method as an Interface of Arithmetic Geometry, Additive Combinatorics and Harmonic Analysis
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2006,06/08/2007
* Jeffrey Lagarias,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2008
* USD 115,894.00

The purpose of this proposal is to illustrate and exploit the observation that
the Hardy-Littlewood (circle) method is a fundamental technique of arithmetic
harmonic analysis that provides a powerful interface connecting arithmetic
geometry, additive combinatorics and harmonic analysis. First, in arithmetic
geometry, the proposer applies diagonalization techniques to investigate the
density of rational points on complete intersections of high dimension, applies
the large sieve inequality to study the Hasse principle in algebraic families of
complete intersections, and combines the circle method with descent techniques
so as to investigate rational points on varieties of intermediate dimension. On
the interface with harmonic analysis, the proposer investigates the Fourier
transform of the solution set of polynomial diophantine inequalities in many
variables, with intended applications to uniform distribution and polynomial
ergodic results. Third, on the interface with additive combinatorics, the
proposer seeks to establish a novel version of the circle method that exploits
Gower's quadratic and higher uniformity ideas. In one direction,applications
here would impact questions in arithmetic geometry, and in another the proposer
seeks quantitative improvements in the work of Gowers and Green-Tao by applying
techniques from the modern theory of the circle method.

This proposal investigates the interface between three areas of mathematics:
number theory (and more specifically diophantine problems), harmonic analysis
and additive combinatorics. Number Theory studies the properties of integers
(``whole numbers''). Since Antiquity, the study of diophantine equations
(equations to be solved in integers) has formed a core component of Number
Theory, and has recently influenced the development of codes and cryptosystems
(applied, for example, in data storage systems such as compact disks and DVDs,
communications systems and internet and web-based commerce). Harmonic analysis
investigates generalizations of Fourier analysis, which in the larger setting
plays a crucial role in electrical engineering and communications. Additive
combinatorics seeks to understand the underlying structure in quite general (and
seemingly, therefore, unstructured) sets, particularly as these sets are
modified by arithmetic operations. This proposal applies a fundamental technique
known as the circle method to transfer technology between these three areas,
both enhancing our knowledge in each area and increasing the scope of the circle
method as a basic tool of arithmetic harmonic analysis.
