
* 0608413
* Extremal Combinatorics at Illinois (EXCILL)
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2006,06/07/2006
* Alexandr Kostochka,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2007
* USD 10,000.00

Combinatorics is the study of existence, enumeration, and optimization of
discrete configurations. A rapidly growing part of mathematics, it has
applications in computer science, operation research, genetics, and other
natural and social sciences. These fields in turn generate many challenging
combinatorial problems. This project emphasizes the optimization or ``extremal''
aspects of combinatorics. It supports a conference on extremal combinatorial
problems, entitled ``Extremal Combinatorics at Illinois'' (EXCILL), hosted by
the Department of Mathematics of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
on November 18-20, 2006. The organizing committee consists of J. Balogh
(Secretary), Z. Furedi, S. Hartke, A. Kostochka, and D. B. West.

Topics to be discussed include extremal set theory, coloring theory for graphs
and hypergraphs, Ramsey theory, cycles in graphs, discrete geometry, and
probabilistic methods in combinatorics. There will be six main lectures
delivered by leading experts in the field and more than 15 additional invited
talks. Speakers will include senior researchers and rising stars from around the
world and from a variety of backgrounds. The conference will be a major event in
the Discrete Mathematics community. Participation by graduate students and young
researchers will be encouraged and supported to help develop the next generation
of researchers.
