
* 0636154
* Schubert Calculus, and Degenerations to Toric Simplicial Complexes
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 10/01/2005,07/10/2006
* Allen Knutson,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2008
* USD 60,102.00

Dr. Knutson's proposed work covers two rather different connections of
combinatorics and algebraic geometry. The first concerns Schubert calculus, a
boolean lattice's worth of problems whose minimal element is the (now extremely
well-understood) intersection theory on Grassmannians. Its extensions include
equivariant intersection theory (recently solved by Knutson and T. Tao),
K-theory (recently solved by A. Buch), quantum cohomology (unsolved, but a very
solid conjecture exists), replacing the Grassmannian by larger flag manifolds,
and analogues for arbitrary Lie groups (for these last two almost nothing is
known). Since the submission of the proposal, much progress has been made (by
Knutson and R. Vakil) towards one more level in this lattice, the equivariant
K-theory of Grassmannians, but all other combinations remain. The second part is
a generalization of Littelmann's path model in representation theory, which one
should regard in this context as providing a flat degeneration of the flag
manifold to a union of toric varieties. In the generalization, the only property
used of the flag manifold is that it carries an action of the circle with
isolated fixed points. Many other varieties should thus have a "path model" for
their coordinate ring, such as toric varieties (a testbed, where the theory is
rather trivial), wonderful compactifications, and Hilbert schemes. As an example
application, this would provide a ppositive formula for Haiman's generalization
of the (q,t)-Catalan numbers (where positivity is known for vanishing-cohomology
reasons, but there is no formula).

The first of Dr. Knutson's two projects concerns a 19th-century intrusion of
combinatorics into algebraic geometry: counting the number of lines (or planes,
or chains consisting of a point inside a line inside a plane etc.) satisfying a
number of generic intersection conditions. The first interesting such question
is ``Given four generic lines in space, how many other lines touch all four?''
(The answer is 2.) There are many generalizations of this problem; one of the
newest and most exciting is quantum intersection theory, in which there may be
no single solution to all the conditions, but rather the solution may "quantum
tunnel" between the requirements, while paying a well-defined "penalty."(In
physical terms, this penalty means the occurrence is impossible classically, but
in the quantum world is only very rare.) There already exist formulae to solve
any one of this huge family of problems, but they are extremely unsatisfying, as
they determine the count by adding and subtracting many numbers. Such
cancelative formulae are essentially useless for proving that a general class of
intersection problems has an answer, and moreover they are computationally very
inefficient. Dr. Knutson and his collaborators have provided noncancelative
formulae for some of these generalizations, and have conjectures about others.
His other project is not directly related, though it also uses combinatorics to
control algebraic geometry, building on work of P. Littelmann. Littelmann showed
how to use the very great symmetry of certain algebraic spaces, such as the set
of all k-planes in n-space, to compute the space of functions on them in terms
of lattice points inside a union of large-dimensional tetrahedra. This second
proposal is based on recent work of Dr. Knutson's indicating that this large
degree of symmetry is unnecessary -- a single circular symmetry, plus a
technical (but common and easily checked) condition, seem to be enough to be
able to make use of this lattice-point machinery. Such algebraic spaces with
symmetry are endemic in mathematics and physics.
