
* 0652845
* Problems in Algebraic Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2007,05/05/2011
* Robert Lazarsfeld,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2013
* USD 473,699.00

Lazarsfeld will work on a number of problems in complex algebraic geometry.
First, with Mustata, he will investigate in detail a procedure by which one
associates a convex body to a linear series on a projective variety. Introduced
in passing by Okounkov, this construction has the potential to shed important
new light on the structure of linear systems. A second set of problems involves
using multiplier ideals and related tools from higher dimensional geometry to
study some questions of an essentially local nature. Specifically, Lazarsfeld
hopes to resolve some conjectures of De Fernex, Ein and Mustata relating
algebraic invariants of an ideal, and to prove in all dimensions a result about
attenuation of singularities of graded families of ideals suggested by a theorem
of Favre-Jonsson concerning currents in the plane.

Algebraic geometry, one of the oldest and most central fields of mathematics,
deals with the geometric study of the solutions of systems of polynomial
equations. It touches on many other fields of mathematics, ranging from number
theory to topology, algebra and complex analysis. It has found important
applications to problems in such diverse areas as coding theory and theoretical
physics. The particular questions that Lazarsfeld will study involve relating
questions in algebraic geometry to geometric properties of solid bodies in space
and to special collections of polynomials. It is hoped that this work will lead
to the development of some valuable new techniques in the field.
