
* 0653512
* Arithmetic, Geometry and Representation Theory of Reductive Groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2007,04/28/2009
* Gopal Prasad,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2010
* USD 158,778.00

In their two recent papers, Gopal Prasad and Sai-Kee Yeung have constructed all
arithmetic "fake" projective spaces and have found some of their geometric
properties. Their work has led to many interesting questions related to these
spaces and also about some of the singular surfaces with small geometric
invarients. Prasad proposes to work on these questions. He has also been working
with Andrei Rapinchuk to find the extent a locally symmetric space of finite
volume is determined by the set of lengths of its closed geodesics, or its
spectrum. Their work led them to define a new relationship between "large"
(Zariski-dense or arithmetic) subgroups which they call "weak commensurability".
They have shown that weak commesurability of two arithmetic subgroups of a
simple Lie group, whose Dynkin diagram does not have symmetries, implies that
they are commensurable. They are now investigating the situation when the Dynkin
diagram does have a symmetry. Prasad and Rapinchuk have used theorems in
transcendental number theory, and a widely believed conjecture due to Schanual,
to show that if the quotients of the symmetric space of an absolutely simple
real Lie group by two arithmetic subgroups have same set of lengths of closed
geodesics, or have the same spectrum, then the two arithmetic subgroups are
weakly commensurable. So their results on weakly commensurable arithmetic
subgroup can be used. Prasad proposes to obtain analogous results for locally
symmetric spaces arising from comples semi-simple Lie groups. In a comepletely
different direction, Prasad has associated a natural Levi-subgroup to a given
irreducible admissible representation of a reductive p-adic group. He will
investigate what role this subgroup plays in the representation theory. Prasad
has an ongoing collaboration with Rapinchuk to simplify, unify and complete the
results on the congruence subgroup problem. They plan to write a book on this
topic in near future.

Recent work of Prasad with Sai-Kee Yeung on certain interesting geometric
objects known as arithmetic fake projective spaces has led to an explicit
construction of all of them and helped to determine many of their geometric
properties. Their work has also led to some important questions about related
geometric objects. Prasad's recent work with Rapinchuk has deep implications for
a particularly important class of geometric structures known as locally
symmetric spaces. These spaces arise from symmetric spaces, which as the name
suggests, have a lot of symmetries. This work of Prasad and Rapinchuk has
introduced a new notion of "weak commensurability" of large subgroups of the
group of symmetries and studies its consequences in geometry and group theory.
There are still some serious unresolved questions on which they will work. They
also plan to write a book on the famous congruence subgroup problem to describe
a new unified approach to settle it.
