
* 0653809
* Euler Product Models of L-Functions and the Distribution of Zeros and Primes
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2007,04/27/2007
* Steven Gonek,NY,University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2011
* USD 204,424.00

The proposer recently constructed one parameter families of functions whose
members approximate the Riemann zeta-function or other L-functions, and whose
structure incorporates the fundamental features of these functions, such as
their Euler products and functional equations. Each function in a family
satisfies a Riemann hypothesis with finitely many possible exceptions. Moreover,
when the parameter is not too large, the functions have approximately the same
number of zeros as the zeta or L-function, the zeros are all simple, and
consecutive zeros repel. One may therefore regard them as models of the zeta-
function or L-function. In fact, if the Riemann hypothesis holds for an
L-function, the zeros of functions in the corresponding family tend to those of
the L-function as the parameter increases, and between zeros on the critical
line the functions tend to twice the L-function. The main goal of this project
is to investigate the new functions further in order to gain insight into the
behavior of the Riemannn zeta-function and L-functions and into connections
between their zeros and the prime numbers. One project is to investigate how
well the models approximate L-functions in a transitional region close to the
critical line. Another is to study the approximations for a particularly
important range of the parameter. In several projects the proposer will use the
models to try to understand problems that have so far resisted other treatments,
such as how the zeros of the derivative of the zeta-function are distributed.
The present line of inquiry gives finite Euler products a more prominent role
than previously in analytic number theory, so another goal is to study such
products anew, particularly their moments. This is quite difficult from the
traditional point of view, but the prposer's recent work leads to a new
approach. A second and separate set of projects aims at furthering our
understanding of the distribution of primes and zeros of L-functions. One is to
explore connections between the Gaussian Unitary Ensemble hypothesis, the
distribution of primes, and mean values of the zeta-function. Another is to
calculate the discrete number variance and other statistics for the zeros of the
zeta-function. A third project is to develop discrete mean values formulas for
long Dirichlet polynomials and use these to estimate the size of gaps between
zeros of the zeta-function.

The projects proposed all address fundamental problems in analytic number
theory: the distribution of prime numbers, the distribution of zeros of
L-functions, and the general behavior of L-functions. Prime numbers are the
ultimate building blocks of arithmetic, and therefore much of mathematics, so
understanding their properties is of basic importance. Many of these properties
are encoded in the Riemann zeta-function and other L-functions, and that makes
these important objects of study as well. Most of the projects proposed center
on the investigation of functions recently constructed by the proposer to model
L-functions and capture their basic features. The structure of these simpler
functions makes it clear why they behave as they do, thereby providing insight
into the behavior of the actual L-functions. The remaining projects study the
primes, L-functions, and their connections more directly.


