
* 0654421
* Categories of representations of affine algebras and related algebraic structures
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2007,06/19/2007
* Jacob Greenstein,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sommers
* 06/30/2012
* USD 93,051.00

The PI plans to work on various problems in representation theory of level zero
representations of current and affine Lie algebras and their quantum analogues.
The first group of problems is related to investigation of the structure of the
category of finite dimensional representations of current algebras and Yangians.
There is a remarkable connection between graded representations of current
algebras and module categories of quasi-hereditary algebras. On the one hand,
this allows one to use the power of representation theory of finite dimensional
associative algebras to study the structure of indecomposable finite dimensional
representations of current algebras. On the other hand, existence of certain
families of indecomposable representations for current algebras, such as
restricted Kirillov-Reshetikhin modules, is expected to yield interesting
families of finite dimensional associative algebras. Another direction of the
PI's work is a study of relations between realizations of crystal bases of
fundamental Kirillov-Reshetikhin modules in the framework of Littelmann's path
model, their q- and q,t-characters and the braid group action on the Heisenberg
subalgebra of the quantum affine algebra. The PI will also investigate a
possibility of constructing an analogue of Littelmann's path model adapted to
the study of finite dimensional representations of quantum affine algebras other
than fundamental Kirillov-Reshetikhin modules and their tensor products.
Finally, he intends to work on developing an analogue of Littelmann's path model
for the generalized Kac-Moody algebras, first introduced by Borcherds in his
study of the Monstrous Moonshine.

The study of representations of affine algebras, finite and infinite
dimensional, was originally motivated by and is related to problems stemming
from mathematical physics, in particular from conformal field theory, Bethe
ansatz, solvable vertex models and affine Toda theory. It also has fruitful
interactions with other branches of mathematics, such as knot theory, number
theory and especially combinatorics. The beauty of this subject is that,
although it has been and is being intensively studied for more than two decades,
it does not cease to exhibit surprising new aspects and even more surprising
connections with other mathematical disciplines.
