
* 0654060
* Combinatorial Structures for Permutation Enumeration and Macdonald Polynomials
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2007,07/27/2007
* Jeffrey Remmel,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2010
* USD 113,505.00

Combinatorial Structures for Permutation Enumeration and Macdonald Polynomials

PI: Jeffrey B. Remmel

Abstract: The PI plans to pursue research in three different areas: the
application of symmetric functions to permutation enumeration, the combinatorics
of Macdonald polynomials, and rook theory. In the area of permutation
enumeration, the PI plans to extend the work of Brenti, Remmel, Beck, Langley,
Mendes and Wagner who have shown that many old and new generating functions for
permutation statistics over the symmetric group, hyperoctahedral group, and the
wreath products of cyclic groups with the symmetric group can be derived by
applying suitable homomorphisms to simple symmetric function identities. One
goal of this research project will be to extend the homomorphism method to new
classes of symmetric functions and new symmetric function identities. A second
area of research in this project is to study various combinatorial aspects of
the Macdonald Polynomials. For example, in recent work, Haglund, Haiman, and
Loehr gave a combinatorial interpretation of the coefficients that arise in the
expansion of the modified Macdonald polynomials in terms of quasisymmetric
functions and gave a combinatorial interpretation of non-symmetric Schur
functions. The PI plans to study the algebraic meaning of the coefficients that
appear in the quasisymmetric function expansion of the modified Macdonald
polynomials and related polynomials in the context of Garsia-Haiman modules.
Last year, Mason defined a modification of the famed Robinson-Knuth-Schensted
correspondence which can used to prove various identities for non-symmetric
Schur functions. Recent work of Haglund, Mason, and the PI has lead to the
discovery of a new family of such correspondence which allow one to give a
uniform proof of many properties of these correspondences. The PI plans to
continue the study of these correspondences. Finally the PI also plans to study
applications of a new rook theory model developed by the PI and his student B.
Miceli. This new rook theory model allows one to prove a quite general
factorization theorem for rook polynomials that specializes to many such
factorization theorems that have appeared in the literature. The PI will
research further applications of this new rook theory model.

Each of three proposed research areas, the applications of symmetric functions
to permuation enumeration problems, the combinatorial aspects of Macdonald
polynomials, and the new combinatorial models for rook theory, are currently
active areas of research and have many connections with other areas of
mathematics. For example, the combinatorics of symmetric functions have played a
key role in many areas of mathematics including the theory of polynomial
equations, the representation theory of finite groups, Lie algebras, algebraic
geometry and the theory of special functions. Since their introduction in 1988,
Macdonald polynomials have been intensely studied and have found applications in
special function theory, representation theory, algebraic geometry, group
theory, statistics, and quantum mechanics. In each of the three areas, the PI is
studying properties of fundamental combinatorial models that allow one to
synthesize a large number of results that have previously appeared in the
literature as well to prove a large number of new results. The proposed research
should lead to a deeper understanding of fundamental combinatorial models which
play an important role in each of the three areas.


