
* 0701578
* Algebraic varieties, birational geometry and the structure of the Galois groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2007,05/01/2009
* Fedor Bogomolov,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2010
* USD 207,739.00

The principal investigator plans to work on several problems in algebraic
geometry, algebra and number theory. One of the objectives is to understand a
relation between geometry of tangencies of smooth subvarieties of a complex
projective space of small codimension with a structure of holomorphic tensors on
such subvarieties. This will provide a description of such subvarieties
satisfying special tangent conditions. In another project the plan is to show
that previously constructed examples of projective surfaces indeed provide
counter examples to the uniformization conjecture which claims holomorphic
convexity of the universal coverings of complex projective manifolds. The
completion of this project will change the current perception of the structure
of non-simply-connected projective varieties. The main objective of another
project is a dominance conjecture for special classes of hyperbolic curves
defined over algebraic numbers. The dominance conjecture claims that any such
curve has a finite nonramified covering which surjects onto arbitrary other
curve. The covering depends on the target curve. This result would provide a
simple geometric reason for the structure of algebraic points on all arithmetic
hyperbolic curves to be similar. Hence many statements about the arithmetic of
hyperbolic curves would be sufficient to check for one such curve only. It opens
a new avenue for the advance in arithmetics of algebraic varieties. The focus of
another project is a study of the structure of a hyperbolic curve defined over a
finite field considered as a subset of its points under a standard imbedding
into the jacobian of the curve. In this context the jacobian is viewed simply as
an infinite torsion group. The subsets defined in this way have many remarkable
properties and the plan is to investigate those systematically. In particular
one of the objectives is to check whether the above subset defines completely
the field of algebraic functions on the curve. The study of the geometry of
complex algebraic varieties has many connections to other areas of mathematics
and several areas of modern physics. Smooth submanifolds of small codimension in
a projective space have very special geometry and their study is motivated by a
conjecture which predicts a simple and complete description of such manifolds.
Algebraic curves over small fields appear now in a multitude of applications. As
it happens these curves have many additional geometric properties compare to
complex algebraic curves and the objective is to uncover and describe them.
