
* 0701310
* Shimura varieties and their local models
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2007,07/27/2007
* Elena Mantovan,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 11/30/2010
* USD 120,000.00

ABSTRACT for award DMS-0701310 of Mantovan Beginning in 1967 Langlands suggested
an intricate web of far-reaching conjectures connecting the theories of
automorphic forms and Galois representations. He also predicted some of these
correspondences to be encoded in the cohomology groups of Shimura varieties and
their local models. The proposed research pursues the study of the geometric
implications of these conjectures, focusing on two key features: the
compatibility between global and local conjectures and the functoriality
principle. The PI aims to enlarge the class of Shimura varieties whose local
behavior at unramified primes is well understood by eliminating two common
restrictive hypotheses: the assumption of properness and the restriction to the
subclass of Shimura varieties of P.E.L. type. In the first case, the PI proposes
to develop the integral theory of arithmetical compactifications for Shimura
varieties, following the works of Faltings-Chai and Pink. In the second case,
she plans to study the bad reduction of Shimura varieties of Hodge type,
following the strategy of Rapoport-Zink. The Langlands program proposes the
existence of a relation between seemingly unrelated objects in number theory and
harmonic analysis. A Galois group is the collection of all symmetries existing
among the roots of a given polynomial in one variable and a Galois
representation is the realization of such symmetries as matrices. On the other
hand, automorphic forms are complex functions possessing many self-similarities.
A connection between the two theories as it is proposed by the Langlands program
would provide an incredibly powerful mathematical tool translating theorems of
harmonic analysis into theorems about algebra, and vice versa. In some cases, it
is expected such a correspondence to be encoded in the geometry of certain
algebraic objects: the Shimura varieties and their local models. This project
aims to shed some light on how the geometry of these spaces could reflect some
of the deepest aspects of the Langlands' conjectures.


