
* 0701183
* Probabilistic and Extremal Combinatorics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2007,05/04/2009
* Tom Bohman,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2010
* USD 137,918.00

This research project has two main parts. The first focuses on applications of
the differential equations method for the analysis of greedy algorithms and
random graph processes. Recent work of the investigator and Alan Frieze gives a
new technique for employing this method to prove good performance of randomized
algorithms on random graphs without an explicit solution (or numerical
approximation of the solution) of the associated system of differential
equations (the need for such often complicates application of the method). The
key new idea is to use combinatorial observations to identify an invariant set
in the autonomous system of ordinary differential equations that, by a standard
application of the method, governs the evolution of the algorithm. Problems to
be addressed in this part of the project include Hamiltonicity, matchings and
3-colorability of sparse random graphs. The second part of this research project
is motivated by the problem of determining the Shannon capacities of graphs. The
Shannon capacity is a function of the independence numbers of the powers of the
graph. The investigator proposes a novel technique, based on combinatorial
stability, for attaining upper bounds on the independence numbers of powers of
odd cycles.

This research is in the areas of probabilistic and extremal combinatorics.
Probabilistic combinatorics is comprised of the study of random combinatorial
structures, randomized algorithms and probabilistic existence proofs for
combinatorics (i.e. the probabilistic method). Extremal combinatorics considers
questions of the form: `How large (or small) can an object that lies in a
particular discrete mathematical system and satisfies a certain condition be?'
We are often concerned with the behavior of the size of the extremal objects as
the size of the underlying system goes to infinity. Interest in both fields grew
extensively during the twentieth century. Pioneers, such as Paul Erdos,
discovered many beautiful properties of extremal and random discrete structures,
posed vast arrays of fascinating questions in these areas and devised powerful
methods for solving them even before the close connections between probabilistic
and extremal combinatorics and various other fields (including theoretical
computer science, statistical physics and information theory) were discovered.
The Shannon capacities of graphs are a classic example of the close interaction
between extremal combinatorics and the theory of communication. The Shannon
capacity gives a measure of the optimal zero-error performance of a noisy
communication channel and is centrally important in information theory. At the
same time, it gives rise to natural questions in extremal combinatorics.


