
* 0701106
* Character Sheaves for Unipotent Groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2007,09/22/2008
* Vladimir Drinfeld,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2011
* USD 647,862.00

The principal investigators conduct research in geometric representation theory
for unipotent groups over fields of positive characteristic and in the theory of
modular tensor categories. They define and study the notion of a character sheaf
on a unipotent algebraic group. Using this notion they introduce certain
subcategories, called "blocks", of the equivariant derived category of bounded
constructible l-adic complexes on this group. The principal investigators
formulate certain conjectures about the structure of the blocks and the relation
between character sheaves on a unipotent group and the irreducible characters of
its group of points over a finite field; their goal is to prove the conjectures.
One of the conjectures says that each block is equivalent to the derived
category of some modular category, another conjecture describes all possible
modular categories that can arise in this way.

The subject of the research lies at the intersection of several domains of
modern mathematics and mathematical physics -- geometric representation theory,
algebraic geometry, and conformal field theory. The research will deepen our
understanding of geometric representation theory by developing it in the new
context of unipotent groups in positive characteristic, where this theory has
not been studied before. It will also strengthen the connection between
geometric representation theory and the theory of modular tensor categories.
