
* 0707212
* Flat Connections, Irregular Singularities and Quantum Groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2007,04/21/2009
* Valerio Toledano Laredo,MA,Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2010
* USD 223,612.00

This proposal stems from the PI's recent generalisation of the Kohno-Drinfeld
theorem according to which the monodromy of the Casimir connection, a flat
connection with logarithmic singularities on the root hyperplanes of a simple
Lie algebra, is described by the quantum Weyl group operators of the
corresponding quantum group. This result had been conjectured independently by
the PI and De Concini. The first project, in collaboration with B. Feigin and E.
Frenkel, endeavours to establish a precise link between the Casimir connection
and Conformal Field Theory by exhibiting new fields in the Wess-Zumino-Witten
model whose correlation functions satisfy the corresponding system of
differential equations, thus incorporating connections with irregular
singularities into this model. This project has a number of important potential
applications beyond those to Conformal Field Theory: to the structure and
representation theory of simple Lie algebras (quantisation of the shift of
argument subalgebra, construction of new basis of irreducible finite dimensional
representations) and to Statistical Mechanics (construction of new integrable
models generalising the Gaudin model). The second project aims at extending the
PI's monodromy theorem at roots of unity. This extension could provide the
impetus for the study of generalised braided tensor categories, that is tensor
categories whose underlying braid group is a generalised one, and whose
definition is implicit in the axioms of a quasi-Coxeter algebra. The last
project, in collaboration with R. Rouquier, is concerned with Dynkin diagram
cohomology, which was introduced by the PI to control deformations of quasi-
Coxeter algebras. Its aim is to arrive at a better combinatorial and topological
understanding of this cohomology by computing it for Coxeter groups and the
enveloping algebras of semi-simple Lie algebras.

Quantum groups are deformations of the most basic symmetry groups of Nature.
They were discovered in the mid-eighties as symmetries of certain Quantum
mechanical systems and have since appeared in a wide range of fields in
Mathematics and Physics such as String Theory, Quantum Statistical Mechanics,
the study of finite symmetry groups, Topology and Combinatorics. One of their
bewildering aspects is their uncanny ability to address, and solve, long
standing problems in these fields which are often formulated without appealling
to quantum groups. The PI has been pursuing one such avenue of investigation, by
using quantum groups to describe the branching behaviour of solutions of certain
systems of differential equations in the complex domain. This proposal aims at
further broadening our understanding of this intriguing phenomenon. This project
has important potential applications to String Theory and Representation Theory.
It is also expected that it will lead to a wide generalisation of Braided Tensor
Categories which, in their present guise, have been extensively used in Computer
Science, Logic and, more recently, Quantum Computing. The PI has, on several
occasions, given lectures to audiences of young researchers and graduate
students about his recent results and always found an extremely receptive
audience. It is likely that the further developments stemming from them which
are presented above will attract such young mathematicians.
