
* 0728322
* Trends in noncommutative geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2007,08/28/2007
* Boris Tsygan,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2008
* USD 31,000.00

Abstract

Award: DMS-0728322 Principal Investigator: Boris Tsygan, Dmitry Tamarkin

This award provides partial support for a conference at the end of the emphasis
year on noncommutative geometry at Northwestern University. Its aim was to
explore the interaction between several directions in noncommutative geometry:
index theorems, noncommutative calculus and operads, relations to mathematical
physics, to number theory, and to the geometric Langlands program. An important
objective was to highlight the subjects that are strong in the Chicago area
(algebraic geometry, motives, microlocal analysis, representation theory,
geometric Langlands program, mirror symmetry) and investigate their links to the
works in what is more traditionally considered noncommutative geometry, and vice
versa. For example, an algebraic approach to loop spaces that is used in the
geometric Langlands program and in representation theory of real groups was
compared to the topological string theory which is related to algebraic topology
and mathematical physics, as well as to an approach to the representation theory
of p-adic groups. A relation was established between these subjects, in
particular string topology, and current research on motives. Several approaches
to a conjectural relationship between noncommutative geometry and mirror
symmetry were presented.

Noncommutative geometry is an extension of the classical geometry to "spaces" in
which coordinates x, y, etc. no longer commute, i.e. where the identity xy=yx is
not necessarily true. Such "spaces" abound in mathematics and physics. For
example, noncommutativity is the mathematical manifestation of the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle in quantum mechanics: if x stands for a position of a
particle and y for its momentum, you cannot know precise values of both x and y.
In a more mathematical context, noncommutativity is an expression of the fact
that, if you apply two transformations to an object, the result depends on the
order in which you do it. Mathematical situations where noncommutativity occurs
have been known for a long time but the idea to treat them as "noncommutative
spaces" and to study them by geometric methods is relatively recent. One of the
successes of this approach is a radical simplification of the standard model in
quantum field theory by means of allowing the space to be noncommutative. The
aim of the conference was to compare several approaches to noncommutative
geometry, as well as its links to other areas of mathematics and physics. You
can find more information on the conference website at
http://www.math.northwestern.edu/~tsygan/conf


