
* 0739380
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: EMSW21-RTG: JOINT COLUMBIA-CUNY-NYU RESEARCH TRAINING GROUP IN NUMBER THEORY
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 09/01/2008,06/06/2012
* Yuri Tschinkel,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2014
* USD 809,000.00

The goal of the RTG proposal is to make the New York metropolitan area a
premier world center and model for the study of number theory. The project is a
joint training effort involving three universities (Columbia-CUNY-NYU) with
eight principal investigators and twenty-five other faculty all working in
number theory and related areas. The Columbia-CUNY-NYU team will develop nine
new graduate courses for the design of a city-wide graduate number theory
curriculum with more active training methods such as workshops, presentations by
students, and opportunities to develop technical lecturing, computer
programming, and writing skills. The new graduate courses will go beyond the
existing first year courses (commutative algebra/algebraic geometry, algebraic
number theory) and will cover a broad range of core topics (required for cutting
edge research) such as: arithmetic geometry, automorphic representations,
spectral theory, and combinatorial number theory. In addition, six new or
restructured undergraduate courses will be developed and an annual undergraduate
summer research program and graduate summer school (meeting once every 3 years)
will be created. The recently created Columbia-CUNY-NYU Number Theory Seminar
will be redesigned, making it more accessible to students and more vibrant for
seminal research. A central goal is to provide an environment where postdocs,
graduate students, undergraduates, and faculty from the entire New York
metropolitan area study and work together in a collaborative atmosphere that
fosters research and development.

Number theory is one of the oldest and most fundamental branches of mathematics.
Basic research in number theory has led to important applications in computer
science and cryptography. Recent spectacular breakthroughs in the subject such
as the proof of Fermat's Last Theorem by Taylor-Wiles require an understanding
of an enormous amount of mathematics, much of it outside number theory. It is
not sufficient any more for beginning students to study a small segment of
number theory. The eight PI's of this proposal (Goldfeld, Kolyvagin, Kramer,
Szpiro, Tschinkel, Urban, Venkatesh, Zhang) have extensive overlapping interests
but their combined expertise covers all of modern number theory. The scientific
research interests of the team include algebraic/arithmetic geometry, hyperbolic
geometry, automorphic forms and representations, Langlands program, analytic
number theory, spectral theory, ergodic theory, Lie algebras, algebraic number
theory, elliptic curves, dynamical systems, and cryptography. This project will
be decisive in raising the level of number theory across participating campuses:
cross-pollinating successful ideas already in existence, and creating approaches
through collective interaction. It is hoped that this RTG will become a national
model for other programs of this kind.
