
* 0748718
* CAREER: Stacks, moduli spaces, and log geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2008,03/29/2012
* Martin Olsson,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2014
* USD 400,006.00

The PI studies both foundational questions and applications of stacks and
logarithmic geometry. The project roughly breaks up into two parts. The first
part concerns the study of moduli spaces and log geometry. Since log geometry
and logarithmic structures are closely related to degenerations, log geometry
plays a natural role in the study of compactifications of moduli spaces. The PI
studies several problems related to log geometry and moduli spaces, and also
studies a logarithmic Grothendieck-Riemann-Roch theorem, generalizing the
classical theorem for schemes. The second part of the project concerns sheaves
on algebraic stacks. A central theme in this part of the project is trace
formulas and their generalizations to stacks. Central to all parts of the
project is the close relationship between algebraic stacks and log geometry
discovered in earlier work of the PI.

Given a system of polynomial equations defining an algebraic variety, there are
two natural ways to study the system. One approach is to study the symmetries of
the equations, and a second approach is to vary the coefficients of the
equations ("moduli") and "degenerate" them to a simpler (though possibly
singular) system. Stacks, introduced by Artin, Deligne, Grothendieck, and
Mumford in the late 1960's, are the main tool used in algebraic geometry to
study spaces with additional symmetries. In recent years, the theory of stacks
has come to play an important role in almost every part of algebraic geometry,
arithmetic geometry, and mathematical physics and a great number of exciting new
applications of stacks have been found. For example, stacks play a central role
in the study of Brauer groups and in the rich interaction between string theory
and algebraic geometry. For the study of degenerations, a key tool is the theory
of logarithmic geometry developed by Kato, Fontaine, and Illusie in the late
1980's. As mentioned above, in earlier work the PI related this theory to
stacks, and the ongoing projects use this relationship to further our
understanding of degenerations and the moduli of algebraic varieties.
