
* 0752235
* Twenty-First Cumberland Conference on Combinatorics, Graph Theory and Computing
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 03/01/2008,11/29/2007
* Mark Ellingham,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Sagan
* 02/28/2009
* USD 14,000.00

ABSTRACT

Twenty-First Cumberland Conference on Combinatorics, Graph Theory and Computing

Mark N. Ellingham

An international research conference in the area of discrete mathematics and
computer science will be held at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee
from 15th to 17th May, 2008. The conference is the Twenty-First Cumberland
Conference on Combinatorics, Graph Theory and Computing. The Cumberland
Conference is an annual conference held to bring together researchers in
discrete mathematics and computer science in the mid-south and southeast. It was
first held in 1988, and has been held every year since then. The venue changes
from year to year, moving around between universities. Many outstanding
researchers have given principal talks at previous Cumberland Conferences.

The conference focuses on combinatorics, graph theory and computing. These
areas form the essential theoretical background for much of our modern
information infrastructure, and for many modern methods of optimizing activities
such as transportation and scheduling. Tools from these areas are used in areas
as diverse as ecology, communication networks such as the Internet, economics
and business, and military logistics. The conference aims to promote interaction
between researchers, to allow for the dissemination of the most recent research
results, and to publicize the importance of these areas in modern society.

The conference is expected to have about 100 participants. There will be five
principal hour speakers and about sixty contributed talks, each of fifteen or
twenty minutes' duration, in two or three parallel sessions. At the time of
writing, Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi (National Institute of Informatics, Japan), Neil
Robertson (Ohio State University), Akira Saito (Nihon University, Japan), and
Bjarne Toft (University of Southern Denmark) have accepted invitations to be
principal speakers. The conference is organized by Mark Ellingham and Gexin Yu,
both of Vanderbilt University.

Besides being a meeting place for mathematicians and computer scientists from
the southeast, the conference will have a focus on two special areas designed to
stimulate future research. There will be forward-looking focused sessions on
Matchings, Factors and Factorizations, and on Hadwiger's Conjecture. These are
currently very active areas of research, and these sessions should attract
attendance from strong researchers from a wider area. In addition, the
conference will be dedicated in honor of Mike Plummer's 70th birthday, and these
are two topics in which Mike has worked. There will be principal speakers and
special contributed talk sessions in each of these two areas.
