
* 0753009
* Linear Algebra and Applications Graduate Summer School
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2008,12/10/2007
* Leslie Hogben,IA,Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Sagan
* 05/31/2009
* USD 25,223.00

ABSTRACT

Principal Investigator: Hogben, Leslie Proposal Number: DMS - 0753009
Institution: Iowa State University Title: Linear Algebra and Applications
Graduate Summer School: Additional Funding



Linear algebra is a subject of central importance in both mathematics and a
variety of other disciplines. It is used by virtually all mathematicians and by
statisticians, physicists, biologists, computer scientists, engineers, and
social scientists. Just as the basic idea of first semester differential
calculus (approximating the graph of a function by its tangent line) provides
information about the function, the process of linearization often allows
difficult problems to be approximated by more manageable linear ones. This can
provide insight into, and, thanks to ever-more-powerful computers, approximate
solutions of the original problem. The fundamental nature of linear algebra and
its many applications make this an ideal theme for a summer program for graduate
students.

The 2008 Institute for Mathematics and its Applications (IMA) Participating
Institutions Summer Graduate Program on ``Linear Algebra and Applications'' will
be held Iowa State University June 29 - July 26, 2008. The IMA will pay all
costs for the principal speakers and all expenses for up to two students from
each of the 40 IMA participating institutions to this Summer Graduate Program.
This project will provide support for an 12 additional graduate students from
non-IMA US institutions, and salary for a post-doctoral associate who will serve
as a mentor to the graduate students. Applications will be taken through the
Linear Algebra and Applications Graduate Summer School website
http://www.ima.umn.edu/2007-2008/PISG6.30-7.25.08/

The program organizers are Leslie Hogben, Wolfgang Kliemann and Yiu-Tung Poon.
The the principal speakers and their topics are:

Bryan Shader, University of Wyoming, Linear algebra and applications to
combinatorics.

David S. Watkins, Washington State University, Numerical Linear Algebra.

Chi-Kwong Li, College of William and Mary, Matrix inequalities and equations in
science and engineering.

Fritz Colonius, University of Augsburg, Germany, Applications of linear algebra
to dynamical systems.

Lectures will be presented in the mornings and students will work in groups in
the afternoons, supervised by post-doctoral associate Jason Grout. Each week the
students will learn the necessary background to attack current research problems
presented at the end of the week.

The Linear Algebra and Applications Graduate Summer School will help to educate
future US mathematical scientists. This NSF funding will broaden participation
in the summer school and will hence magnify its impact and allow a more
diversified group of students to participate, since the organizers will now
advertise the summer school broadly also to underrepresented groups of students
outside of the IMA participating institutions.


