
* 0755520
* Moduli of vector bundles, Donaldson-Thomas theory and Gromov-Witten theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/15/2008,04/16/2010
* Zhenbo Qin,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2013
* USD 119,736.00

The study of vector bundles is a fundamental problem in algebraic geometry.
Their connections with physics and representation theory were pioneered in the
work of Penrose and Atiyah. They played central roles in Donaldson theory and
Seiberg-Witten theory. From 1995, physicists working in string theory have
speculated many surprising but deep results concerning vector bundles, Gromov-
Witten theory and their interplay with representation theory. In the past few
years, elegant relations among moduli spaces of vector bundles (including
Hilbert schemes of points and curves), Donaldson-Thomas theory and Gromov-Witten
theory have been revealed. In this project, Professor Qin intends to study
several problems concerning moduli of vector bundles, Donaldson-Thomas theory
and Gromov-Witten theory in the general context of algebraic geometry and its
interplay with representation theory and string theory. The main tools are
localized virtual fundamental classes, techniques of vertex algebras, quantum
cohomology, and stable bundles on surfaces and three folds.

Algebraic geometry studies geometric objects described by polynomial equations.
It has been at the central stage of recent confluence between mathematics and
physics. Many of these interactions have led to profound improvement in the
understanding of both mathematics and physics. Professor Qin's research helps to
strength these interactions.
