
* 0757987
* Algebraic Geometry and Representation Theory in Genus One
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2008,07/29/2008
* Thomas Nevins,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 07/31/2013
* USD 120,000.00

Nevins will develop new methods and apply them to algebra and representation
theory ``in genus one''---that is, as encoded in the geometry and noncommutative
algebra of moduli of bundles on (possibly singular) genus one curves. First,
Nevins will systematically establish geometric realizations of some fundamental
objects of noncommutative algebra, the double affine Hecke algebras and their
degenerations. Second, Nevins will develop tools of ``categorical harmonic
analysis'' for these geometric objects via the geometry (classical and quantum)
of phase spaces of some ubiquitous particle systems, the Calogero-Moser and
Ruijsenaars-Schneider systems. Third, Nevins will apply these tools to classify
representations of these algebras and explore new geometric and algebraic
directions in their study.

Harmonic analysis is a powerful tool in many areas of mathematics and its
applications. For example, the classical Fourier transform, which decomposes a
wave into its pure frequencies, plays a central role in the understanding of
many concrete physical problems. Nevins will develop new methods of harmonic
analysis in a geometric setting. He will then apply these powerful new tools to
explore the rich structure of important algebraic objects known as double affine
Hecke algebras.
