
* 0757627
* FRG: L-functions and Modular Forms
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2008,08/27/2012
* William Stein,CA,American Institute of Mathematics
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 09/30/2012
* USD 1,219,078.00

The PI and his research team are proposing a major new project to develop theory
and organize methods for understanding and computing with L-functions and
modular forms. Broadly speaking, they plan to chart the landscape of L-functions
and modular forms in a systematic and concrete fashion. They will study these
functions, develop algorithms for their computation, and test fundamental
conjectures, including: the Generalized Riemann Hypothesis, the Birch and
Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture, the Bloch-Kato conjecture, the correlation
conjectures of Montgomery and of Rudnick-Sarnak, the density conjectures of
Katz-Sarnak, automorphy of the Hasse-Weil zeta functions, and the Selberg
eigenvalue conjecture. They plan to carry out a systematic study, theoretically,
algorithmically, and experimentally of degree 1, 2, 3, 4 L-functions and their
associated modular forms, including classical modular forms, Maass forms for
GL(2), GL(3), GL(4), Siegel modular forms, and Hilbert modular forms. They will
also investigate symmetric square and cube L-functions, Rankin-Selberg
convolution L-functions, the Hasse-Weil L-functions of algebraic varieties,
Artin L-functions associated to 3- and 4-dimensional Galois representations,
and, less systematically, look at a few high degree L-functions associated to
higher symmetric powers and higher dimensional Galois representations.

L-functions and modular forms underlie much of twentieth century number theory
and are connected to the practical applications of number theory in
cryptography. Virtually all branches of number theory have been touched by
L-functions and modular forms. Besides containing deep information concerning
the distribution of prime numbers and the structure of elliptic curves, they
feature prominently in Andrew Wiles' solution of the famous 350-year-old
Fermat's Last Theorem, and in the twentieth century classification of congruent
numbers, a problem first posed by Arab mathematicians one thousand years. In
spite of their central importance, mathematicians have only scratched the
surface of these crucial and powerful functions. The PI and his research team
are undertaking a major new project to systematically tabulate and study these
functions. Their work will fall into four categories: theoretical, algorithmic,
experimental, and data gathering. The theoretical work will be stimulated by
their goal of charting the world of L-functions and modular forms. Their
experimental work will involve testing many key conjectures concerning these
functions. The project will produce a large amount of training, with plans for
three graduate student schools, an undergraduate research experience, and
support for a score of postdocs and graduate students who will assist in
research. It will result in the creation of a vast amount of data about a wide
range of modular forms and L-functions, which will far surpass in range and
depth anything computed before in this area. The data will be organized in a
freely available online data archive, along with the actual programs that were
used to generate these tables. By providing these tables and tools online, the
researchers will guarantee that the usefulness of this project will extend far
beyond the circle of researchers on this FRG. The archive will be a rich source
of examples and tools for researchers working on L-functions and modular forms
for years to come, and will allow for future updates and expansion.
