
* 0757807
* Arithmetic of elliptic curves and abelian varieties
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2008,04/05/2010
* Karl Rubin,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2012
* USD 169,999.00

Elliptic curves and abelian varieties are increasingly important not only in
number theory and arithmetic algebraic geometry, but also in cryptography and
related applications. Some of the most interesting and important open
theoretical questions about elliptic curves and abelian varieties are the Birch
and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture and other questions about ranks of Mordell-Weil
groups, Selmer groups, and L-functions. On the applied side, a fundamental
question is the difficulty of the discrete logarithm problem on elliptic curves
over finite fields. In this project the investigator and his colleagues plan to
use many different techniques, including algebraic, p-adic, and analytic tools,
to study various aspects of these questions.

Elliptic curves and abelian varieties play a central role in many parts of
mathematics including its most applied areas. For example, elliptic curves are
used in algorithms to encrypt data for transmission, and for efficient digital
signatures. In its most basic form, an elliptic curve is a special kind of
polynomial equation in two variables. Historically number theorists are
interested in finding solutions of these equations in which the variables take
values which are either whole numbers, or fractions. The rank of an elliptic
curve is a basic invariant which measures the size of the set of solutions. The
investigator and his coworkers study ranks of elliptic curves and their
interrelations with other mathematical objects and concepts. They also study
other questions directly related to the cryptographic applications of elliptic
curves, which come about by considering solutions in which the variables take
values in finite fields.
