
* 0758391
* Algebraic Stacks and Applications
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/15/2008,07/08/2008
* Max Lieblich,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 03/31/2010
* USD 124,442.00

The PI proposes to continue his work on stacks and their applications to
arithmetic geometry, algebraic geometry, and noncommutative algebra. One project
involves studying the connection between the Hasse principle for geometrically
rational varieties over global fields and the period-index problem for Brauer
groups of function fields. This is analogous to the connection between Artin's
conjecture on the finiteness of the Brauer group for schemes proper over the
integers and the Tate-Shafarevich conjecture, and builds on earlier work by the
PI on the moduli of twisted sheaves. A second project will continue the joint
work carried out by the PI and Kovács on higher-dimensional generalizations of
the Shafarevich conjecture on non-isotrivial families of curves. Crucial to this
project will be a greater understanding of stacks parametrizing morphisms
between stacks, whose systematic study was only recently begun. A third project
aims to deepen the understanding of stacks and their intrinsic geometry. The PI
and his collaborators will study the nature of birational modifications and
analytification of stacks, and the categorical information content of stacks.
The ultimate goal of the proposed research is to broaden the applications of
algebro-geometric and stack-theoretic methods in pure algebra and related
fields.

Broadly speaking, algebraic geometry is the study of the geometry associated to
algebraic objects. One of the most fruitful historical examples is the equation
for a circle; the quadratic nature of the equation is closely related to the
fact that a line generally intersects a circle in two points. Over the last
several millennia, mathematicians have come to understand that the connections
between algebra and geometry run far deeper than one might imagine, and this has
led to the gradual encroachment of geometric methods into far-flung areas of
pure algebra and a profound unification of several seemingly-different subjects.
Each new advance in algebraic geometry ultimately finds applications to other
areas of mathematics; several abstract areas of the field have turned out to be
very computer-friendly, and modern cryptography would be impossible without
algebraic geometry. The theory of stacks is relatively young, but it has been
the focus of recent attention and is rapidly maturing. The PI's research will be
directed toward applying the theory of stacks to a wide range of problems in
algebra and geometry, bringing new tools to the geometric analysis of algebraic
problems.
