
* 0758379
* Equations and Automorphic Forms
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/01/2008,03/13/2014
* Christopher Skinner,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 09/30/2014
* USD 431,188.00

ABSTRACT

Principal Investigator: Wiles, Andrew J. Proposal Number: DMS - 0758379
Institution: Princeton University Title: Equations and Automorphic Forms

This project aims to study the problem of solving polynomial equations. The
formula for the solution of the quadratic equation, at least in special cases,
was known to the Babylonians and the solutions to cubic and quartic equations
were developed by Italian mathematicians in the 16th century. In the 19th
century it was shown that a general equation of degree greater than or equal to
five has no formula of the same kind. However it is possible that equations in
more than one variable might always have simple solutions obtained by extracting
roots, just as exist for the quadratic, cubic and quartic equations. Our first
goal is to try to find families of equations for which there are such solutions.
Our second goal is to try to describe the solutions in many cases in terms of
functions with symmetries called modular forms. These symmetries are more
complicated than, but are related to, the kinds of symmetries satisfied by the
trigonometric functions.

The particular set of curves which will be investigated are the curves of genus
one. These curves have received a lot of attention in recent years. The PI hopes
to extend his research into whether these curves always have solvable points.
His second and principal goal is to try to prove cases of non-solvable base
change. This would enable one to describe suitable representations of Galois
groups in terms of automorphic forms. This is a crucial part of the Langlands
program and seems to be a key stumbling block in the way of proving general
results about functoriality.
