
* 0758057
* Turan Problem for Graphs and Hypergraphs
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2008,05/20/2009
* Oleg Pikhurko,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2011
* USD 135,337.00

The PI proposes to work on the Turan problem for graphs and hypergraphs and
related questions. This problem, introduced in the seminal paper of Turan in
1941, asks for the largest size of a (hyper)graph of given order that does not
contain some fixed local configuration. Some very exciting techniques and tools
were greatly motivated by Turan-type questions, the recent developments
including the stability approach, hypergraph regularity lemmas, graphons, and
flag algebras. The PI will work on such important aspects as enlarging the
family of solved Turan instances, finding good sufficient conditions for
stability, studying jumps in the hypergraph Turan density, the co-degree
problem, the min-degree partite version, the saturation function, and Turan-type
questions for first order logic properties.

The proposed topic is one of the most important areas of extremal combinatorics,
comprising very general and deep problems, namely how some local restrictions
can influence the global structure. The main questions are still wide open in
spite of more than 65 years of active attempts by numerous mathematicians. Their
notorious difficulty has not stifled research. On the contrary, it brought to
life many areas of modern combinatorics and revealed fruitful connections to
other fields, including linear algebra, codes, design theory, finite geometries,
and computer science. Hopefully, the proposed work will lead to a better
understanding of this area. Also, this support will enable the PI to enhance his
other activities, such as organizing workshops, developing and teaching courses
that disseminate new research techniques and results, and mentoring young
mathematicians.
