
* 0800085
* RUI: Combinatorics and Repesentations of Diagram Algebras
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/15/2008,09/16/2008
* Thomas Halverson,MN,Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2012
* USD 120,540.00

This proposal is to study the combinatorial representation theory of a class of
algebraic structures known as diagram algebras. These algebras have bases given
by collections of diagrams and multiplication described combinatorially by
diagram concatenation. Examples of diagram algebras arising in this project
include partition algebras, Temperley-Lieb algebras, braid group and symmetric
group algebras, complex reflection group algebras, Hecke algebras, and many
generalizations. Often these diagram algebras arise as centralizer algebras of
Lie theoretic objects, and this duality, classically known as Schur-Weyl
duality, is a central theme in this research. The main goals of this project are
(1) to give a combinatorial construction and analysis of the q-partition
algebra, (2) to study diagram algebras related to the McKay correspondence, (3)
to combinatorially construct multiplicity-free model representations of diagram
algebras, (4) to analyze canonical bases for diagram algebras. This research
uses both combinatorial and algebraic tools, and the relation is symbiotic:
combinatorics are used to model and describe algebraic structures and algebra is
used to find combinatorial relationships.

The algebraic structures under investigation represent the symmetries in highly
complicated systems such as models of energy transfer in statistical mechanics,
the AdS/CFT correspondence in string theory, principal components in large sets
of data, and quantum symmetries in integrable lattice models. These algebras are
enormous, complex structures which are best understood through their
representations as matrices operating on vector spaces. The goal of
combinatorial representation theory (and this proposal) is to find concrete
elementary models which allow us to understand and obtain explicit information
about the detailed structure of these matrix representations and especially of
their irreducible components. An important feature of this project is to engage
undergraduate researchers as collaborative assistants in all of the aspects of
this work.




