
* 0801625
* Dimer-mediated interaction of gaps in lattice graphs
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Combinatorics
* 07/01/2008,04/22/2010
* Mihai Ciucu,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2011
* USD 127,500.00

This proposal is concerned with the asymptotic enumeration of dimer coverings of
lattice graphs with holes. More specifically, using work of Fisher and
Stephenson as its starting point, it studies how the total number of dimer
coverings of the complement of the holes changes as the holes are shifted around
on the lattice graph. The joint correlation of a collection of holes is a non-
negative real number measuring this change, and is the central object of study
of this proposal. In earlier work, the proposer proved that the correlation of
holes on the hexagonal lattice is governed, for large separations between the
holes, by a law closely resembling the superposition principle of
electrostatics: If each hole is regarded as a point charge of magnitude given by
the signed difference between the number of white and black vertices in it (in a
fixed white-black coloring of the vertices in which each edge has oppositely
colored endpoints), then, for large distances between the holes, their
correlation is proportional to the exponential of the negative of the 2D
electrostatic energy of the resulting system of charges. Other previous results
concern two naturally defined fields that the proposer proved approach the
electric field in the limit when the lattice spacing approaches zero. In the
current project, the proposer presents a program organized in several inter-
related groups comprising two dozen specific problems and conjectures. The bulk
of this program is aimed at developing further the analogy to electrostatics,
but the list includes also independent combinatorial problems, such as
conjectures on tiling enumeration of new regions and problems arising in the
study of card shufflings.

This research is in the general area of Combinatorics. One of the goals of
Combinatorics is to find efficient methods of studying how discrete collections
of objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely
important to modern communications. For example, the design of large networks,
such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in
computer science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of
combinatorial research. The specific problems in this project are instances of
the dimer model of statistical physics. A basic illustration of this is the
real-world process (relevant to the study of of lubricants) of adsorption of a
liquid, consisting of two-atom molecules---the dimers in the model---along the
surface of a crystal, whose fixed atoms form a lattice pattern, with any two
neighboring positions capable of holding one molecule, and any given crystal
atom being involved in the adsorption of at most one molecule. The main issue in
this setting is the asymptotic behavior of the quantities that are studied
(speciffically, the number of different ways the surface of the crystal can be
covered by molecules). In some of the instances we encounter, the usually more
difficult problem of determining quantities exactly turns out to allow progress
in the asymptotic study.
