
* 0838692
* A Sage/SciPy Developer Workshop: Special Functions and Computational Number Theory Meet Scientific Computing; Austin, TX
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 02/01/2009,02/02/2009
* Fernando Rodriguez-Villegas,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 01/31/2010
* USD 9,000.00

This workshop is an instance of SAGE Days (number 11 to be precise), a periodic
gathering where developers of the software package SAGE, a free and open
software that supports research and teaching in algebra, geometry, number
theory, cryptography, and related areas, address current issues of the software,
program for very long hours, either improving existing code or adding new code,
and plan the next steps to be taken. For example, this workshop includes working
on adding to SAGE the capability to work with modular forms over function
fields. In addition to the above standard features of such a meeting, this
particular workshop includes a strong emphasis in the interaction betwen algebra
and number theory (the area of the bulk of the SAGE developers and researchers
in attendance) and computer science, supercomputing (from TACC, the Texas
supercomputing center) and applied Mathematics (from ICES, the Institute for
Computational Engineering and Sciences) at the University of Texas at Austin, as
well as researchers working outside academia (from Entought, an Austin based
company).

The main goals of this workshop are: (i) to support the development of the free
and open source software SAGE by gathering some of its developers as well as
researchers that use it in their own research; (ii) to bring together the SAGE
commnunity and various research groups at the host location, the University of
Texas at Austin, that while might have very different research focus share many
common computational problems and needs. To give just one example, being able to
solve large linear algebra problems accurately and fast is a fundamental problem
that underlies essentially any type of scientific computation imaginable. The
availability of high level software is nowadays of crucial and increasing
importance for research in Mathematics, both in applied and pure Mathematics.
SAGE is an example of a be very powerful computer package that is at the cutting
edge (in terms of the sophistication of its capabilities as well as its speed)
of existing tools for research in Mathematics and its applications;
particularly, in those areas related to algebra, number theory, geometry and
cryptography. The workshop is planned with the SAGE development model in mind,
distinguished by an emphasis on openness, community, cooperation, and
collaboration.
