
* 0838210
* EMSW21-RTG: Algebraic Geometry and Number Theory at the University of Wisconsin
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 08/01/2009,03/05/2014
* Jordan Ellenberg,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2014
* USD 1,297,349.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The University of Wisconsin Algebraic Geometry and Number Theory Research
Training Grant will integrate the research activities of this core part of the
faculty into a unified training program involving postdoctoral faculty, graduate
students, and undergraduates from UW and elsewhere. The eight faculty members
involved in the grant cover the entire spectrum of number theory and algebraic
geometry, from automorphic forms to arithmetic geometry to interfaces with
mathematical physics and theoretical computer science. The team will run a
collaborative undergraduate research laboratory in which undergraduates work
together with graduate students in the focus areas with the goal of producing
publishable research and easing the transition to graduate school. For US
undergraduates outside our program who are admitted to UW for Ph.D. study, we
will offer a Summer Enhancement Program, in order to prepare the students for
qualifiying exams as quickly as possible so that their research can begin
without delay. Once the research is underway, we will provide teaching relief to
these students with RTG fellowships. In addition, we will run annual graduate
student conferences, focusing on number theory and algebraic geometry in
alternate years, where students from UW and other schools will get up to speed
with currrent developments in all aspects of this rapidly changing subject in a
collaborative environment, and gain professional skills in lecturing and
presentation. Taken together, these programs will enable us to enhance our
already strong record of producing very strong Ph.D. graduates in number theory
and algebraic geometry. We will also offer new postdoctoral fellowships, aimed
at bringing top new Ph.D.s in the focus areas to Wisconsin to serve as a
critical bridge between senior faculty and students, and allowing us to continue
our tradition of energetic mentorship of postdocs, and research collaboration
between postdocs and graduate students.

Number theory -- the study of numbers, their patterns, their properties -- is
one of the oldest branches of mathematics, in which we still wrestle with some
of the problems that vexed the Greeks. Algebraic geometry -- the study of
equations and the shapes traced out by their graphs -- is much younger, but
still goes back centuries to the time of Rene Descartes. But with the
revolutionary work of Alexander Grothendieck and his collaborators in the 1960s,
a magnficent unity between these two seemingly unrelated subjects was exposed.
This new paradigm has become so central to modern mathematics that the boundary
between number theory and algebraic geometry has been almost entirely erased.
The University of Wisconsin is a center of cutting-edge research in this new
hybrid subject. The RTG will allow us to leverage our research strength to
create a completely integrated training program for new researchers in the area,
starting at the undergraduate level and continuing all the way up to young
Ph.D.s in the pre-tenure phase of their career
