
* 0846972
* CAREER: Higher rational connectedness, higher Fano manifolds, and applications
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2009,05/31/2013
* Jason Starr,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2015
* USD 419,999.00

Rational connectedness, rational simple connectedness, etc., are algebro-
geometric analogues of path connectedness, simple connectedness, etc. Just as
higher connectedness and higher homotopy groups play an important role in
topological obstruction theory, so the algebro-geometric analogues should play
an important role in algebro-geometric obstruction theory. In particular, new
ideas coming from A1-homotopy theory should resolve the weak approximation
problem of Hassett and Tschinkel. There are 3 objectives of the research
component. One objective is to develop an algebro-geometric theory of higher
rational connectedness analogous to the theory of topological obstruction
theory, and with applications to existence of rational sections of algebraic
fibrations. A second objective is the classification of higher Fano manifolds,
the study of their connection to higher rational connectedness, and the study of
their complex differential geometry. The final objective is to study the
parameter spaces for rational curves on Fano manifolds which do not satisfy the
higher Fano conditions. This is relevant to the open problem of proving
existence of non-unirational Fano manifolds.

Quite frequently in science and engineering one wants to solve a system of
polynomial equations in some set of variables, and depending on some set of
parameters. An optimal case is when there is a solution to the system of
equations whose coordinates are themselves polynomials (or more often fractions
of polynomials) in the parameters. There are some sufficient conditions for this
optimal solution which involve the geometry of the solution set for a general
choice of the parameters. The goal is to sharpen these results to give
conditions which are both sufficient and necessary, i.e., to develop a theory of
"obstructions" to the existence of rational solutions.

The educational component of the proposal has 3 parts: a program aimed at
training high school math teachers from the MA program directed by the PI so
that they may establish and run math clubs and math circles in their schools, a
seminar/summer workshop in mathematical exposition for graduate students and
recent postdocs, and a northeastern regional algebraic geometry seminar
fostering interactions between graduate students in different cities across the
northeastern United States.
