
* 0854900
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Automorphic forms, Galois representations, periods and p-adic L-functions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2009,02/09/2010
* Kartik Prasanna,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2013
* USD 275,171.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The PIs will study some fundamental problems in algebraic number theory,
particularly problems related to the deep links between Galois representations
and special values of L-functions (as conjectured in the Birch-Swinnerton-Dyer
Conjecture and the Bloch-Kato Conjectures). More specifically, the PIs will
study the following themes: (i) Mod-p Galois representations and mod-p modular
forms; (ii) Constructing Galois representations and motives associated to
automorphic forms; (iii) The Iwasawa Main Conjecture; (iv) p-adic families of
automorphic forms and applications; (iv) Algebraic cycles, p-adic L-functions
and Euler systems. Thus the main focus will be on p-adic methods in the theory
of automorphic forms and Galois representations. The PIs will arrange short-term
visits for collaborative research purposes between themselves, affiliated
researchers and new comers in the area, be actively involved in graduate
training and postdoctoral advising, and organize two workshops and a final
conference, with preparation of a proceedings for dissemination of the results.

In nontechnical terms, the problems that the PIs will study involve showing the
surprising equality of two number-theoretic objects, one defined analytically
and the other algebraically. In this way, the problems to be studied are linked
by two common philosophical threads: the notion of a reciprocity law, which has
a long and deep tradition in number theory, going back to the quadratic
reciprocity law of Gauss, and the notion of a class number formula, which goes
back to the fundamental ideas of Dirichlet. Further, such equalities of
mathematical objects defined in a priori different ways are not just of
theoretical interest but tend to have extremely concrete applications, the most
striking recent ones being the resolution of Fermat's last theorem and the Sato-
Tate conjecture. The workshops, the final conference, and the graduate and post-
doctoral advising will have an important impact on the formation of new
researchers in the field and on the promotion of new collaborations.
