
* 0855257
* Investigations on Low-Lying Zeros of L-Functions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2008,10/30/2008
* Steven Miller,MA,Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 12/31/2010
* USD 40,792.00

Professor Miller will study properties of zeros of L-functions near the central
point, and equidistribution questions related to digits of arithmetically
interesting sequences and functions. Zeros near the central point in families of
L-functions are well modeled by scaling limits of eigenvalues near 1 of a
classical compact group. For elliptic curves the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer
conjecture relates zeros at the central point to the size of the group of
rational solutions. Thus one-parameter families of elliptic curves with rank
over Q(T) should provide an accessible laboratory for investigating the effect
of multiple zeros. In addition to studying special families of L-functions (with
emphasis on how zeros of the twist of two families of L-functions and families
of L-functions with high vanishing at the central point behave), the research
will include developing random matrix theory models for ensembles with high
multiplicity eigenvalues, as well as writing computer programs and algorithms
for numerical investigations. This will be accomplished by analyzing Legendre
sums related to elliptic curves (for by the explicit formula sums over zeros of
an L-function are related to sums over primes of its coefficients), analysis of
the Satake parameters of Rankin-Selberg convolutions, and developing
combinatorial formulas to handle the random matrix theory calculations. As
conjectures on the behavior of zeros are related to standard conjectures in
number theory, this work provides an opportunity to test such claims (for
example, the dependence of the error term on the residue class for primes in
arithmetic progression). Finally, Professor Miller and A. Kontorovich recently
proved that values of L-functions near the critical line, values of
characteristic polynomials of random matrix ensembles and iterates of the 3x+1
map satisfy Benford's law for digit bias. These connections will be further
explored in additional systems of number theoretic interest.

Zeros of L-functions have been related to arithmetic problems since Riemann;
standard conjectures on their distribution imply numerous results in number
theory, with applications ranging from optimal error terms in counting primes to
constructing efficient algorithms in cryptography. In the last few decades
connections have been observed with high energy nuclear physics and random
matrix theory as well. Thus investigations in one of these topics can be
fruitfully used in the others. Studying digit bias in number theoretic and
dynamic systems highlights key features of these problems, and is another
example where different systems behave similarly. Deriving techniques to detect
and understand digit bias have enormous applications; such methods have been
used to test for data integrity. Many of these projects have components that are
amenable to numerical experimentation; these and tractable special cases will be
investigated in conjunction with undergraduate research assistants.
