
* 0901554
* Methods of supergeometry in representation theory of supergroups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2009,07/26/2009
* Vera Serganova,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sommers
* 07/31/2013
* USD 153,249.00

The project addresses structure problems in representation theory of supergroups
and suggests geometric methods to approach them. Two fundamental questions of
representation theory of any algebraic structure are the description of
irreducible representations and the description of indecomposable
representations. The second question is trivial in semi-simple case; however,
since finite-dimensional representations of a simple algebraic supergroup are
not completely reducible, both questions turns out to be very difficult: naive
constructions give representations which are not irreducible, and irreducibles
allow nontrivial extensions. (The situation is similar to one for modular
representations.) In the last 25 years works of many mathematicians brought a
lot of progress. Now, the characters of irreducible representations are known
for general linear and orthosymplectic supergroups. The proposal suggests to
adopt the geometric ideas of localization and support variety for supergroups to
address the question of extensions. In particular, the proposal constructs a
graph which conjecturally encodes a lot of information about extensions and
characters. This graph appears naturally in calculation of cohomology groups of
invertible sheaves on flag supervarieties and in attempt to generalize a Borel--
Weil--Bott theory for supervarieties. A complementary geometric approach is via
a functor associating to each module over a Lie superalgebra a quasicoherent
sheaf on the cone of selfcommuting odd elements. The support of this sheaf has
two counterparts in other branches of representation theory: the associated
varieties of Harish-Chandra modules and the rank varieties in modular case. The
conjecture is that the complexity of a simple module grows with the dimension of
the support of the corresponding sheaf, in particular, one can prove the Kac-
Wakimoto conjecture on superdimension this way. The proposal also suggests first
steps for "odd" geometric quantization of the self-commuting cone. Recently,
supersymmetric spaces became very popular in relation to sigma models; several
physical papers develop particular examples of harmonic analysis on such spaces.
The proposal contains a conjecture about the structure of modules of regular
functions on supersymmetric spaces. The final part of the proposal concerns
infinite-dimensional Lie superalgebras; character formulae for affine
superalgebras were conjectured by Kac and Wakimoto. The aim here is to single
out the cases when the conjectures hold, and to prove them in these cases.

In modern particle physics, the principle of supersymmetry plays a very
important role already for decades. A relatively new development is that, during
the last decade, physicists realized that using supergroup symmetries makes
feasible solutions of certain problems in the theory of condensed matter as
well, e.g., in (super)conductivity. The methods of supersymmetry factor the
questions interesting for physicists through the theory of representations of
supergroups and superalgebras. The proposal puts forward several geometric
methods, which, when developed, would answer a lot of currently pending concrete
questions needed by physicists.
