
* 0901086
* Abelian Varieties, Jacobians, and Applications
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2009,07/26/2009
* Samuel Grushevsky,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 10/31/2010
* USD 155,776.00

The PI proposes to work with multiple collaborators to study topics in algebraic
geometry, number theory, and string theory related to abelian varieties, curves,
and their moduli. The PI will study the intersection homology of the moduli
spaces of abelian varieties, investigate the failure of injectivity of the
Torelli map for Prym varieties, and endeavor to prove by degeneration that the
Schottky-Jung identities characterize Jacobians of curves among all abelian
varieties. The PI will attempt to use the geometric properties of Jacobians to
approach Coleman's conjecture on the finiteness of the number of Jacobians of a
fixed large genus with complex multiplication. By using real-normalized
meromorphic differentials, the PI will work on constructing complete
subvarieties of the moduli space of curves. The PI will also investigate further
mathematical and physical properties of superstring scattering amplitudes an
ansatz for which he proposed.

Algebraic curves (aka Riemann surfaces) are real two-dimensional surfaces with a
metric on them. They arise in many areas of mathematics, and are also
fundamental to string theory as worldsheets (trajectories) of strings
propagating in space. One can associate to any algebraic curve its Jacobian - it
is an algebraic variety (a geometric set of points, such that there is an
operation of "adding" two points together), and knowing the Jacobian one can
recover the curve uniquely. This project aims to utilize and further study the
intricate interplay between the geometry of the curve and of its Jacobian in
order to further our understanding of curves and abelian varieties. Progress
made on the questions addressed by this project would have implications in
mathematics and physics going beyond algebraic and complex geometry,
particularly in number theory, integrable systems, partial differential
equations, and perturbative string theory.
