
* 0901341
* Schubert calculus and algebraic combinatorics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2009,06/22/2009
* Harry Tamvakis,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2013
* USD 150,000.00

ABSTRACT

Principal Investigator: Tamvakis, Harry Proposal Number: DMS - 0901341
Institution: University of Maryland College Park Title: Schubert calculus and
algebraic combinatorics

The investigator will continue his study of quantum and arithmetic Schubert
calculus, degeneracy loci, and related algebraic combinatorics. The following
are some of the proposed research problems: a) complete his work on the
classical and quantum Schubert calculus for isotropic Grassmannians and more
general flag varieties; b) discover the right combinatorial objects to address
the Giambelli problem in the quantum cohomology rings of these spaces; c)
develop the related combinatorial theory of theta polynomials, a family of
polynomials which intertwines the Schur S and Q functions; d) find a Littlewood-
Richardson type rule for the product of two Schubert classes in the cohomology
of isotropic Grassmannians. The educational activities proposed by the
investigator include developing and teaching an undergraduate course based on
problem solving with topics that have a direct connection to current research.
He also will work on a book which aims to make the modern Schubert calculus and
its various extensions and applications more accessible to beginners in the
area.

This proposal is concerned with enumerative algebraic geometry and its
interaction with other parts of mathematics such as Lie theory and
combinatorics. The calculus invented by Schubert is a fundamental example of
enumerative techniques in geometry which predate the cohomology and intersection
theories of the twentieth century. An example of the kind of question considered
by Schubert is: given 4 lines in Euclidean 3-space in general position, how many
lines intersect all 4 of the given lines? Schubert calculus provides a general
method to answer similar questions involving linear conditions in higher
dimensions. The more recent definition of the quantum cohomology ring of a
manifold incorporates invariants that count the number of rational curves in the
space which satisfy natural incidence conditions. This theory has its origin in
quantum physics, where it has applications to string theory and the predictions
of mirror symmetry. The homogeneous spaces of Lie groups and their Schubert
varieties provide a rich source of examples where explicit computations of
quantum cohomology rings are possible. The resulting modern Schubert calculus is
the focus of this research project. Besides the many applications to related
areas such as equivariant cohomology and quiver varieties, it introduces fresh
new ways of looking at rather classical objects, and leads to important
combinatorial and computational challenges.
