
* 0901249
* Theta Functions, Intersection Theory and Representation Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2009,04/12/2011
* Prakash Belkale,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 05/31/2013
* USD 239,299.00

This project will focus on the interconnected areas of non-abelian theta
functions, intersection theory and representation theory. The view point is that
the theory of theta functions and invariant theory (with relations to the
classical Schubert calculus) constitute a common generalization of the classical
theory of theta functions. The spaces of theta functions correspond to physical
states in the WZW model of conformal field theory, and this correspondence links
the subject to modern mathematical physics.The Hitchin connection on the spaces
of non-abelian theta functions lies at the heart of the physics view point on
theta functions and several outstanding problems concerning its properties
remain open (unitarity, whether it is ``motivic''). The aim of the project is to
study the Hitchin connection, and to have techniques from conformal field theory
bear upon open problems in invariant theory such as the saturation conjecture
for the even orthogonal groups. A study of the Hitchin connection will be
carried out with potential applications to strange duality questions (that is,
relations between non-abelian theta functions for different groups) in their
most general formulation. It is hoped that a study of the strange dualities will
lead to insights on the Hitchin connection.

Algebraic geometry studies the solutions to systems of polynomial equations.
Representation theory (the theory of symmetry), combinatorics, and mathematical
physics have fundamental links with algebraic geometry. Theta functions,
originating in algebraic geometry, are some of the most important functions in
mathematics. These functions appear frequently in mathematical physics. The
project aims to deepen the links between theta functions and representation
theory. It is hoped that the project will lead to better algorithms in various
combinatorial questions. Possible applications outside of mathematics are via
contributions to the theory of differential equations (the Riemann-Hilbert
problem), to theoretical computer science and physics (string theory and
conformal field theory).


