
* 0901707
* Theory of Motivic Sheaves and Beyond
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2009,06/29/2009
* Vadim Vologodski,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2010
* USD 35,599.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

In this project, the PI intends to use the theory of motives to create new tools
for the study of problems in algebraic geometry and number theory. The PI will
develop a theory of motivic sheaves. His approach is based on the idea that the
category of motivic sheaves over a scheme can obtained by gluing the DG
categories of Voevodsky's motives over points. The PI plans to study the functor
of motivic vanishing cycles and prove that this functor commutes with the Hodge
realization and l-adic realization. The PI will apply these results to the study
of degenerations of algebraic varieties and, more specifically, to the
integrality conjectures in mirror symmetry. Additionally, the PI plans to use
the theory of motivic sheaves to embed the category of log schemes into the
category of motives providing a bridge between the Fujiwara-Kato-Nakayama Hodge
and etale realizations of log schemes.

The theory of motives is a central part of algebraic geometry. Algebraic
geometry deals with systems of algebraic equations. The theory of motives uses
ideas from algebraic topology (study of shapes by means of algebra)to understand
structural properties of the solution set even when one cannot actually solve
the equation explicitly. This theory provides a language to relate seemingly
unrelated objects such as the space of complex solutions to a given system of
algebraic equations with integral coefficient and the set of its integral
solutions. The PI plans to borrow some ideas from singularity theory (a part of
algebraic topology, that studies shapes by degenerating them into simpler ones),
adapt these ideas to the new setting, using the language of motives, and then
apply it to solve problems in algebraic geometry and number theory that can not
be solved by other methods.
