
* 0901221
* Feynman Motives
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2009,05/06/2010
* Matilde Marcolli,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2014
* USD 223,800.00

Quantum field theory is the most sophisticated technique for predictive
computations in high-energy and particle physics. The use of Feynman diagrams as
computational devices makes it possible to obtain high precision computations of
physical processes involving elementary particles and quantum fields. Despite
its long history of successful applications to the world of particle physics,
the mathematics of quantum field theory is still mysterious and full of
beautiful challenges and open problems. Numerical evidence suggests that the
procedure of extracting finite values from divergent Feynman integrals gives
rise to a class of numbers, multiple zeta values, that are of great significance
to number theory and algebraic geometry. This suggests a mysterious relation
between quantum field theory and an important research topic of current interest
in pure mathematics: Grothendieck's theory of motives of algebraic varieties.
The purpose of this research proposal is to understand the nature of this
relation and investigate what results can be derived from it, both in terms of
gaining some better understanding of the very difficult multi-loop computations
of Feynman integrals using tools from algebraic geometry, and conversely of
understanding how we can extend our current knowledge of motives using quantum
field theory.

One of the main questions under investigation is when, possibly after a
subtraction of divergences, the computation of a Feynman integral for a scalar
quantum field theory results in a period of a mixed Tate motive. Using the
Feynman parametric form, this question reflects the motivic nature of a relative
cohomology of an affine hypersurface constructed out of the data of the Feynman
integral. The subtraction of divergences is encoded in a Hopf algebra structure,
which is itself related to Hopf algebras and dual groups that appear naturally
in the theory of motives. One of the main steps that are needed to further
understand the relation between quantum field theory and motives is combining
the more concrete approach via the algebraic geometry of hypersurfaces of
Feynman graphs with the more abstract approach via Tannakian categories and Hopf
algebras.
