
* 0901852
* Problems in Motivic Cohomology Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2009,09/04/2009
* Andrei Suslin,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2013
* USD 189,998.00

Proposer plans to investigate several topics in motivic cohomology theory. The
first project is to compare two constructions of the motivic spectral sequence,
the first due to Bloch, Lichtenbaum, Friedlander, Suslin and Levine and the
second one due to Grayson and Suslin. Since the first construction was shown by
M. Levine to coincide with the Voevodsky construction via the slice filtration
this will prove that all the known approaches to the construction of the
spectral sequence give the same answer. The second project concerns the motives
of non split reductive algebraic groups like GL_n,D and SL_n,D, where D is a
central division algebra over a field F. The third project is an attempt to
compute the group H^n-1,n(F) for a field F. Finally the last project concerns
the comparison between two constructions of the algebraic cobordism theory.

The main objective of mathematics is to provide an accurate picture to the
physical world or at least an appropriate approximation of that picture. From
this point of view algebraic varieties are of principal importance, first they
are relatively easy to understand since they are just defined by polynomial
equations, next they usually give a rather accurate approximation to other
shapes, most importantly they do appear naturally in quite a lot of subjects
from theoretical physics to coding theory. That is why algebraic geometry - the
theory of algebraic varieties is so important for the development and
applications of mathematics. This project is devoted to the study of certain
fundamental problems of motivic cohomology theory - a relatively new and very
quickly developing branch of algebraic geometry. Geometry is blended with
algebra and topology in this part of mathematics, ideas and methods to be used
come equally from all these directions.
