
* 0902145
* The relative trace formula and central L-values
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 09/01/2009,08/17/2009
* Andrew Knightly,ME,University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2013
* USD 137,246.00

The purpose of the proposed research is to establish new explicit identities
involving the central values of L-functions and other data attached to
automorphic forms. The relative trace formula is a technique which expresses
period integrals of automorphic forms on a given group in terms of orbital
integrals on the group. Depending on the setup, the period integrals can give
desirable spectral information, like Fourier coefficients or L-values. One
example is the GL(2) Fourier trace formula of Kuznetsov, which has become
ubiquitous in analytic number theory with applications to such diverse important
problems as bounding sums of Kloosterman sums, moments of the Riemann zeta
function, and subconvexity for modular L-functions. The PI and his collaborator
C. Li will develop other Fourier trace formulas, and also directly investigate
various averages of L-functions using the relative trace formula.

This project is in number theory, which is the study of the integers and their
algebraic properties. According to a conjecture of Langlands, the algebraic
structure of the rational numbers, as captured by the Galois group, is encoded
by modular forms. These are functions in advanced calculus which exhibit special
symmetries. The proposed research will deepen our understanding of modular
forms.


