
* 0902103
* Geometric realizations of local Langlands correspondences
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2009,06/29/2009
* Matthias Strauch,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2013
* USD 135,794.00

"This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5)."

The PI proposes to investigate representations of p-adic reductive groups
(mainly general linear groups) and Galois groups which are (simultaneously)
realized by the cohomology of deformation spaces of p-divisible groups. The
proposed research naturally falls into two projects, according to the type of
cohomology theory that is considered. The rst project is concerned with the de
Rham cohomology of the p-adic symmetric spaces de ned by Drinfeld. These can be
considered as the special bers of formal schemes, and these formal schemes
represent deformation functors for certain p-divisible formal groups (with extra
structures). It was shown by P. Schneider and U. Stuhler that the (compactly
supported) de Rham cohomology groups of these spaces realize generalized
Steinberg representations (of general linear groups). Torsion points on the
universal formal group give rise to etale coverings of the symmetric spaces, and
global arguments (relying on the use of Shimura varieties) show that their
cohomology groups realize supercuspidal representations. Be- cause these spaces
are Stein spaces, their cohomology groups can be computed by means of rigid-
analytic di^erential forms. Using the relation to di^erential forms, the project
aims at constructing lattices in these supercuspidal representations which then
give rise to Banach space representations. Furthermore, the PI seeks to relate
these Banach space representations to certain families of potentially
crystalline Galois representations, at least when the spaces are one-dimensional
(in which case the Galois representations are of di- mension two), and when the
covering is 'tame'. The second project is concerned with the etale l-adic
cohomology of deformation spaces of one-dimensional formal groups. These
cohomology groups are known to realize the local Langlands correspondence
between n- dimensional Weil group representations and representations of the
p-adic GL(n). Again, the only known proofs for this fact, due to M. Harris and
R. Taylor (respectively P. Boyer in the equal characteristic case) depend on
global arguments. The PI proposes to investi- gate the equality between epsilon
constants of representations which correspond to each other, in the case when
the base eld is of positive characteristic, by using local methods from rigid-
analytic geometry. For the Galois representation a formula due to G. Laumon
describes the epsilon constant in terms of a local Fourier transform, and this
Fourier transform in turn has a rigid-analytic description. Analyzing this
description the PI seeks to relate Laumon's formula to a formula of Bushnell and
Frohlich for the corresponding representation of GL(n).

The proposal is about investigating solutions of algebraic equations with
special emphasis on methods involving congruences with respect to a xed prime
number p. For instance, even though a polynomial in general may have no roots
which are rational numbers, there may well be integers which are roots up to
multiples of (arbitrary) high powers of p. This can be considered as an
approximate solution with respect to p, and these approximate solutions give
rise to a solution which is no longer an ordinary number, but a so-called p-
adic number. The arithmetic of p-adic numbers is considerably easier than the
arithmetic of rational numbers, yet complex enough to reveal lots of information
about algebraic equations (with rational coefficients). Moreover, it is possible
to do analysis with p-adic numbers. The local Langlands correspondence describes
the arithmetic of p-adic numbers in terms of actions of certain groups of
matrices on linear spaces. These linear spaces are derived from non-linear or
'curved' spaces by 'taking homology', which is a process of converting geometric
information into linear spaces. The curved spaces in turn, which are like
surfaces in spaces of p-adic numbers, are accessible to analytic methods, with
functions depending on p-adic numbers as arguments. The PI proposes to use these
available analytic methods to investigate the curved spaces (and subsequently
the linear spaces they give rise to) with the goal of getting a better
understanding of the local Langlands correspondence and extending it beyond its
classical domain.
