
* 0917686
* Number Theory Problems Over Local Fields and Function Fields
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2008,05/18/2010
* Brian Conrad,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2013
* USD 299,484.00

DMS-0600919 Brian Conrad

The PI proposes to work on some geometric questions that arise in number-
theoretic questions over global function fields and p-adic fields. In the theory
of overconvergent classical modular forms, the canonical subgroup of Lubin and
Katz (for a p-adic analytic family of elliptic curves) has been an important
tool. The recent interest in p-adic modular forms beyond the classical case has
motivated several different constructions of canonical subgroups for abelian
varieties, and recent work of the PI has led to another higher-dimensional
theory that, at least in its geometric aspects, has a wider range of
applicability than the other approaches. The PI proposes to use deformation-
theoretic methods to make explicit certain abstract estimates in the theory, and
to draw arithmetic consequences for p-adic families of automorphic forms. In
another direction, the PI and co-workers have used methods from deformation
theory and rigid-analytic geometry to develop a theory of a new global parity
obstruction to randomness properties of prime specialization of inseparable
irreducible polynomials over certain coordinate rings of curves over finite
fields. This has given rise to families of elliptic curves with unexpected rank
behavior over global function fields (under some standard conjectures) and seems
likely to have further Diophantine applications to Mordell--Weil ranks for
families of abelian varieties over global function fields. The PI proposes to
develop a better understanding of this basic arithmetic phenomenon and to work
out some further consequences for ranks in families.

Number theory is among the oldest subjects in mathematics, since it is
ultimately concerned with the relatively concrete problem of studying properties
of whole numbers. Such problems can take on the form of finding whole number
solutions to systems of equations in many variables, or problems relating to
properties of primes, and so on. Typically one has to bring in some deeper
structural information (provided by geometric, algebraic, or analytic ideas) to
make progress on such questions, and in the last several decades a very wide
range of sophisticated geometric techniques have been developed to attack these
problems. Moreover, though the initial motivation comes from within pure
mathematics, security of electronic telecommunications has come to be related in
an essential way to many of these number-theoretic problems (such as prime
factorization and studying points on curves over finite fields) and the
geometric concepts used to attack them. This proposal focuses on both geometric
and prime factorization questions that arise in several number-theoretic
settings, aiming to develop some new theoretical methods and to apply them to
specific problems. In addition, the PI proposes to continue his long-standing
tradition of supervising high-level number theory research by talented high
school students and giving talks to larger groups of students at the high
school, undergraduate, and graduate levels. He will also complete two books
that, together with assorted freely available notes already posted on his web
site, will provide useful references for graduate students who wish to learn
about some fundamental topics in arithmetic geometry.
