
* 0935613
* Congruences between automorphic forms and lower bounds on Selmer group
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 02/15/2009,04/24/2009
* Joel Bellaiche,MA,Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2009
* USD 4,562.00



The study of the absolute Galois group of a number field F or, from a Tannakian
point of view, of its abelian category of continuous finite dimensional
representations (let us say over a p-adic field) has long been recognized as one
of important challenge in pure mathematics. Among those representations, the
ones that are geometric, in the sense of Fontaine and Mazur, are especially of
arithmetic significance, and their category should be equivalent to the (still
conjectural) category of mixed motives over F. It is important to understand the
first Ext groups in that category (higher Ext groups should be zero) and Bloch
and Kato have made precise conjectures relating the dimension of those groups to
the order of L-functions at integers values of the variable. The project aims to
construct as much extensions as possible in those Ext groups (hopefully as much
as predicted by the conjecture, in the case corresponding to the center of the
functional equation of the L-function) using p-adic deformations of non-tempered
automorphic forms. An important step should be the study of the local geometry
of the "moduli space of p-adic automorphic forms" called Eigenvarieties around
the non-tempered automorphic forms.

Many old problems in arithmetic, some of them going back as far as Diophantes,
as well as some new ones, fit well in the framework of Galois theory: they often
can be translated into questions about existence, or non-existence, of certain
Galois representations (that is representations of the absolute Galois group G
of the field Q of rational numbers, or of some open subgroups of G) with
prescribed properties. And then, sometimes, they can be proven, as was Fermat's
Last Theorem by Wiles. The study of Galois representations splits up into two
parts : finding irreducible Galois representations, and then determining
extensions between them. Even if the first problem is far from being solved,
precise conjectures about the second one were made by Bloch and Kato. The
projects aims to give partial answers to those conjectures, by constructing some
interesting extensions. The method uses the theory of automorphic forms, which
was once quite a different topic, but which is now strongly tied to the theory
of Galois representations by the Langland's program. The idea is that one can
obtain interesting extensions of Galois representations by looking at (p-adic)
deformations of some very special automorphic forms, the so-called non tempered
forms. The more deformations there are, the more extensions one should be able
to construct. Those deformations are encoded in the geometry of a (p-adic)
variety, known as the Eigenvariety, and developing tools to study that geometry
is an important part in the project.
