
* 0943832
* EMSW21-RTG: Developing American Research Leadership in Algebraic Geometry and its Boundaries
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 08/01/2010,07/14/2015
* Karen Smith,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2017
* USD 2,255,000.00

This RTG project continues a successful research training program in algebraic
geometry and its boundary areas at the University of Michigan. Target trainees
are recent PhDs and advanced graduate students, though undergraduates are also
involved on a smaller scale. The project is run by five senior faculty members
(William Fulton, Robert Lazarsfeld, Mircea Mustata, Yongbin Ruan and Karen
Smith) in consultation with an additional 16 senior faculty at Michigan in
related areas. Algebraic geometry is a central and highly active branch of
mathematics today, with increasingly important connections to other branches of
mathematics and science. These other areas include commutative algebra, number
theory, combinatorics, representation theory, and complex analysis, as well as
string theory and other aspects of theoretical physics and computer science. The
explosive growth of algebraic geometry at the end of the twentieth century has
made this a very exciting time to begin research, but it has also made it
difficult for young researchers to get started. This project will increase the
flow of broadly trained researchers in algebraic geometry and its boundary
areas. Given the size and visibility of the research groups involved in this
project, Michigan's Algebraic Geometry RTG program has had and will continue to
have a substantial impact at the national level in building a thriving community
of young researchers in and around algebraic geometry. The project develops the
research potential of its trainees, as well as their capability to nurture the
next generation. Activities include a rich array of seminar and workshop
activities, including the opportunity for post-doctoral trainees to propose,
design and organize workshops under the mentorship of a senior faculty member;
opportunities for post-doctoral researchers to design and lead undergraduate
research projects under the mentorship of a senior faculty member; numerous
opportunities for advanced graduate students and post-docs to develop their
technical and expository lecturing skills, and to receive mentoring on all
aspects of a research career in mathematics; funds for trainee travel to
domestic and international conferences in order to establish connections, get
exposure to research trends not represented at Michigan, and gain visibility as
they lecture on their work.
