
* 0968699
* Graph Partitions and their Applications
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 08/15/2010,08/03/2010
* Gabor Sarkozy,MA,Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2013
* USD 133,086.00

Recently graph partitioning (clustering) algorithms have received a lot of
attention because of their applications in data mining and web search. In this
proposal the PI will focus on graph partitions and their applications. The PI
will continue his research in the area of developing and applying a method in
extremal graph theory based on the Regularity Lemma and the Blow-up Lemma.
Roughly speaking here the Regularity Lemma finds the graph partition and then
the Blow-up Lemma tells us how to use this partition. A recent development on
the method is the new "de-regularization" technique that helps to eliminate the
use of the Regularity Lemma from these proofs, while maintaining other key
elements, and thus the results are much more applicable (since the Regularity
Lemma applies only for very large graphs).

This research is in the area of extremal discrete mathematics. The fundamental
question of this field has the following form: determine the maximum (or
minimum) size of a discrete mathematical object that satisfies a certain
condition. It turns out that this general problem has connections to very
diverse fields (geometry, design theory, number theory, algebra, topology, etc.)
and to areas with important concrete applications in everyday life (computer
science, coding theory, cryptography, optimization and scheduling problems,
communication and networking problems, etc.). Therefore achieving results on
these research problems will have serious implications in these applications as
well.
