
* 0970067
* RUI: Investigations of L-functions and Benford's Law
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2010,05/18/2012
* Steven Miller,MA,Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2014
* USD 132,556.00

Since the 1970s, researchers have successfully modeled the leading term behavior
of zeros of L-functions using Random Matrix Theory; recently new models and
conjectures, such as the L-functions Ratios Conjecture, have been advanced to go
beyond the main term and understand the lower order terms, where the arithmetic
of the families surface. Continuing previous research, the PI and his students
plan on extending these models to numerous other families of L-functions,
ranging from number field cases to elliptic curves. The latter is especially
appealing, as it is the only known example with zeros with multiplicities (by
the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture, the multiplicity of the zero at the
central point equals the geometric rank of the group of rational solutions). The
main project involves modeling these zeros with a new random matrix model (a
modified Jacobi ensemble) combining the arithmetic of the lower order terms and
the discretization of the values of the L-functions at the central point. The
numerical calculations require programs for solving non-linear Painleve VI
differential equations, which will be written and made available in Matlab and
Sage. In related work, the PI plans to explore classical random matrix
ensembles, as these systems frequently provide powerful intuition in
understanding the behavior of sub-families. Much of the analysis of the behavior
of zeros near the central point of L-functions can be recast as questions about
equidistribution and convergence of measures. In addition to the above number
theoretic systems, these methods can also be applied to other problems, such as
Benford's law of digit bias. Numerous data sets exhibit a powerful and universal
bias, with the probability of the first digit being a 1 is 30%, dropping
monotonically to a 5% chance of the first digit being a 9. Benford's law is
frequently used to test for data integrity (the IRS uses it to flag corporate
tax returns that are likely fraudulent). The PI will use the above techniques to
determine which systems should exhibit such behavior, understand the rate of
convergence (which is essential in proving fraud), and derive new tests for data
integrity.

One of the central questions across disciplines is how events are distributed,
be it energy levels of heavy nuclei, spacings between prime numbers or waiting
times at a bank. Similar to the Central Limit Theorem, there seem to be a few
universal spacing laws that govern these and other phenomena; thus studies in
one of these topics can frequently provide useful insights in the others. Much
of the proposed work seeks to understand the spacings between zeros of the
Riemann zeta function and its generalizations, L-functions; it has long been
known that many important problems in number theory (ranging from counting the
number of primes to efficient primality tests) are equivalent to properties of
these zeros. The most important family to be studied are the zeros of elliptic
curve L-functions. This is the only known number theory family with zeros with
multiplicity, and thus understanding its behavior should be useful to model
other physical systems. The system, like many others, is described by a non-
linear Painleve VI differential equation; in addition to constructing a model
the PI and his colleagues will generate and distribute Matlab and Sage code to
solve these equations. Solving these problems requires the development of tools
and techniques in complex analysis, Fourier analysis, number theory and
probability. These results are applicable to other fields, in particular
Benford's law of digit bias (for many natural sets of data, the first digit is 1
about 30% of the time, with the probability decreasing to a first digit of 9
about 5% of the time). The PI will also work on several problems involving the
distribution of leading digits of data sets, especially on the rate of
convergence to Benford behavior and determining which systems should satisfy
this law. Deriving techniques to detect and understand digit bias have enormous
applications; for example, the IRS uses Benford's law to locate corporate tax
fraud. Many of these projects have components that are amenable to numerical
experimentation; these and tractable special cases will be investigated in
conjunction with undergraduate research assistants.
