
* 1001408
* RUI: Collaborative Research: New Graph Theory from and for Nanoconstruct Design Strategies
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, Combinatorics, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 09/01/2010,08/19/2010
* Joanna Ellis-Monaghan,VT,Saint Michael's College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2014
* USD 200,002.00

The proposed research creates new mathematical theory in the areas of graph
polynomials and topological graph theory motivated by structural problems
arising from self-assembling DNA nanostructures. Because the targeted
nanostructures are often graphs (e.g. polyhedra), this application is a rich and
natural source of appealing graph theoretical problems. Specifically, we will
provide optimal design strategies in the form of algorithms and constructive
proofs for new graph invariants corresponding to the minimum number of molecular
components necessary to build a target graph under various laboratory settings.
Furthermore we will determine the combinatorial structures of these building
blocks, and how they may be assembled into the desired nanostructure. One method
of producing self-assembling DNA nanostructures involves designing linear single
strands of DNA that form double helixes along the edges of the desired graphical
structure. Currently, these may be specially designed double strands, or a
single long scaffolding strand held in place by many short staple strands, but
either way, optimal paths for the strands through the target graph must be
determined. A second construction method for self-assembly of DNA nanostructures
uses k-armed branched junction molecules, called tiles, whose arms are double
strands of DNA with one strand extending beyond the other. These arms attach to
one another when the extended segments consist of complementary bases, thus
forming the edges of a graphical structure. Combinatorially, tiles may be
represented by vertices with labeled half-edges. Here the minimum number of
tiles required and their combinatorial structures must be determined.

Two new graph invariants together with generalized transition polynomials, the
topological Tutte polynomial, cycle double coverings, and genus results from
topological graph theory apply to minimizing the molecular building blocks used
in self-assembling nanostructures. For linear single strand methods, we will
develop optimal strategies for locating the strands, characterize graphs that
may be good candidates for these construction methods, and use graph polynomials
to capture the topological properties of these constructs. For branched junction
molecule methods we will provide explicit combinatorial descriptions of tile
sets achieving the minimum number of tile and bond-edge types, and efficient
algorithms for generating these sets. This is done under a range of different
laboratory settings: whether flexible or rigid armed tiles are used, whether or
not the incidental creation of same-size or smaller graphical complexes is
acceptable, and whether the target graph is of fixed size (e.g. a polyhedron) or
arbitrarily large (e.g. a lattice).
