
* 1001230
* Some problems in topological graph theory
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 06/01/2010,04/28/2010
* Guoli Ding,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2014
* USD 191,745.00

Topological graph theory studies how graphs can be drawn on surfaces in
different ways. One of its fundamental problems is to determine for each surface
S the set F of minimal graphs that have a cross no matter how they are drawn on
S. It follows from the celebrated result of Robertson and Seymour on Wagner?s
conjecture that F is finite for every surface S. However, nothing is known about
the elements of F, except when S is the sphere or the projective plane. Over the
past twenty years, many attempts were made by many researchers yet no new F is
completely determined. The PI proposes a different approach to this problem.
Results generated from this proposal could lead to a characterization of core
members of each F, which would essentially determine F since other members of F
are sporadic unimportant graphs.

The goal of this project is to understand the behavior of topological graph
parameters such as genus and crossing number when the graph is well connected
and is big. To achieve this goal, it will be necessary to study the interactions
between connectivity, genus, and the size of the graph. A good understanding of
such interactions would bring significant insights to the entire topological
graph theory. Since surface graphs are so fundamental, these results could have
very strong theoretical (on graph structures) and practical (on graph
algorithms) impact in many areas of graph theory.
