
* 1001079
* Metaplectic Whittaker functions and quantum groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/15/2010,05/13/2015
* Daniel Bump,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2016
* USD 299,948.00

Whittaker functions are important in both number theory and physics. In number
theory, they arise in the Fourier expansions of automorphic forms. In physics,
they appeared in Kostant's work on the Toda lattice and in recent work of
Gerasimov, Lebedev and Oblezin with connections to statistical and quantum
physics and mirror symmetry. Brubaker, Bump, Chinta, Friedberg and Gunnells have
been investigating Whittaker functions on metaplectic groups. They found that
these have expressions as sums over Kashiwara crystals. Moreover they have
expressions as partition functions of statistical physics, in which the
Boltzmann weights are Gauss sums. This allows the Yang-Baxter equation to be
introduced as a new tool in their study and opens up a new field of
investigation.

The proposer has been working with Brubaker, Chinta, Friedberg and Gunnells over
the last few years over a project which began in number theory but is developing
connections with mathematical physics. The objects under study are "Dirichlet
Series" that resemble the Riemann zeta function, which is fundamental in number
theory. Their symmetries, known as "functional equations" resemble the
symmetries of Lie groups. It has recently been found that they may be realized
in terms of a class of models arising in statistical and quantum physics, which
has opened up a new area of investigation.
