
* 1001729
* Classifying spaces of degenerating Hodge structures, the p-adic analogue, and related arithmetic study
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2010,05/02/2012
* Kazuya Kato,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2014
* USD 427,128.00

In this proposal, the principal investigator K. Kato intends to study
degenerations of Hodge structures and related problems, collaborating with the
co-principal investigators S. Bloch and T. Fukaya. K. Kato and S. Usui
constructed toroidal partial compactifications of classifying spaces of
polarized Hodge structures in which points at infinity correspond to
degenerations of Hodge structures. He is now generalizing this theory to treat
mixed Hodge structures and also p-adic Hodge structures. With S. Bloch, he plans
to study asymptotic behaviors of period integrals and regulators in
degeneration, by using the study of degenerations of Hodge structures. Period
integrals and regulators are related to values of zeta functions. The PI's
intend to study related problems concerning arithmetic properties of zeta
values. It is expected that the study of this proposal on degenerations of Hodge
structures have various applications. For example, Hodge conjecture is related
to degeneration of intermediate Jacobian which is understood as a class group of
degenerating Hodge structures, and so, it is expected that the study of this
proposal can contribute to the solution of Hodge conjecture. S. Bloch studied
the relation of the theory of motives and the period integrals which appear in
physics. The divergence of such period integral is an important subject in
physics, and it is expected that the divergence is well understood by the
degeneration of motives and degeneration of associated Hodge structures. The
study of this proposal is expected to have applications to physics.

Understanding of degeneration for geometric objects (spaces or mathematical
structures) is an important but difficult problem. By constructing enlarged
classifying spaces of mathematical structures in which points on the boundary
correspond to degenerations, the PI's can better understand degeneration. For
example, in physics it is important to understand various infinite limits. In
this program, the divergences in physics are understood as arising from
degeneration of mathematical structures, and it is expected that this study will
clarify such asymptotic behavior. Values of zeta functions often appear in
physics, and K. Kato, S. Bloch and T. Fukaya have studied arithmetic properties
of zeta values. They intend to study the relations between degenerations and
zeta values. One may hope that in this way the deep relation between nature and
arithmetic can be better understood. More generally, many unsolved problems in
mathematics are related to degeneration, and it is expected that the study of
this proposal will contribute to the solution of them.
