
* 1001667
* Problems at the interface between Ramsey Theory and Combinatorial Geometry
* DMS,ALGORITHMS, COMPUTATIONAL GEOMETRY, Combinatorics
* 09/01/2010,08/17/2010
* Adrian Dumitrescu,WI,University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this project is to explore several problems and directions in
Combinatorial Geometry and Ramsey Theory and their interconnections. One
research direction is centered around the problem of geometric incidences
between points and curves and their connections with problems involving
distances, areas, and other measures. The project also deals with geometric
questions in Ramsey theory, applications of Van der Waerden's theorem on
arithmetic progressions and new results of this type, and others that fit in the
broader category of monotone paths in line arrangements. Of particular interest
are techniques that permit reformulations of geometric problems in a purely
combinatorial setting, such as the technique of allowable sequences introduced
by Goodman and Pollack. The last category comprises problems of estimating the
size of sets that appear in the theory of set addition and multiplication.
Ramsey type problems and Erdos-type extremal discrete geometry problems have
attracted continued attention in the combinatorics and computational geometry
communities, due to their relevance for computational problems (in range
counting, pattern matching, motion planning, and others) and the rich techniques
developed for improving extremal bounds (such as the epsilon-net theory, the
Crossing Lemma, quasi-planar graphs, etc.), which proved to be instrumental in
many areas of computational geometry.

A key objective of this project is to explore and identify new techniques for
dealing with incidence and distance problems, and other problems in Ramsey
theory and number theory that seem to require attacks from several directions.
An important feature of the proposed research is advancing the integration of
techniques from different areas---geometric graph theory, number theory,
topology, linear programming, computer experiments, theory of algorithms---in
finding solutions for problems in combinatorial geometry and Ramsey theory.
Progress on some of the combinatorial questions presented here are likely to
have applications in the design and analysis of geometric algorithms,
approximation algorithms, etc, and consequently have impact in the real word
over time.
