
* 1001598
* Discrete subgroups of semisimple Lie groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2010,08/16/2010
* Alireza Golsefidy,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 10/31/2011
* USD 146,277.00

This proposal addresses problems on discrete subgroups of semisimple Lie groups.
These problems have been the interplay of several kinds of mathematics. They
are, on one hand, related to counting curves over a finite field and, on the
other, to the asymptotic behavior of the subgroup growth of lattices. The PI has
already solved several problems in this area and would like to give a better
picture. The second purpose of this proposal is to describe the "smallest"
locally symmetric orbifolds with a given covering space, or its equivalent
object in the non-Archimedean setting. This natural question had been considered
by many mathematicians such as Siegel, Chinburg, Friedman, Meyerhoff, Gehring,
Martin, and Lubotzky, and it is solved for lattices in SL(2) over different
local fields. The PI solved this problem for most of Chevalley groups over a
positive characteristic local field. The PI would like to understand structure
of such orbifolds. For instance, he plans to answer Lubotzky?s question on
whether the smallest orbifold is compact. The next problem is the classification
of discrete vertex transitive actions on Bruhat-Tits buildings. These actions
have been of interest since the 80?s. Several mathematicians have tried to
construct such actions and, so far, for large dimensions, only one family of
such actions have been constructed. They have been also used to construct
explicit Ramanujan complexes. These combinatorial objects are generalization of
Ramanujan graphs, which are highly useful in computer science, and expected to
have broad applications. The PI plans to classify such actions. The PI and
Mohammadi have constructed new families of simply-transitive actions on the
vertex set of the Bruhat-Tits building and gave a very strong classification
theorem, and it might be possible to get new examples in positive characteristic
which in turn would give us new Ramanujan complexes. The PI proposes a step
toward a recent conjecture by Sarnak on equi-distribution of orbits of prime
powers of a unipotent element in a finite volume homogeneous space.

Discrete subgroups of semi-simple groups can be considered as the connecting
point of several parts of mathematics. On one hand, they are related to geometry
and geometric group theory, and on the other to dynamical systems and number
theory. The PI proposes several related problems on this subject. In these
projects, PI would like to either count number of certain combinatorial objects
with rich algebraic structure, or describe "smallest" models with certain
descriptions, which usually have more symmetries and might be useful in computer
science, or seek for other evidences of the randomness of the MÃ¶bius function.
These projects consist of different parts and of various mathematical nature,
e.g. Bruhat-Tits theory, mass formula, subgroup growth and sieve theory. Because
of its relations with a wide range of mathematics, students at both graduate and
under-graduate level can be exposed to and learn different topics. Moreover,
some parts are of combinatorial or computational nature which makes them more
accessible to under-graduates.
