
* 1001594
* Derived Equivalences and Mixed Categories in Representation Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2010,05/07/2010
* Pramod Achar,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 06/30/2014
* USD 129,000.00

A series of major advances in geometric representation theory in the past
fifteen years have taken the form of "coherent-constructible equivalences":
these theorems assert that the category of coherent sheaves on some variety
associated to a reductive group is equivalent (or derived-equivalent) to the
category of constructible (or perverse) sheaves on a different variety,
associated to the Langlands dual group. Perhaps the best-known such result is
the "geometric Satake equivalence," due to Lusztig, Ginzburg, and Mirkovic-
Vilonen. It relates representations of a group G (equivalently: coherent sheaves
on a point) to spherical perverse sheaves on the affine Grassmannian for the
dual group. Another major result is the Arkhipov-Bezrukavnikov-Ginzburg (ABG)
equivalence, which states that there is a derived equivalence between perverse
sheaves on the affine Grassmannian and coherent sheaves on the cotangent bundle
of the flag variety of G. Both these results may be regarded as part of the
geometric Langlands program. The P.I. hopes to contribute to this picture with
the following two projects: (I) In collaboration with S. Riche, the P.I. hopes
to prove parabolic versions of several known coherent-constructible
equivalences; these results would encompass the ABG and geometric Satake
equivalences as special cases. (II) The P.I. hopes to develop a new axiomatic
framework which is expected to lead to theorems on derived equivalences and
higher Ext-vanishing in a very general setting, with a view to applications to
coherent sheaves on the nilpotent cone and on the cotangent bundle of the flag
variety.

A "matrix group" is a set of invertible square matrices that contains all
products and inverses of its members. A typical example is SU(2), the group of
2x2 unitary complex matrices. A "representation" of such a group is a rule that
assigns to each member of the group a linear transformation of some vector
space, in such a way that it transforms matrix multiplication into composition
of linear transformations. SU(2) has a natural 2-dimensional representation--the
rule assigning to each element of SU(2) itself--but there are many others as
well: for instance, SU(2) has a representation on the space of polynomials in
two variables, given by linear substitutions in the variables. SU(2) is also a
topological space: in fact, it is topologically equivalent to a 3-sphere. A
number of modern results in representation theory involve the geometry of matrix
groups and related spaces. Two celebrated results are the geometric Satake
equivalence and the Arkhipov-Bezrukavnikov-Ginzburg (ABG) equivalence, both of
which relate representations of a matrix group to "D-modules" (a sophisticated
way of working with spaces of local solutions of differential equations) on a
certain infinite-dimensional space called the "affine Grassmannian." The
proposed research includes two projects: (I) the P.I., in collaboration with S.
Riche, hopes to prove a general "parabolic-parahoric equivalence theorem" that
would include the geometric Satake and ABG equivalences as special cases; and
(II) the P.I. hopes to study in an axiomatic way certain "positivity phenomena"
that occur in the known equivalence theorems, with a view to generalizing those
theorems to other settings.
