
* 1001935
* Categories, Hopf Algebras, and Algebraic Combinatorics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Combinatorics
* 08/15/2010,08/04/2010
* Marcelo Aguiar,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Victoria Powers
* 07/31/2014
* USD 178,362.00

This project involves research in category theory and the theory of Hopf
algebras, as well as algebraic combinatorics. The research is largely motivated
by concrete questions of a combinatorial nature, but it also addresses questions
of interest in category theory and general algebra, which in turn should find
applications elsewhere. The PI has recently completed an 800 page monograph
(coauthored with Swapneel Mahajan from IIT Mumbai), on which a solid conceptual
framework for the study of a large class of Hopf algebras that arise in
combinatorics was laid out. This project took about 7 years of dedicated work.
This long journey has opened the door to a wealth of new questions and exciting
avenues to explore. A very important finding of this work is the existence of a
general construction of Hopf algebras which includes at the same time the
combinatorial Hopf algebras alluded to above, and the deformations of the
enveloping algebras of simple Lie algebras (quantum groups). This connection has
not been explored in depth yet, but it certainly deserves to be. Thus, an
important goal of this project will be to bridge between the world of
combinatorial Hopf algebras and that of abstract Hopf algebras. There have been
recent important advances in the latter (by Andruskiewitsch, Schneider, and
others) which should be mutually beneficial to this endeavor. Central to this
work is Joyal's notion of species. It provides the right framework for the
application of categorical ideas to algebraic combinatorics. The theory of Fock
functors, whose first stages are developed in the PI's work with Mahajan, links
the setting of Hopf monoids in species with that of graded Hopf algebras.
Extensions of the theory will be explored. Concrete applications to algebraic
combinatorics will be a theme of major focus for this project.

The use of algebraic techniques in order to study concrete combinatorial
problems, pioneered by Rota, Stanley, and many others, has gained solid ground
over the past two decades. This project builds in this direction by exploiting
notions and ideas from category theory. Categorical ideas, properly employed,
can be very powerful and clarifying. Conversely, the concrete questions studied
in this project will serve as motivation and guide for new developments in
algebra and category theory. The PI will introduce graduate students to this
area of research and make international contacts and collaborations in Europe,
Latin America, and India.
