
* 1001154
* Algebraic geometry of moduli spaces
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2010,11/17/2014
* Rahul Pandharipande,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 12/31/2015
* USD 304,963.00

Gromov-Witten theory is a rapidly expanding field with basic connections to many
central areas of current research in mathematics and physics. The project
proposed here is a wide ranging study of Gromov- Witten theory based on the
techniques and discoveries of the last few years. The main topics covered are:
the definition and exact evaluations of integrals on the moduli space of curves
with boundaries, the proof of the universal Virasoro constraints, the
establishment of the Gromov-Witten/ Donaldson-Thomas/Pairs correspondences, and
the study of tautological classes. These topics point in several different
directions: topological string theory, integrable hierarchies, and classical
algebraic geometry. Each topic is central to progress in the field, and each
will be addressed with a new point of view.

Algebraic varieties, defined by the zeros of polynomial equations, are basic
objects in both classical and modern mathematics. Algebraic geometry is the
study of algebraic varieties. Ideas from symplectic geometry and string
theoretic physics have opened new fields in algebraic geometry: the study of
algebraic varieties via the Gromov-Witten theory of their curves and the
Donaldson-Thomas theory of their sheaves. Since the topic has basic connections
in several directions, progress will have a direct impact on the neighboring
fields. Topological string theory is the most obvious connection and the two
fields are in frequent contact. But also, for example, topics varying from the
Fukaya category to random 3-dimensional partitions will be affected.
