
* 1001677
* Quantization, Noncommutative Geometry, and Applications
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2010,05/16/2012
* Victor Ginzburg,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Sommers
* 06/30/2013
* USD 237,183.00

The Proposal explores new structures on classical geometric objects, like
manifolds, vector bundles, etc., that can be interpreted, most naturally, from
the point of view of noncommutative, rather than commutative, geometry. This
involves developing a new general theory of deformation quantization of vector
bundles on an algebraic variety. The theory provides an explanation for recently
discovered invariants associated with singularities of intersections of
lagrangian submanifolds. Other applications include explicit constructions of
deformation quantizations of an important class of 2-dimentional algebraic
surfaces known as del Pezzo sufaces.

The subject of quantization has a long history and takes its origins in classic
works on quantum mechanics by Dirac, Heisenberg, Pauli, and others. In
mathematics, the idea of quantization involves replacing familiar geometric
objects by appropriate noncommutative analogues thought of as some deformations
of the corresponding geometric objects. The resulting theory is often referred
to as noncommutative geometry. The present Project is concerned with a more
specific direction known as noncommutative algebraic geometry. This is a
relatively recent area, 10-15 years old, at the crossroads between algebra,
geometry and theoretical physics. The developments in noncommutative algebraic
geometry were strongly influenced by, and have important applications to, string
theory, a part of theoretical physics describing fundamental laws of elementary
particles at very high energy.
