
* 1001557
* Modular Ranks of Incidence Matrices and Related Topics
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/01/2010,11/02/2015
* John Pelesko,DE,University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2015
* USD 180,371.00

The principal investigator (PI) and his collaborators are interested in a
diverse set of problems concerning incidence matrices, additive combinatorics,
difference sets and Hadamard matrices. Incidence matrices arise whenever one
considers relations between two finite sets. Many questions in finite geometry,
combinatorics and representation theory of finite groups reduce to the
computation of ranks of certain incidence matrices over finite fields. The PI
and his collaborators have had some successes in the past few years
investigating the modular ranks and the Smith normal forms of classes of
incidence matrices arising from finite geometry and combinatorics. The PI
intends to continue his work in this direction, aiming at solving several open
problems in this area. Secondly, the PI will continue his recent work on
Snevily's conjecture on Latin transversals of addition tables of finite abelian
groups and apply the exterior algebra method to other problems in additive
combinatorics. In the third part, the PI intends to study relative difference
sets and further explore their connections to Hadamard matrices and mutually
unbiased bases.

Incidence matrices are basic mathematical objects which are frequently
encountered in various branches of mathematics, computer science and
engineering. Many of the incidence matrices considered in this proposal can be
used to generate efficient error-correcting codes, which are used nowadays in
our daily life, for example, in CD players, high speed modems, and cellular
phones. Difference sets and Hadamard matrices are important objects in
combinatorial designs theory, which have found many applications in radar,
spread-spectrum communications and cryptography.
