
* 1003908
* Conference on Permutation Patterns 2010
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 03/15/2010,04/07/2010
* Sergi Elizalde,NH,Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 02/28/2011
* USD 14,460.00

This conference is devoted to permutation patterns, i.e., the study of
permutations with respect to the involvement order. A pattern in a permutation
written in one-line notation is a subsequence whose entries have a prescribed
relative order. This definition can be re-phrased in various different contexts,
e.g. geometrical, where a permutation is identified with its plot, and model-
theoretic, where a permutation is taken to be a set with two linear orders
defined on it. Of particular interest are the sets of permutations which are
closed under involvement. These are precisely the sets of permutations which can
be defined by avoiding (i.e. not involving) prescribed sets of permutations
("forbidden patterns"). The conference topics include enumeration questions,
algorithmic problems, and applications and generalizations of permutation
patterns.

Historically, the study of pattern containment in permutations arose from two
independent streams in 1960s and 1970s. One was combinatorial in nature, and
concentrated on the enumeration problems for permutations with a small set (size
1 or 2, typically) of short (length up to 4) forbidden patterns. The other was
coming from Theoretical Computer Science, and was concerned with sets arising
from common sorting mechanisms and their combinations. In the past 10 years or
so these two strands have come much closer together, and this interaction has
created a new, fast developing area of combinatorics, with significant
interactions with Theoretical Computer Science, the Theory of Computability and
Complexity, Algebra, and Computational Biology, to name only a few. Apart from
the continued interest in sorting mechanisms and enumeration problems, major new
strands of research have emerged including the structural theory of classes, the
asymptotic behavior of classes, generalized pattern avoidance, packing
densities, algorithmic and decidability problems, and geometrical methods.
