
* 1064214
* Collaborative Research: Automorphic Forms, Representations and L-functions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/06/2010,09/24/2010
* Alex Kontorovich,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 12/31/2011
* USD 119,995.00

This collaborative proposal is concerned with developing a new higher rank
version of a fundamental identity known classically as the Kuznetsov trace
formula, which relates the spectrum of a certain differential operator to the
geometry of the space on which the operator acts. The aim is to establish either
asymptotics or strong bounds for all the different terms appearing in the
formula. A first application is to obtain the symmetry types of certain thin
families of L-functions in various higher rank situations. A broad range of
further applications are expected. Additionally, the following research problems
will be investigated: a search for a new class of Multiple Dirichlet Series will
be executed; supercuspidal representations in higher rank will be studied; the
Affine Linear Sieve will be combined with bilinear forms methods to exhibit thin
orbits containing an infinitude of primes; and finally, effective infinite-
volume counting problems will be attacked.

The theory of automorphic forms, representations, and L-functions is a central
theme in modern number theory, and has provided links between such diverse areas
of mathematics as algebraic geometry, representation theory, probability,
combinatorics, and mathematical physics. Thus progress in the understanding of
the aforementioned objects often has a significant impact in other fields. For
example, cryptographic algorithms which secure wireless communication for the
internet and cellular phones often rely heavily on deep properties of prime
numbers. The proposal also includes a significant educational and dissemination
component in the mentoring of undergraduate, graduate students, and postdocs
working in these evolving parts of mathematics, with the hope of bringing
traditionally under-represented goups into the field.
