
* 1068946
* Some Questions in Commutative Algebra
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2011,04/15/2011
* Wenliang Zhang,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2012
* USD 102,195.00

The questions in this proposal are centered around 4 different but deeply
connected research areas in commutative algebra: local cohomology, algebraic
D-modules, F-singularities, and homological conjectures. Local cohomology is the
common thread. For example, the study of Frobenius actions on local cohomology
modules has been fruitful in the study of F-singularities, and the content of
local cohomology, a notion introduced by Hochster and Huneke, has provided a
number of new approaches to homological conjectures, and in the study of local
cohomology, algebraic D-module theory has proven to be indispensable. The PI
wants to study various aspects of local cohomology and their applications to
both F-singularities and homological conjectures and to investigate a
characteristic-free notion of holonomicity. This project is mainly concerned
with questions in commutative algebra and their applications to algebraic
geometry. Algebraic sets are sets of solutions of systems of polynomial
equations. Commutative algebra studies functions over algebraic sets (in
commutative algebra, these algebraic sets can be over any commutative rings);
while algebraic geometry studies the geometric or topological aspects of
algebraic sets (in algebraic geometry, these algebraic sets are very often over
a field). These two areas are closely related and are mutually beneficial.
Questions in this proposal can be considered as questions about the existence of
solutions to systems of polynomial equations and the topological or geometric
nature of the solution sets.
