
* 1068190
* Invariants of Singularities in Zero and Positive Characteristic
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2011,06/17/2013
* Mircea Mustata,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2015
* USD 290,649.00

The project concerns two questions about singularities. The first problem has
two different incarnations: a first one in the algebro-geometric setting of
graded sequences of ideals, and a second one, in the analytic setting of
plurisubharmonic functions (in which context it was conjectured by Demailly and
Koll\'{a}r, and it is known as the Openness Conjecture). The common point is
that both versions reduce to understanding asymptotic versions of familiar
invariants of singularities, such as the log canonical threshold, associated now
to certain sequences of ideals. The first part of the project consists in the
study of these asymptotic invariants, and of their connections to valuation
theory. The second part will be devoted to a study of valuations from a point of
view relevant to this problem. The second problem concerns connections between
certain invariants of singularities in birational geometry (such as the log
canonical threshold and multiplier ideals) and invariants introduced in
commutative algebra, coming from tight closure theory (such as the F-pure
threshold and the test ideals). There have been formulated precise conjectures
regarding this correspondence via reduction to prime characteristic. This
project concerns translating such conjectures into some more established
questions regarding the Frobenius action on the cohomology of reductions of
smooth projective varieties to positive characteristic, and then in trying to
attack some special cases of these questions.

Singularities appear naturally in the study of algebraic varieties, and a good
understanding of singularities is important, for example, in the classification
of higher-dimensional algebraic varieties. This project addresses two important
open problems related to singularities. By reducing them to questions in
different settings, the PI hopes to bring into action tools from other areas,
such as valuation theory and arithmetic geometry. The reduction itself would be
of interest, by highlighting connections between these different settings.
