
* 1068247
* Studies in arithmetic algebraic geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2011,04/25/2013
* Nicholas Katz,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2016
* USD 180,000.00

Technical description of the project: The project is concerned with A) the study
of algebraic varieties over finite fields, exponential sums on such varieties,
their associated L-functions, how these objects vary in families, and the
determination of the associated monodromy groups which govern this variation.
B)Various "horizontal" questions where we start with a situation over the
integers, reduce modulo various primes p, and ask how the answers to the
questions of section A) above vary with p. C) Various questions of Lang-Trotter
type about families, other than modular families, of elliptic curves in a given
characteristic p. Some of the main technical tools for attacking questions of
type A) are group theory, Fourier Transform, and the theory of perverse sheaves.
For questions of types B) and C), there are very few tools, and even designing
and implementing numerical experiments to guess what should be true can be
nontrivial.

Broader significance and importance of the project: The broader significance and
importance of the project is three-fold. While it is too soon to appraise the
societal impact of this particular project, the last two decades have seen
stunning practical application in many fields (e.g., telecommunications,
cryptology, and computer security, to name just a few) of a great deal of
algebraic geometry over finite fields, some of which goes back to the nineteenth
century, and all of which seemed quite arcane at the time it was being done. The
project proposes to extend our understanding of already posed, extremely
interesting mathematical questions over finite fields, questions the answers to
which may well in the future have a broader societal impact. Second, the project
proposes the investigation of new, extremely interesting, mathematical
questions, for whose consideration there does not yet exist even a theoretical
framework; any progress on such questions may point the way to the presently
missing theoretical framework. Third, the project will deepen our understanding
of the analogies between the finite eld case and the number field case,
analogies which have already played a important role in shaping our very
thinking about the number field case.
