
* 1068883
* Representation Theoretical Methods in the Theory of Special Functions
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 08/15/2011,06/27/2013
* Adriano Garsia,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2015
* USD 210,000.00

The proposed research extends across Representation Theory, the Theory of
Symmetric Functions and Combinatorics. The bridge between Representation Theory
and Combinatorics is provided by the Frobenius map, which encodes dimension and
multiplicity questions as coefficients of polynomials that relate different
symmetric function bases; the latter have been shown to count various
combinatorial structures such as tableaux, lattice paths, and tree-like
structures. In 1987, Macdonald introduced a new symmetric function basis which
profoundly enriched the Theory of Symmetric Functions by its deep connections
with Representation Theory, Algebraic Combinatorics, Algebraic Geometry,
Particle Physics and Statistics. The connection of Macdonald's basis to
Representation Theory was formulated in 1988 by the PI in a program to prove the
positivity of the q,t-Kotska polynomials (a truly seminal conjecture in
Macdonald's paper). The PI's program was to show that certain modified forms of
the Macdonald polynomials are images, under the Frobenius map, of the character
of certain bigraded modules; the q,t-Kotska would then yield multiplicities of
irreducible representations in the various bi-homogeneous subspaces of these
modules. In 1990 the PI and Mark Haiman constructed these bigraded modules as
submodules of the Diagonal Harmonics and showed that the q,t-Kotska conjecture
would follow if for each partition of n, the module corresponding to it could be
shown to have dimension n!. This came to be known as the n!-conjecture, which
was proved in 2001 by Mark Haiman after a decade of intensive research in the
Algebraic Geometry of Hilbert schemes.

The proposed research is to study connections between the Representation Theory
of Diagonal Harmonics, the Theory of Macdonald Polynomials and the so-called
Parking Functions of Computer Science. The program is a three-pronged attack on
the 2002 Shuffle Conjecture, which expresses the Frobenius image of the
Character of Diagonal Harmonics as a weighted sum of Parking Functions. The PI
plans to work on the Representation Theory parts of the project and is guiding
his PhD students to carry out the Symmetric Function Theory and Combinatorial
parts of the subject. In the decades that followed the Macdonald paper the PI,
his collaborators, and his students have obtained a vast collection of results
in the theory of Macdonald polynomials which have already yielded proofs of
various special cases of the Shuffle conjecture. Whatever the outcome of the
present project, as is common when working on difficult mathematical problems,
the proposed work will lead to discoveries that may even surpass in significance
the solution of the original problem. The research to be carried out under this
grant involves transfer of information from pure algebraic constructs to
explicit symmetric functions and ultimately to combinatorial objects such as
tableaux, paths and trees. The algebraic problems proposed can only be solved by
advances in the theory of symmetric functions. Symmetric functions, in turn, are
a computational device of wide applicability. Thus progress in the proposed
research should widen the variety of tools available to physicists and engineers
for obtaining the hard data needed in their pursuit of applications of science.
All the proposed research lies in areas of Mathematics that computers have
transformed into experimental sciences. In this setting even beginning students
can experience the joy of non-trivial discovery. Thus, this work is an ideal
setting in which to convey to our new generations of researchers a deeper
understanding of the wide range of possibilities offered by computer-guided
research.
