
* 1069316
* Geometry, Representation theory, and the Langlands program
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/15/2011,05/19/2013
* Kari Vilonen,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2015
* USD 156,831.00

This project makes use of and develops geometric methods to attack several
longstanding problems on: systems of differential equations, representation
theory of Lie groups, and the Langlands program. It has been understood for a
long time that (special) functions, in generalized sense, can be studied in
terms of the systems of differential equations that they satisfy. To this end, a
general theory of systems of linear differential equations was developed by the
Sato school in Kyoto. This point of view, in its various incarnations, is now
ubiquitous in mathematics. The PI, jointly with Masaki Kashiwara, has solved the
key longstanding problem in this area, the codimension three conjecture.
Kashiwara and the PI will continue their collaboration towards a comprehensive
understanding of holonomic regular microdifferential systems. These are the
systems that most often come up in applications to other areas. The Langlands
program provides means of relating areas of mathematics that often do not have a
straightforward direct relationship. It implements this relationship via the
symmetries of the theories by exhibiting a relationship between their
representations. A major area of this proposal is the theory of real groups.
Real groups are the fundamental symmetries that occur both in number theory and
physics. A key outstanding question in representation theory of real groups is
the determination of the particularly important class of unitary representations
. Wilfried Schmid and the PI have made far-reaching conjectures which put this
question in a general mathematical context phrasing the problem in terms of
Hodge theory. They are on their way to settling these conjectures and the
structures of the unitary dual. The PI also proposes, in joint work with Roman
Bezrukavnikov, to prove a categorical Langlands duality for real groups.

Differential equations are used to model various phenomena in nature. One major
aspect of this project aims at a comprehensive understanding of an important
class of systems of differential equations. Lie groups are the fundamental
symmetries that occur in nature. They are important both in physics and number
theory. A key question is to understand where these symmetries occur and it what
form they occur. The second major aspect of this project will answer this
question in terms of basic geometric structures called Hodge structures.
