
* 1101670
* The interaction of gaps in dimer systems and beyond
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 09/01/2011,08/25/2011
* Mihai Ciucu,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2014
* USD 178,185.00

This proposal is concerned with the asymptotic enumeration of dimer packings
with gaps. More specifically, using work of Fisher and Stephenson as its
starting point, it studies how the total number of dimer coverings of the
complement of the gaps changes as the gaps are moved around on the lattice
graph. The joint correlation of a collection of gaps is a non-negative real
number measuring this change, and is the central object of study of this
proposal. In earlier work, the proposer proved that the correlation of gaps on
the hexagonal lattice is governed, for large separations between the gaps, by a
law closely resembling the superposition principle of electrostatics: If each
gap is regarded as a point charge of magnitude given by the signed difference
between the number of white and black vertices in it (in a fixed white-black
coloring of the vertices in which each edge has oppositely colored endpoints),
then, for large distances between the gaps, their correlation is proportional to
the exponential of the negative of the 2D electrostatic energy of the resulting
system of charges. Other previous results concern two naturally defined fields,
which the proposer proved approach the electric field in the limit when the
lattice spacing approaches zero. In the current project, the proposer presents a
program organized in several inter-related groups comprising twenty four
specific problems and conjectures. The bulk of this program is aimed at
developing further the analogy to phenomena from physics, but the list includes
also independent combinatorial problems, such as conjectures on tiling
enumeration of new regions and generalizations of classical results on plane
partitions.

This research is in the general area of Combinatorics. One of the goals of
Combinatorics is to find efficient methods of studying how discrete collections
of objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely
important to modern communications. For example, the design of large networks,
such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in
computer science, deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of
combinatorial research. The specific problems in this project are instances of
the dimer model of statistical physics. A basic illustration of this is the
real-world process (relevant in the study of lubricants) of adsorption of a
liquid consisting of diatomic molecules---the dimers in the model---along the
surface of a crystal, whose fixed atoms form a lattice pattern, with any two
neighboring positions capable of holding one molecule, and any given crystal
atom being involved in the adsorption of at most one molecule. The main issue in
this setting is the asymptotic behavior of the quantities that are studied
(specifically, the number of different ways the surface of the crystal can be
covered by molecules). In some of the instances we encounter, the usually more
difficult problem of determining quantities exactly turns out in fact to be more
tractable, and allows progress in the asymptotic study.
