
* 1101289
* Tropical geometry: combinatorics, topology, and algorithms
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/15/2011,07/15/2011
* Josephine Yu,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2015
* USD 130,001.00

Tropical geometry is a polyhedral shadow of algebraic geometry and naturally
lies in the intersection of geometric combinatorics and algebraic geometry. It
has a wide range of applications in enumerative geometry, mirror symmetry,
computational algebra, optimization, algebraic statistics, and computational
biology. The strengths of tropical methods come from the fact that the tropical
objects are intrinsically combinatorial, and computations can go farther on
combinatorial objects than on algebro-geometric objects. Better understanding of
combinatorial structures in tropical geometry has led to new algorithms and
formulas in enumerative geometry and computational algebra. Moreover, tropical
geometric objects have rich combinatorial structures that also arise naturally
in discrete geometry and combinatorial algebra, such as graphs, subdivisions and
triangulations of polytopes, fiber polytopes, matroid theory, space of
phylogenetic trees, and cellular resolutions of monomial ideals, just to name a
few. The project aims to understand combinatorial and topological structures and
further the development of new algorithms in three main directions: tropical
varieties, tropical curves, and tropical semialgebraic sets.

Tropicalizations of algebraic varieties are piecewise linear, so tropicalization
replaces difficult algebraic computations with easier polyhedral computations.
Tropical methods can be used to develop algorithms and software for solving
classical problems in computational commutative algebra. Although tropical
varieties have been around for years, very few families of them have known
homology. This project includes a study of the combinatorial topology of natural
families of tropical varieties such as tropicalizations of complete
intersections, determinantal varieties, Grassmannians, and resultants. A
difficulty is the lack of examples to check conjectures and develop intuitions
on. The PI proposes to build a library of examples for the aforementioned
families of varieties and complete classifications when feasible. Tropical
curves are metric graphs that naturally arise in graph theory and electrical
network theory. They are simple combinatorial objects, yet they are powerful
enough for proving new theorems about classical algebraic curves. The proposal
aims at a better understanding of projective embeddings and ramifications of
tropical curves. Application of tropical geometry to semialgebraic sets and
optimization is a promising but under-explored direction. This project aims to
develop new algorithms for tropical convexity and understand the combinatorics
of tropical semialgebraic sets. Many parts of this project are suitable for
involvement of students and for interdisciplinary collaborations. Research tools
and software will be developed for discrete geometry and computational algebra.
The computational methods may be useful in other areas such as semialgebraic
optimization, algebraic statistics, and computational biology.
