
* 1101383
* Invariant Theory for Finite-Dimensional Algebras
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/15/2011,08/11/2011
* Calin Chindris,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2015
* USD 120,163.00

The PI proposes several projects in the representation theory of finite
dimensional algebras that combine ideas and techniques from invariant theory,
algebraic combinatorics, and algebraic geometry. One of the fundamental problems
in this area is that of classifying the indecomposable representations. Based on
the complexity of the indecomposable representations, a finite dimensional
algebra is of tame or wild representation type. The PI will work on projects
aimed at characterizing the representation type of an algebra in terms of the
invariant theory of the algebra in question. This proposal deals first with
developing reduction techniques for the study of quotient varieties of
representations. The PI next proposes to use these techniques to characterize
the tameness of an algebra in terms of the fields of rational invariants and the
moduli spaces of representations of the algebra in question. The PI will also
work on several other projects in quiver invariant theory and related problems
about configurations of subspaces, polynomiality properties of tensor product
multiplicities, and Mori dream spaces.

Representation theory, a branch of modern algebra studying symmetries of various
objects of interest, interacts with many other areas in mathematics,
mathematical physics, chemistry, and theoretical computer science. The building
blocks of the objects studied in the representation theory of algebras are the
indecomposable representations. The projects in this proposal aim to provide
geometric means for parametrizing the indecomposable representations, and to
explore applications to problems in algebraic combinatorics and algebraic
geometry.
