
* 1101131
* Homological Behavior of Modules over Commutative Local Rings
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2011,08/16/2011
* Liana Sega,MO,University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Victoria Powers
* 08/31/2014
* USD 85,843.00

This project aims to contribute towards understanding the homological behavior
of modules over commutative rings. Modules are the objects on which a given ring
acts: geometrically, they correspond to bundles and, more generally, sheaves on
a space. Sega will study certain classes of commutative local rings which extend
in several directions the well-studied class of complete intersection rings, and
will investigate to what extent the known properties of complete intersections
can be translated to a larger context. Earlier work of the PI, in collaboration
with D. Jorgensen, has shown that vanishing of cohomology over non-complete
intersection rings can have rather non-rigid behavior. The accent in the
proposed work is shifted towards finding a common bridge between complete
intersections and other good classes of rings. Attention will be paid to
vanishing of (co)homology, properties of the minimal free resolutions of
modules, Betti numbers and other homologically defined invariants. An important
aspect is an effort to show that the classes of rings and the modules considered
occur abundantly in a variety of situations of geometric interest.

Commutative algebra allows one to encode information regarding solution sets of
polynomial equations into objects such as rings and modules, and further
understand their structure, using algebraic tools and a recent infusion of
techniques from other fields that deal with physical spaces, such as topology.
This method of encoding information and its further study is relevant to almost
any area of mathematics, and to theoretical physics. In particular, the classes
of rings and the properties considered in this project are relevant in the field
of algebraic geometry, and some of the methods and outcomes make connections
with the field of non-commutative algebra.
