
* 1101623
* Random Structures and Algorithms Conference - 2011
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 01/15/2011,01/24/2011
* Dwight Duffus,GA,Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2011
* USD 20,000.00

The 15th International Conference on Random Structures & Algorithms

Abstract

The 15th International Conference on Random Structures & Algorithms will take
place at Emory University in Atlanta, May 24 - 28, 2011. This is a biennial
meeting, initiated in 1983 by the Faculty of Mathematics, Adam Mickiewicz
University, in Poznan, Poland. The aims of these conferences are to present
recent research results and to identify and explore directions for further
research in random discrete structures, randomized algorithms and broad areas of
applications of probabilistic methods in discrete mathematics, computer science,
and related fields.

The conference is established as a key locus for the exposition of trends and
breakthroughs in the development of probabilistic methods and their application
in discrete mathematics and CS theory. The choice of the plenary speakers
highlights important themes ranging from classical topics such as Ramsey theory,
phase transitions in random graphs, and the regularity lemma, which have seen
recent exciting progress, to modern ones including message passing algorithms,
unique games related hardness of approximation for optimization problems,
internet related mechanism design, auctions, and computational game theory.

A main feature of the conferences is the mix of researchers from discrete
mathematics, theoretical CS and optimization, attracted by a common interest in
probabilistic tools and their application. Holding the meeting in Atlanta is
intended to attract more involvement from the CS theory community, which is
arguably best-developed in this country. Conference activities will be widely
disseminated by the conference proceedings in Random Structures & Algorithms, a
leading research journal, on the conference website, and through archived and/or
streaming video of selected lectures. We hope to attract, and support, a large
number of students and postdoctoral researchers, and participants from groups
under-represented in the community.
