
* 1148490
* RTG: Unified Training in Geometry and Topology
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 07/15/2012,05/12/2016
* Daniel Freed,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2018
* USD 2,499,126.00

Abstract

Award: DMS 1148490 Principal Investigators: Daniel S. Freed, Dan F. Knopf, Alan
W. Reid

The University of Texas Geometry/Topology Research Training Grant (RTG) is a
vertically integrated program to enhance the training of undergraduates,
graduate students, and postdoctoral associates at the University of Texas and,
through publication on the web, beyond. The thirteen faculty members will build
on the success of our previous RTG grants and also initiate new activities. The
latter include a Directed Reading Program pairing undergraduate students and
graduate mentors; a new Journal Seminar for all graduate students in geometry
and topology; a new series of First Cut Lectures on a variety of core topics, to
be disseminated on the web; a new yearly Undergraduate Mathematics Conference;
and a new series of Graduate Winter Schools for graduate students and postdocs.
All RTG activities are designed around a unified perspective on geometry and
topology. They include a healthy mix of ideas from low dimensional topology,
algebraic geometry, differential geometry, global linear and nonlinear analysis,
geometric group theory, geometric representation theory, and homotopy theory;
often concepts and inspiration from theoretical physics play an important role
as well. The RTG training activities are designed to promote this unified view
of geometry and topology and, more broadly, of mathematics and science to young
mathematicians.

Mathematics, the study of Number and Space, lies at the foundation of science
and technology. Geometry, the study of Space, has long had connections with and
applications to the real world. Topology investigates, very roughly, global
geometric properties of spaces which do not rely on local structure. There is
great interplay between Geometry and Topology-there is not a sharp boundary
between them. In the ancient world measurement was introduced to facilitate
commerce; more advanced concepts, such as trigonometry, were introduced to
understand the stars. In our modern world advanced ideas in Geometry underlie
abstract theories in physics and also have more immediate practical
implications, for example in navigation, computer graphics, etc. The large scale
structures studied in topology appear in biological and physical science; there
are new applications to data analysis and signal processing as well. Effective
training of the next generation of Geometers and Topologists is vital for the
continued development of these ideas, both within mathematics and for external
applications. The University of Texas Geometry/Topology Research Training Grant
promotes a unified view of the field. An open attitude towards ideas from all
directions is essential for success with the challenges facing mathematics and
science today. Through local activities in Austin, and via dissemination on the
web, the RTG will enhance training at all levels.
