
* 1200804
* Affine Schubert Calculus
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 06/01/2012,04/25/2014
* Mark Shimozono,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2016
* USD 154,791.00

This project investigates combinatorial structures arising in algebraic
geometry, particularly the Schubert calculus, whose origins are in the
enumerative geometry of the late 19th century, but whose applications touch on
modern mathematics such as quantum cohomology and quantum K-theory. The research
will focus on the infinite-dimensional homogeneous spaces known as affine
Grassmannians and affine flag varieties, which will be studied using
combinatorial, algebraic, and geometric methods. In particular, explicit
computational methods will be developed for various kinds of cohomology rings of
these varieties. An example is the use of Groebner basis methods to obtain new
formulae for the homology basis of the affine Grassmannian of a special linear
group called k-Schur functions, which generalizes the classical expression of a
Schur function as the weight generating function of Young tableaux. This project
has applications to the theory of Macdonald polynomials and may provide new
combinatorial formulae for Gromov-Witten invariants of flag manifolds.

The investigation is largely fueled by extensive computational experimentation.
The robust implementation of algorithms derived from the project will lead to
the development of new packages for computer algebra systems, which allow a user
to build and manipulate computer implementations of mathematical objects. The
dissemination of this software, through an open-source system, will not only
advance the proposed research program, but will also have an outreach impact on
the mathematics, physics, and computer science communities.
