
* 1200304
* Modularity lifting in non-regular weight
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2012,04/22/2013
* David Geraghty,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2014
* USD 115,390.00

This project is concerned with the correspondence, predicted by Langlands and
Fontaine-Mazur, between Galois representations and automorphic representations.
This correspondence is still largely conjectural but there has been much
progress in recent years. The proof of the Shimura-Taniyama conjecture has been
considerably generalized to rather general potential automorphy theorems that
apply to Galois representations of arbitrary dimension. Such results have led,
for example, to a proof of the Sato-Tate conjecture. On the other hand, these
results have the restriction that they apply only to Galois representations with
distinct Hodge-Tate weights. This restriction rules out some well known examples
of Galois representations such as Artin representations and the Tate modules of
abelian varieties of dimension greater than one. The principal goal of this
project is to develop modularity results that apply to Galois representations
with repeated Hodge-Tate weights.

Number theory is one of the oldest branches of mathematics and has a very rich
history. Modern number theorists are interested in the field of algebraic
numbers (numbers that satisfy a polynomial equation with rational coefficients)
and its group of symmetries (which is an example of a Galois group). The
conjectures of Langlands and Fontaine-Mazur then predict that representations of
this group are intimately related to objects from distinct branches of
mathematics such as representation theory, analysis and algebraic geometry.
Progress on these conjectures has led to some spectacular results such as Wiles'
proof of Fermat's Last Theorem and has been a driving force for much development
in neighboring fields. Objects of fundamental interest in this theory, such as
elliptic curves, play a large role in cryptography and internet security.
