
* 1200726
* Degenerations and moduli
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2012,04/29/2015
* Valery Alexeev,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2017
* USD 420,000.00

Dr. Alexeev will work on a range of problems in algebraic geometry centering
around degenerations, compact moduli spaces of stable varieties and pairs, and
connections to the Minimal Model Program. Stable varieties and pairs are higher-
dimensional generalizations of Deligne-Mumford-Knudsen's stable curves. Some
particular subjects of this project are moduli of weighted stable hyperplane
arrangements, stable surfaces of general type, and geometric meaning of various
compactifications of moduli spaces of abelian varieties and K3 surfaces.

Algebraic geometry is one of most central branches of mathematics which aims to
understand, both practically and conceptually, solutions of systems of
polynomial equations in many variables. It has important applications to other
fields of mathematics, such as number theory, topology, analysis, as well as to
physics, biology, cryptography, and engineering. The particular problems that Dr
Alexeev will study involve moduli spaces, a classical subject going back to
Riemann, and in particular moduli spaces of stable curves and maps, and their
higher-dimensional analogues. Some of these originated in physics, and may in
turn find application there. The grant will contribute to training of graduate
students, and will support an active program in algebraic geometry at the
University of Georgia.
