
* 1200875
* Moduli Spaces - Geometry and Arithmetic
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2012,04/11/2012
* Radu Laza,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2015
* USD 142,935.00

The PI investigates several questions regarding moduli spaces by using
techniques of algebraic and analytic nature. One main direction of Laza's
research program is the construction of geometric compactifications for moduli
spaces and the development of tools for studying them. In particular, he is
interested in the study of the behavior of the period map at the boundary of the
moduli spaces. Another direction is the study of moduli spaces of certain
special varieties (K3, Calabi-Yau, and Hyperkahler). In this case, the interplay
between geometry, algebra, and arithmetic is the strongest, and consequently one
expects a good understanding of the moduli of these varieties. Some of the
questions that arise here have direct relevance to string theory.

This is a proposal in algebraic geometry, with connections to the related fields
of Complex Geometry and Arithmetic Geometry. Algebraic Geometry is concerned
with the study of geometric properties of objects defined by algebraic
equations. Within Algebraic Geometry, the PI is interested in the study of
moduli spaces, which parameterizes the shapes of objects within a given
topological class. This study has connections and applications to several other
branches of mathematics and to mathematical physics. The PI is involved in a
number of activities that broaden the impact of the proposed research: He is
advising graduate and undergraduate students. He is (co)organizing several
conferences, as well as a thematic semester on the geometry of Calabi-Yau
varieties.
