
* 1201572
* Noncommutative surfaces and Calabi-Yau algebras
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2012,03/07/2012
* Daniel Rogalski,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2016
* USD 180,144.00

Noncommutative algebraic geometry generalizes certain aspects of the
correspondence between commutative rings and schemes to the setting of
noncommutative rings. In particular, noncommutative projective geometry uses a
localization of the category of graded modules over a noncommutative graded ring
as a substitute for a category of coherent sheaves. A major goal of this project
is to advance the classification of noncommutative projective surfaces. We
continue to study surfaces in the birational classes of noncommutative
projective planes, especially those of Sklyanin type. Calabi-Yau algebras are an
important class of noncommutative algebras with good homological properties,
which are related to commutative Calabi-Yau varieties. For example, in certain
cases they can be seen as providing noncommutative resolutions of singular
varieties. In this project, we also propose to study certain classes of graded
Calabi-Yau algebras which are closely connected to noncommutative projective
geometry.

The set of all functions from a geometric space to the real numbers has a
natural addition and multiplication. A set with an addition and multiplication
is called a ring, and the example above is called the coordinate ring of the
space. Its algebraic properties often reflect and give information about the
underlying geometry of the space. The goal of noncommutative geometry, which is
the subject of this project, is to generalize to rings which do not directly
arise as coordinate rings of spaces, because the product of two elements in
these rings depends on the order you multiply them. Though there is no
underlying space, the algebra of these rings can have deep structure that allows
one to still study them in a geometric way. As an example, certain
noncommutative rings can be thought of as giving a noncommutative resolution of
a singular commutative space (the space is not smooth but has sharp points, and
the resolution smooths it out). Our main project concerns the classification of
noncommutative surfaces (2-dimensional spaces) and the structure of Calabi-Yau
algebras, which are noncommutative rings motivated originally by string theory
in theoretical physics.
