
* 1206434
* On two topics in algebraic geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 08/01/2012,07/09/2012
* Bangere Purnaprajna,KS,University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2016
* USD 156,685.00

In the first part of the proposal PI will work on the framework he and his
coauthors have introduced for varieties of general type. In this part, PI will
illustrate the striking new results that emanate from this framework for
algebraic surfaces. The methods developed are not restricted to the case of
surfaces alone, but apply to varieties of general type of arbitrary dimension.
Many of the questions have been open for a long time even for the case of
algebraic surfaces. They are compelling for many reasons that include
applications to moduli problems. One such long standing open question, posed by
Enriques in the 1940's, is to find methods of constructing the so-called
canonical surfaces, that is surfaces of general type with birational canonical
map. This question has attracted a lot of attention from geometers down the
years. We accomplish this task. The new methodology, involving very current
mathematical technology, has already yielded several new results on the
deformation, construction and the moduli, of varieties of general type. For
instance, the methods allow us to describe components of infinitely many moduli
spaces of surfaces of general type. The question of description of the moduli
components is so basic, these are found in graduate texts on algebraic surfaces.
The PI proposes to pursue this project. Recent results indicate that the methods
PI has developed with his coauthors are capable of handling deformation of
canonical maps of varieties of general type of arbitrary dimensions. This in
turn will have implications to their moduli, which are being explored.
Applications include new results for linear series on Calabi-Yau threefolds and
their deformations, settling a 14 year old conjecture and on the moduli space of
CY-threefolds.

The topic of holomorphic convexity of the universal cover of a projective
variety has attracted considerable interest and is usually referred to as
Shafarevich conjecture. One of the reasons is due to the fact that it is a
higher dimensional analogue of the much celebrated uniformization theorem of
Riemann and Kobe. The uniformization theorem says that any simply connected
Riemann surface is conformally equivalent to one of the three: the open unit
disk, the complex plane, or the Riemann sphere. Examples show that a pursuit of
exact analogues of this great theorem is out of question. The best one can hope
for in algebraic geometry is the holomorphic convexity of the universal covering
of a projective variety, which goes under the name of Shafarevich conjecture.
There are two approaches to this problem, one is constructing a general
theoretical framework that shows interconnections and the other involves solving
hard open cases that also have a compelling presence in different aspects of
algebraic geometry. Even for the case of surfaces only elliptic surfaces has had
a satisfactory and complete answer. With his co authors PI deals with these
problems for much larger class of surfaces fibered over a curve, open questions
for which there was until now no solution, via the fundamental groups of
algebraic surfaces. The methods of PI and his coauthors, which are new and
conceptual in the context, yield a stronger form of Shafarevich conjecture on
holomorphic convexity and also provide an affirmative answer to a conjecture of
Nori on fundamental groups of surfaces fibered over a curve. Besides this, the
results have application to second homotopy groups of these varieties. It must
be mentioned here that the classes of surfaces the PI and coauthors deal with
for which Shafarevich conjecture has been very much open have a huge moduli and
appear ubiquitously in the geometry of surfaces of general type and higher
dimensions.. The results of the PI and a more recent one in progress also
contain surprising elements concerning the bounds on the multiplicity of the
multiple fibers. This result contrasts sharply with the famous results of
Kodaira on the multiple fiber of an elliptic fibration. PI's recent results show
the power of the methods that is used to attack these circles of problems and
the PI wants to pursue the new ideas to more general fibrations for surface and
higher dimensional varieties.
