
* 1243928
* KUMUNU 2012
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 11/15/2012,10/22/2012
* Steven Cutkosky,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 10/31/2013
* USD 11,000.00

The conference KUMUNU 2012 will be held at the University of Missouri-Columbia
on September 22 and 23, 2012. KUMUNU is the annual weekend conference anchored
by the University of Kansas (KU), University of Missouri (MU) and University of
Nebraska (NU), which focuses on current research in commutative algebra,
algebraic geometry and related areas of mathematics. The KUMUNU conference has a
strong tradition of playing an important mentoring role for graduate students,
recent PhD's and early career faculty in four year colleges in the extended
midwest/great plains region. KUMUNU provides an annual venue for these groups to
come together with senior researchers at KU, MU and NU along with two or three
senior researchers from some institutions which are not so near. KUMUNU
stimulates interactions by having a series of 6 talks on current research by
established researchers and three talks by students expecting their doctorates
this year, with ample time and opportunity for interaction outside of talks in
an informal and friendly setting. In addition to faculty and students from KU,
MU and NU, and other institutions from Kansas, Missouri and Nebraska, KUMUNU
draws participants from neighboring states such as Colorado, Illinois, Indiana,
Michigan, Oklahoma and North Dakota. Travel and lodging support, especially for
graduate students and recent PhD's, is a key element for the success of KUMUNU
in achieving one of its main goals of showcasing research of young faculty,
helping enrich the research programs of recent PhD's and graduate students in
commutative algebra and related fields by both formal and informal mentoring
from experienced researchers. In addition, KUMUNU serves to enhance the existing
strengths at these three institutions. The conference website is
http://kumunu.missouri.edu For further information, one can also contact
kumunu@missouri.edu

The KUMUNU conference will provide an opportunity for mathematicians to interact
and establish research connections with each other; in particular, the
participants will benefit from the interaction and from seeing recent
developments in the field and its relationships with other areas. The primary
impacts of the conference will be its dissemination of recent ideas on an
important topic: commutative algebra and algebraic geometry and the stimulation
and enrichment of the research careers of the students and early career
participants. Participants will take ideas from the conference back to their
colleagues and students, stimulating further research and mathematical
enrichment at their home institutions. The relatively small size of the meeting
and its geographic and disciplinary focus will be particularly effective at
enabling participants to establish productive collaborative relationships.
Encouragement and mentoring that begins at the conference will significantly
contribute to the success and professional development of early career
mathematicians whether in research institutions or primarily teaching
institutions.
