
* 1246844
* RTG: Algebraic and Arithmetic Geometry at the University of Illinois at Chicago
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 06/01/2013,04/09/2020
* Lawrence Ein,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2021
* USD 2,489,046.00

The PI and the co-PIs are planning to establish a Research Training Group in
Algebraic Geometry and Arithmetic Geometry at the University of Illinois at
Chicago. The goal of the project is to increase the proportion of US citizens
and permanent residents that will be educated in mathematical research and well
prepared to pursue careers in the mathematical sciences. The project includes
the mentoring of undergraduate students, graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers. The PIs will work to develop a research program for undergraduate
majors, as part of their degree program in mathematics. Series of mini-seminars,
learning workshops, and conferences are planned to enhance the research
experiences of the postdoctoral researchers and graduate students. The PIs have
planned conferences on the applications of model theory, arithmetic geometry and
dynamics, and algebraic geometry.

The fields of algebraic and arithmetic geometry are among the most fundamental,
diverse and active areas of research mathematics. Algebraic and arithmetic
geometers study the properties of geometric objects defined by algebraic
equations, using tools from algebra, analysis and topology. Beginning with
analytic geometry and elementary properties of numbers, techniques in algebraic
and arithmetic geometry have developed into important tools for solutions of
outstanding problems in number theory and complex geometry, string theory in
mathematical physics, cryptography and computer-aided geometric design. The
goals of the Research Training Group of Algebraic and Arithmetic Geometry at the
University of Illinois at Chicago are to recruit, to train and to develop young
scientists who are US citizens and permanent residents to become researchers in
this very interesting and active area of mathematics.
