
* 1265256
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Birational Geometry and Singularities in Zero and Positive Characteristic
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2013,07/06/2015
* Mircea Mustata,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2017
* USD 312,829.00

The goal of this project is to bring together a group of researchers with
experience in a broad array of topics in higher dimensional algebraic geometry,
in order to make progress in two closely related areas: birational geometry in
positive characteristics and the theory of singularities and linear series
arising in the minimal model program. While there has been a lot of recent
progress in our understanding of the geometry of higher-dimensional varieties,
almost all of this body of work is restricted to characteristic zero, due to the
use of vanishing theorems that can fail in positive characteristic. The first
goal of this collaborative research is to build tools and a framework that would
allow the main results in birational geometry to be extended to positive
characteristics. This would make systematic use of the recent techniques that
have been devised to exploit the Frobenius morphism. A second goal of the
project is to further develop the study of invariants of singularities and of
linear series, with an eye toward the remaining problems in the minimal model
program. There have been many recent advances in this area. In particular, a
conjecture of Shokurov asserting that certain invariants of singularities (the
log canonical thresholds) satisfy the so-called ACC property has been solved by
some of the PIs. This suggests that other related but harder questions might be
within reach, questions whose importance comes from the connection with one of
the remaining conjectures in the minimal model program, the termination of
flips. The PIs propose to attack one of these problems, predicting the ACC
property of another invariant, the minimal log discrepancy. In a separate
direction, the PIs plan to undertake a systematic study of examples of linear
systems on algebraic varieties that exhibit a pathological behavior from the
point of view of various positivity invariants.

The last ten years have seen major breakthroughs in the study of higher-
dimensional algebraic varieties, but several important problems are still open.
A central such problem is intimately related to the study of singularities and
one of the goals of this project is to make progress on understanding the
properties of the invariants of singularities that appear in this setting.
Another general goal of the PIs is to develop systematically the study of
algebraic varieties of dimension at least 3 in positive characteristic. A lot
less is known in this setting, where new phenomena (sometimes considered
pathological) arise. The PIs expect that cross-pollination of ideas with other
areas, in particular with commutative algebra, will play an important role in
making progress in this direction. Moreover, it is likely that techniques and
results in this context would have many applications to other fields (for
example, in arithmetic geometry). As part of the collaborative effort, the PIs
plan several events that will bring together members of the mathematical
community working on related problems and also help disseminate the results and
the techniques developed as part of this project.
