
* 1266104
* Estimates in computational complexity, fluid mechanics, additive combinatorics and analysis
* DMS,ANALYSIS PROGRAM, Combinatorics
* 07/01/2013,08/05/2015
* Nets Katz,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 284,000.00

The methods of what can loosely be described as "hard analysis" can be applied
in many areas. These methods involve inequalities, that is the use of estimates
rather than exact identities. To obtain these, one might use divide and conquer
methods like those which specifically occur in harmonic analysis, such as
Calderon-Zygmund lemmas and stopping times. One might use transform methods,
especially the Fourier transform to determine the role of frequency in the
problem. Often most important, is the role of modeling the problem, which in
mathematics means finding simple model problems exhibiting the difficulties of
the original problem. In this proposal, we plan to use these methods of hard
analysis to work on a number of problems of interest in various areas.

We plan to look for lower bounds in a certain kind of complexity problem by
analyzing the complexity of bipartite graphs which are close to extremal for the
property of having no complete two-by-two subgraphs. We plan to study the
behavior of fluids in two dimensions which are close to extremal for estimates
coming from the work of Beale, Kato, and Majda. We plan to study problems in
arithmetic combinatorics related to structure in and size of sets having no
arithmetic progressions of length 3.

The broader impact of the project will consist in organizing meetings around
some of the elements discussed and in the training of students at various level,
postdocs, graduate students, and undergraduates in ways that allow them to
participate in and understand important work in mathematics. The PI is one of
the organizers of a 3 month program at IPAM centered on uses of the algebraic
method in discrete extremal combinatorics, a practice he helped pioneer in his
work with Guth on the Joints problem and on the Erdos discrete distance problem.
This meeting will bring together scores of mathematicians: senior faculty,
junior faculty, but especially postdocs and graduate students, allowing them to
fruitfully meet and discuss this exciting and growing field. Such meetings are
essential in the development of a workforce of young mathematicians. This grant
will help the PI in his training of graduate students and postdocs, in some
cases providing a bit of support. Focused training of junior researchers by more
senior one, which is carried on through the solution of problems, is crucial to
the creation of the dynamic work force we have in the pure mathematics
community. The PI is starting a new job at Caltech which he is very excited
about. One broad impact that he will have is teaching a course called Math 1a,
required of all Caltech freshmen. It is essentially an accelerated elementary
analysis aimed at scientists and engineers. That such a course will be taught by
a research analyst, making an impact on cutting edge problems through
essentially universal ideas in analysis, will enrich the course, giving the
students a good feel of what mathematics is really about.
