
* 1301608
* Arithmetic combinatorics and applications to number theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Combinatorics
* 08/01/2013,07/18/2013
* Mei-Chu Chang,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2016
* USD 175,511.00

This is a proposal in arithmetic combinatorics, which has become an
interdisciplinary field of research with many applications. While certain themes
in additive combinatorics are classical in number theory, there is also focus on
new structural questions that turned out to be important. For instance, the work
of Gowers and, later, Green and Tao on arithmetic progressions have put
considerable impetus on Freiman's theorem and it's quantitative versions.
Parallel to these results, a general `sum-product' theory in finite fields and
residue rings was developed. The roots of this research go back for instance to
early work of Erdos-Szemeredi and the finite field version of the Kakeya problem
(solved by Z. Dvir). It turned out that results from sum-product and product
theory in various settings are of interest in their own right as they lead to
new results in analytic number theory (such as estimates of short character
sums), in pseudo-randomness and in group theory (growth, expansion and spectral
gaps). The PI intends to explore finite field analogues of the Szemeredi Trotter
theorem on incidences for algebraic curves (which are a special case of so-
called pseudo-line systems). In the finite field setting, such results are
presently only available for straight lines. More general results for pseudo-
line systems have been obtained over the reals but none of the known approaches
seem adaptable to the finite fields situation, so that new ideas are clearly
needed here. Results of this type would have major implications in the areas
mentioned above because they allow to obtain nontrivial statements on solutions
of systems of equations in situations where classical number theory is not
applicable. As a particular case, the PI would like to obtain analogues of the
Bombieri-Pila results on lattice points on curves restricted to boxes in the
prime field setting. Related to 'growth' phenomena in groups, the work of
Breuillard, Green and Tao provides a complete description of 'approximate
groups' that in some sense generalize Freiman's theorem and also provide a
finitary version of Gromov's theorem. At this stage, the results are only
qualitative and obtaining quantitative versions would be most interesting, in
particular in view of the consequences to group expansion. The PI will continue
to work with her collaborators on Poonen's conjecture on the multiplicative
order of F-points on curves. Again this is a problem at the interface of
combinatorics, algebra and number theory where progress can be expected.

Arithmetic combinatorics and `sum-product theory' in various settings have
become increasingly significant to various other fields, such as pseudo-
randomness in computer science, classical analytic number theory and the theory
of expansion in linear groups. The purpose of this proposal is to continue
research on the related issues in combinatorial number theory and their
applications in particular, to problems of estimating the number of solutions of
algebraic equations when the variables are restricted. This research involves
different groups of people and the interaction of various branches of
mathematics, occasionally leading to progress on old problems.
