
* 1301842
* L-values, Galois representations, and elliptic curves
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/15/2013,08/06/2013
* Christopher Skinner,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2017
* USD 140,000.00

This project focuses on one of the central problems in number theory: connecting
special values of L-functions to associated algebraic quantities, such as class
groups or Selmer groups. In the case of elliptic curves, which is addressed by
the celebrated conjecture of Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer, the research described
in this proposal aims to establish simple p-adic criteria for an elliptic curve
to have both algebraic and analytic rank one, to use this criteria to prove a
converse to the work of Kolyvagin and Gross-Zagier, and to show that this
criteria holds for a positive proportion of all elliptic curves over the
rationals (when ordered by height), thereby proving that both the average
algebraic and analytic ranks are positive. It also aims to connect the vanishing
of the central critical value of the L-function of an elliptic curve over the
rationals or a totally real number field to the non-triviality of the associated
p-adic Selmer group through methods involving the Iwasawa theory of unitary
groups, extending some of the investigator's prior work on such problems. This
project includes further development and generalization of these methods so as
to apply to L-functions arising from more general unitary groups, especially
groups of higher rank, and to connect values of p-adic L-functions to Abel-
Jacobi maps of cycles of positive dimension on unitary Shimura varieties.

The research described in this proposal aims to connect certain algebraic and
analytic objects that are fundamental for many problems in number theory. The
analytic objects are L-functions - a special class of functions built from
number-theoretic data (this class includes the celebrated Riemann zeta function
which is built from the prime numbers). For over a century and a half
L-functions have been a crucial ingredient in efforts to tackle the most central
problems in number theory (for example, understanding the distribution of prime
numbers or the structure of the set of rational number solutions to cubic
curves). An important feature of L-functions is that their values at certain
special points are expected to encode information about the orders of algebraic
quantities also associated with the number-theoretic data defining the
L-function. The investigator aims to prove the existence of such relations, with
an emphasis on the important case of elliptic curves. Understanding the
structure of the set of rational points on an elliptic curve - essentially the
rational number solutions to a cubic equation - has been an aim in number theory
for over a century, with connections to open problems that go back even further
(even to classical Greek geometry). The problem of connecting the structure of
this set with the special values of the L-function of the elliptic curve is
often listed as one of the most important unsolved problems in mathematics. It
is expected that this project will especially further the understanding of this
connection and that it will develop new methods that will be useful for making
progress on more general problems of a similar nature. The methods will draw
particularly on the theory of automorphic forms, which are closely connected to
both analysis and algebra and a rich supply of L-functions.
