
* 1303298
* Zonotopal algebra and combinatorics
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Olga Holtz,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2016
* USD 262,470.00

This project is devoted to studies of zonotopal algebra and its combinatorial
applications. The methodology of zonotopal algebra is already known to play a
role in Approximation Theory (box splines), Commutative Algebra (fat point
ideals, Cox rings), Enumerative Combinatorics (matroids and simplicial
complexes), Convex Geometry (zonotopes and hyperplane arrangements), Graph
Theory (Tutte polynomials, parking functions), and Algebraic Geometry
(hyperkaehler toric varieties, de Concini-Procesi wonderful models). This
project seeks to advance the theory of zonotopal algebra in the following three
ways: (1) develop a discrete counterpart to the existing continuous theory, (2)
apply zonotopal algebra to problems of algebraic and enumerative combinatorics,
(3) build the infrastructure for larger-scale collaboration on the subject.

This research effort should advance an important area at the crossroads of pure
and applied mathematics. Results of this research may also have applications to
the mathematics of large networks and traffic flow, including wireless
communication, problems of statistical mechanics, scheduling, logistics and
discrete optimization. The project will involve graduate students and
postdoctoral scholars in and outside UC Berkeley. Junior participants will be
encouraged to interact with each another within a research seminar at UC
Berkeley as well as with more senior experts in the field during mutual
collaboration visits. This should contribute to the integration of research
training and education.
