
* 1303042
* Spaces of tensors and their syzygies via representation theory and combinatorics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/15/2013,08/01/2013
* Claudiu Raicu,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 10/31/2014
* USD 144,000.00

The PI will investigate a number of open problems concerning the equations and
syzygies of algebraic varieties admitting the action of a product of general
linear groups. The main techniques to be employed stem from the classical method
of polarization which replaces arbitrary monomials with square-free monomials in
order to study problems that behave well with respect to specialization. The
techniques involve a circle of new ideas developed in the PI's thesis as well as
in recent works of a number of other authors, which use Schur-Weyl duality in
order to translate questions about equations/coordinate rings/syzygies into a
"generic setting" where tools from combinatorics, topology and the
representation theory of symmetric groups are readily available. The PI will
study the coordinate rings and syzygies of a number of classical varieties, with
a view towards applications to plethysm problems in combinatorics, or to the
understanding of the general asymptotic structure of syzygies of projective
varieties in algebraic geometry.

The proposed research pertains to the field of algebraic geometry, which is
concerned with the study of algebraic varieties defined by systems of polynomial
equations. Syzygies of algebraic varieties are a tool to better understand the
equations, as well as the varieties themselves. They are defined inductively, in
increasing order of their complexity, as the relations between the equations,
the relations between these relations, and so on. When the algebraic varieties
come equipped with a large group of symmetries, which is often the case in
nature, the syzygies will inherit some of those symmetries. The PI and his
collaborators will employ a combination of methods from algebraic geometry,
combinatorial topology, commutative algebra, and representation theory in order
to study the equations and syzygies of natural spaces of tensors (also known as
multidimensional matrices or arrays). A fundamental problem that will be
addressed concerns the generalization of the familiar statement from linear
algebra which states that matrices of rank less than r are defined by the
vanishing of the determinants of their r x r submatrices. For multidimensional
arrays of dimension larger than two a general statement like this one is
unknown, and would have important applications to algebraic statistics, biology,
complexity theory, signal processing etc.
