
* 1303173
* Independence of l and local terms
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/15/2013,07/29/2013
* Martin Olsson,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2017
* USD 179,996.00

This proposal focuses on questions that arise in the study of algebraic
varieties and their cohomology, many of which have arithmetic applications.
Earlier work of the PI and others has led to substantial recent developments in
our understanding of operations on cohomology arising from correspondences, and
also to a new suite of problems which the PI will investigate. The PI will study
questions of independence of l for actions of correspondences on various
cohomology theories (specifically etale, intersection, and crystalline
cohomology), continue his work on localized chern classes, and study global
questions using trace formulas. These lines of investigation are motivated by
the theory of motives, which predicts independence of l results for certain
operators on cohomology and suggests that their traces should have geometric
significance.In addition, the PI will continue earlier work researching
algebraic stacks, abelian varieties, log geometry, Fourier-Mukai transforms, and
moduli spaces. The PI will continue to advise Ph.D. students working on projects
related to the proposed research.

The proposed work concerns basic geometric structures, such as cohomology,
moduli spaces, and stacks, which lie at the core of algebraic geometry and its
interactions with other fields, including number theory, representation theory,
combinatorics, and practical applications. Roughly algebraic geometry is
concerned with the study of geometric properties of algebraic varieties, which
are solutions of systems of polynomial equations. Cohomology theories provide
some of the most powerful techniques for the study of such varieties. For
example, the Lefschetz trace formula can be used to estimate numbers of
solutions of polynomials over finite fields, and more generally cohomology
groups of algebraic varieties are one of the main sources of Galois
representations, which are fundamental objects in modern number theory. The
proposal addresses problems on cohomology theories arising in this context.
Another fundamental approach to the study of algebraic varieties is through
their classification and moduli spaces. The PI's work on moduli spaces and
stacks will continue to advance our understanding of key moduli spaces and
provide broadly applicable foundational tools.
