
* 1341860
* KUMUNU Conference
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2013,08/23/2013
* Steven Cutkosky,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 10/31/2014
* USD 8,000.00

The conference KUMUNU 2013 will be held at the University of Missouri-Columbia
on September 21 and 22, 2013. KUMUNU is the annual weekend conference anchored
by the University of Kansas (KU), University of Missouri (MU), and University of
Nebraska (NU). It was founded by the algebraists in these three institutions in
1999 to promote interaction among faculty, post docs and graduate students in
commutative algebra and related disciplines. The three institutions are within
3-5 hours driving distance and with modest travel and lodging support the
weekend KUMUNU conference will continue to have significant regional impact.
KUMUNU moved to Missouri in 2012. Last year we held the conference in Columbia
on the weekend of September 22-23. The KUMUNU conference has a strong tradition
of playing an important mentoring role for graduate students, recent PhD's and
early career faculty in research institutions and four year colleges in the
extended midwest/great plains region. KUMUNU provides an annual venue for these
groups to come together with senior researchers at KU, MU and NU along with two
or three senior researchers from some institutions not so near. KUMUNU
stimulates interactions by having a series of 6 or 7 talks on current research
accessible to graduate students with ample time and opportunity for interaction
outside of talks in an informal and friendly setting. In addition to faculty and
students from KU, MU and NU, and other institutions from Kansas, Missouri and
Nebraska, KUMUNU draws participants from neighboring states such as Colorado,
Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Michigan, Oklahoma, and North Dakota. One of the
main goals is to showcase research of young faculty, helping enrich the research
programs of recent PhD's and graduate students in commutative algebra and
related fields by both formal and informal mentoring from experienced
researchers. In addition, KUMUNU serves to enhance the existing strengths at
these three institutions. The conference website is http:/kumunu.missouri.edu.

The KUMUNU conference will provide an opportunity for mathematicians to interact
and establish research connections with each other; in particular, the
participants will benefit from interaction with other researchers and from
seeing recent developments in the field and its relationships with other areas.
The primary impacts of the conference will be its dissemination of recent ideals
in commutative algebra and algebraic geometry, and stimulation and enrichment of
the research careers of students and early career participants. Participants
will take ideas form the conference back to their colleagues and students,
stimulating further research and mathematical enrichment at their home
institutions. The relatively small size of the meeting and its geographic and
disciplinary focus will be particularly effective at enabling participants to
establish productive collaborative relationships. Encouragement and mentoring
that begins at the conference will significantly contribute to the success and
professional development of early career mathematicians whether in research
institutions or primarily teaching institutions.
