
* 1344994
* RTG: Algebra, Algebraic Geometry, and Number Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 05/01/2014,02/17/2021
* Dino Lorenzini,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 04/30/2022
* USD 1,999,977.00

This award supports a research training group at the University of Georgia in
the areas of Algebra, Algebraic Geometry, and Number Theory. Many aspects of the
program that have been planned by the University of Georgia Algebra and Number
Theory research group will be suitable for and open to all undergraduate and
graduate students in the department. Thus these activities will have a broad
impact on the life of the department. The training proposed will run year-round.
Keeping the undergraduate, graduate students, and postdocs engaged continuously
will help with retention, shorten the time to degree, and boost productivity.

The Algebra, Algebraic Geometry, and Number Theory group at the University of
Georgia proposes a comprehensive program designed to recruit, engage, and train
students and postdoctoral associates, and to prepare them for successful careers
in the mathematical sciences. The First Year Undergraduate Seminars will draw
UGA students into careers in the mathematical sciences. The Graduate Student
Boot Camp will ensure success for graduate students in the program. Vertical
Research Training Groups (VRTG) will give students and postdocs the chance to
engage early in collaborative research projects. The computational VRTG will
provide online tools for computations in the three research fields. The
Oberseminar will act as educational training tool for graduate students,
catalyst for intra-area discussion, and community builder for the group.
