
* 1352073
* CAREER: Nonnegative Polynomials, Sums of Squares and Real Symmetric Tensor Decompositions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 05/15/2014,06/06/2018
* Grigoriy Blekherman,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 04/30/2020
* USD 400,000.00

This project investigates links between optimization problems arising in
applications and the classical mathematical area of real algebraic geometry.
Nonnegative polynomials and sums of squares are the key objects linking
optimization and algebraic geometry. The PI will carry out research that sheds
light on the computational quality of sums-of-squares methods while building new
connections with algebraic geometry. Such connections between mathematics,
engineering, and natural sciences enrich mathematics by bringing new types of
questions, new perspectives, and new directions of research. The PI will also
organize two summer workshops for graduate students centered around student
presentations on applications of algebraic geometry. The participating students
will be exposed during their graduate studies to perspectives from several
different scientific fields, while learning from their own peers.

The PI will investigate the connection between nonnegative polynomials and sums
of squares in all of its aspects: algebraic, algorithmic, analytical. The PI
will also study the closely related topic of real symmetric tensor
decompositions. Understanding nonnegativity and its relation with sums of
squares is one of the basic challenges of real algebraic geometry. Sums of
squares methods have applications in diverse areas such as control and
optimization, robotics, and complexity theory. Nonnegativity and sums of squares
also have intrinsic connections to classical topics in algebraic geometry. The
fundamental research that PI will carry out will lead to furthering these
connections, while also improving the understanding of the computational quality
of sums of squares algorithms. The PI will also research fundamental geometric
aspects of real symmetric tensor decomposition, which are not nearly as well
understood as for complex tensors.
