
* 1361007
* Thirteenth Conference of the Canadian Number Theory Association, June 16-20, 2014
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2014,03/26/2014
* Steven Gonek,NY,University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2015
* USD 22,000.00

The thirteenth meeting of the Canadian Number Theory Association is scheduled to
take place from June 16, 2014 to June 20, 2014 inclusive at Carleton University,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada with one conference day at the University of Ottawa. The
Canadian Number Theory Association (CNTA) was founded in 1987 at the
International Number Theory Conference at Laval University in Quebec City. The
purpose of the CNTA is to enhance and promote learning and research in Number
Theory. To advance these goals, the CNTA organizes major international
conferences, with the aim of bringing the latest developments in number theory
to both students and researchers. One direct impact of NSF funding for CNTA XIII
will be the training of a significant number of junior American researchers
(graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior faculty) by giving them the
opportunity to participate in the conference and to interact with experts in the
field. Number theory is one of the oldest branches of mathematics. Number
theorists study questions concerning the fundamental properties of the integers.
Although some of these questions may be easily stated, their solutions often
employ advanced methods from diverse fields of mathematics. Moreover,
theoretical results in number theory have a wide range of applications and have
been applied by researchers to cryptography, coding theory, combinatorics, and
theoretical physics.
