
* 1362855
* Combinatorial algebraic geometry: Modern Schubert calculus and generalized splines
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 09/15/2014,09/11/2014
* Julianna Tymoczko,MA,Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 130,000.00

Whenever equations model the world around us---whether describing how the gross
domestic product depends on different sectors of the economy or predicting the
trajectory of a spacecraft or a hurricane---those equations also describe a
geometric object. For a simple system of equations like the line x+y=1, geometry
might not seem very useful. When we have complicated systems with dozens of
equations in hundreds of variables, methods from geometry can be one of the few
ways to analyze important quantitative and qualitative aspects of the system,
like where it has a maximum or how many pieces it has. This research project
develops important geometric tools for describing complicated systems of
equations. It then applies these tools to specific systems of equations with
important applications in mathematics, physics, computer science, and other
fields.

The PI proposes to solve three linked questions in modern Schubert calculus: the
first studies the cohomology of the affine Grassmannian; the second studies the
intersection homology of Schubert varieties; and the third studies the
cohomology of a family of subvarieties of the flag variety called Hessenberg
varieties, in order to answer major open questions about the flag variety. To do
this, the PI will use GKM theory, a combinatorial and algebraic algorithm to
describe equivariant cohomology, as well as a recent extension of GKM theory
called generalized splines. The goals of the project will be 1) to develop
theoretical tools and algorithms in generalized splines and 2) to apply these
tools to perform specific computational and combinatorial calculations in the
various cohomology rings we study.
