
* 1362924
* Critical Points of Functions, Multidimensional Hypergeometric Integrals, and Quantum Integrable Systems
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2014,07/10/2014
* Alexander Varchenko,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 06/30/2017
* USD 162,000.00

The hypergeometric function was introduced and studied in the 18th century by
Leonhard Euler. Modern versions of that function appear in different
mathematical and physical theories, including representation theory, algebraic
geometry, gauge theory, and statistical mechanics, and are considered from
different points of view in these various research domains. The goal of this
project is to develop a unified analysis and geometry of modern multidimensional
hypergeometric functions with applications to these different theories. The work
will lead to better understanding of interrelations between those parts of
mathematics and physics as well as to establishing new connections among them.

Multidimensional (q-)hypergeometric integrals and their semiclassical limits,
Bethe eigenfunctions, and eigenvectors appear as solutions to differential and
difference equations in quantum integrable systems, representation theory,
algebraic geometry, gauge theory, and statistical mechanics. The equations and
solutions have rich mathematical structures. The multidimensional hypergeometric
integrals provide a way to transform the objects and structures of those
theories to objects and structures of geometry and analysis of master functions
and weight functions associated with the integrals. The goal of the project is
to develop this analysis and geometry with applications to the above theories.
The project involves study of representations of quantum groups, algebras of
Hamiltonians of quantum integrable systems, quantum cohomology and associated
quantum differential equations, Frobenius structures, the Bethe ansatz method,
theory of arrangements of hyperplanes, and singularity theory of critical points
of functions. The research plan is as follows: 1) Construct q-hypergeometric
solutions of the equivariant quantum differential equation for the cotangent
bundle of a partial flag variety. 2) Identify the quantum cohomology algebra of
the cotangent bundle of a partial flag variety with the algebra of functions on
the critical set of the associated hypergeometric (or q-hypergeometric) master
function. Identify the elliptic Bethe algebra with the algebra of functions on
the critical set of the corresponding elliptic master function; develop
relations with an elliptic Schubert calculus. Identify the XXX Bethe algebra
with the algebra of functions on the intersection of suitably deformed Schubert
varieties. 3) Find a potential for a KZ-type connection and a Frobenius-like
structure on the base of the KZ-type connection. 4) Develop a relation between
the critical set of master functions associated with an affine Lie algebra and
classical integrable hierarchies associated with that Lie algebra. Develop a
correspondence between populations of critical points of master functions
associated with a tensor product of irreducible modules over a simple Lie
algebra and the decomposition of the tensor product into irreducibles. 5) In
terms of discriminantal arrangements develop a geometric realization of the BGG
resolution of an irreducible module over a simple Lie algebra.
