
* 1362650
* Extremal Combinatorics and Applications
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 06/01/2014,08/21/2017
* Peter Ebenfelt,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Extremal combinatorics is an important area of discrete mathematics. The
mathematical methods in extremal combinatorics are now central tools in
combinatorics, and give rise to many applications in other areas of mathematics
as well as other fields of science, such as statistical mechanics, biology,
theoretical computer science and information and coding theory. The proofs of
the central theorems are also connected to algorithmic complexity questions, as
well as questions on randomized algorithms and derandomization. For instance,
given a network one may ask for the minimum number of nodes whose failure would
cause the network to disconnect, and how efficiently one can exhibit such a set
of nodes -- this is one of the central topics in graph theory. These questions
often lie at the heart of digital and communication security, web searching,
reliable data transmission, network dynamics, and the spread of infectious
disease or information, and so on.

This award supports research in combinatorics, focusing on the very active area
of extremal and probabilistic combinatorics. The aim is to study specific
central problems in extremal combinatorics, such as the Turan and Ramsey
problems for both graphs and hypergraphs, matching and coloring problems and the
extension of these problems into the context of models of random graphs and
hypergraphs. In recent years, there has been a sharp increase in the number of
new tools available for studying these problems, including the various notions
of pseudorandomness in graphs and hypergraphs, martingale concentration
inequalities and probabilistic sieving methods, as well as regularity lemmas, to
mention a few. The problems which the PI propose to study, such as the extremal
problem for bipartite graphs, remain open, and any new advance is likely to have
a substantial theoretical impact and practical consequences. While these open
problems are important and clearly difficult, the new methods and combinatorial
techniques mentioned above together with new ideas look very promising for the
resolution of these problems.
