
* 1400876
* Sphere packings and related extremal problems
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 08/01/2014,08/09/2016
* Oleg Musin,TX,The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2017
* USD 160,000.00

This proposal is devoted to the problems of sphere packings in metric spaces,
other point allocations, and related combinatorial objects. The presentation of
the findings through conferences and colloquia, both in the USA and abroad, will
broaden the discussion of these topics and inspire further developments therein.
Likewise the investigators expect to contribute to the educational goal of
informing the next generation of mathematicians and inspiring them to conduct
related research of their own.

The investigators will employ two major methods of analyzing extremal point
allocations. The method of jammed or irreducible graphs goes back to Schutte and
van der Waerden, Fejes Toth, and Danzer, and is directly related to the rigidity
theory. The method of positive definite constraints that has been used to
analyze the properties of point configurations, and to derive bounds on their
size, relies on classical works of Schoenberg, Bochner, and Delsarte. The PI and
co-PI intend to solve the Tammes problem for values of n larger than 13,
classify irreducible graphs on a two-dimensional sphere, and describe optimal
sphere packings on other surfaces (including a square flat torus with n larger
than 8) and in higher dimensions. The investigators will also attempt to
quantify the impact of the positive definite relaxation on the description of
point sets and the accuracy of the known Delsarte bounds on codes. Through the
proposed analysis of few-distance sets, the PI and co-PI will contribute new
tools to a classic combinatorial problem; while geometric ideas used in the
study of such sets could lead to new approaches to finding constraints on
strongly regular graphs and primitive association schemes. Delaunay
triangulations provide an important tool for analysis of sphere packings and
coverings; the PI and co-PI intend to extend known results to a larger set of
point configurations and to find new all-dimensional functionals for which a
Delaunay triangulation is always optimal.
