
* 1400859
* Combinatorics of discrete surfaces
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 09/01/2014,08/22/2014
* Olivier Bernardi,MA,Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 140,000.00

This research project focuses on the study of discrete surfaces, that is,
surfaces obtained by gluing together polygons along edges. Discrete surfaces
(also known as maps) are fundamental mathematical structures which play an
important role in several branches of mathematics, and theoretical physics and
are also of practical importance in computer science (for computer graphics and
circuit layout). The goal of the project is to solve several open problems about
discrete surfaces by finding encodings of maps by simpler mathematical
structures such as trees and lattice paths. In particular, these encodings shall
be used to study the properties of large random discrete surfaces, and to design
algorithms for discrete surfaces. Some broader impacts of the project are the
mentoring of undergraduate research projects, the organization of weekly
seminars and conferences, and the dissemination of scientific discoveries
through survey articles.

The PI intends to solve several problems related to maps using a bijective
approach. In recent years many bijections were found between classes of maps and
simpler mathematical structures such as trees. This represented a breakthrough
in the understanding of maps, which helped solve previously unreachable problems
such as describing the metric properties of random maps and random surfaces. In
a collaboration with Eric Fusy, the PI has found a "master bijection"
generalizing and unifying most known bijections for maps. The PI plans to pursue
his research in the following directions:

- Extend the master bijection approach to new classes of maps, namely, hypermaps
and irreducible maps. This will complete the unification of the bijective theory
of maps, and encompass bijections for maps endowed with a statistical mechanics
model.

- Study the metric properties of random maps by using a recent bijective result
about ``charged maps''.

- Write a survey article about the bijective approach to maps.

- Design drawing algorithms for graphs using canonical orientations.

Other goals of the PI which are not directly related to maps are a combinatorial
proof of Okounkov determinantal formula for Schur measures, and the
parametrization of the space of branched polymers.
