
* 1401224
* Topics in number theory, dynamical systems and discrete geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2014,06/04/2016
* Jeffrey Lagarias,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 12/31/2017
* USD 321,885.00

There have recently been many important interactions between number theory and
other fields, including dynamical systems and discrete geometry. The connection
of number theory with discrete geometry structures via packings leads to
connections with problems in materials science. Problems in number theory
involving zeta functions and distribution of primes have parallels with problems
in mathematical physics. There are further connections of number theory with
physical theories such as conformal field theory through modular forms. Number
theory structure appears in some exactly solvable models of phase transitions in
physical models. The proposal investigates several possible areas of contact
between fields, which may lead to fruitful interactions with researchers in
physics and material sciences. The grant will support the training of graduate
students in these areas.



Dr. Lagarias will investigate several independent topics interacting among
these fields. The first, and main, topic continues the investigation of the
Lerch zeta function, which is a function of three variables, that on
specializing variables yields the Hurwitz zeta function and Riemann zeta
function. A connection is made with the representation theory of the Heisenberg
group and related groups, and the project aims to connect it more closely to
automorphic representations on various groups. A second topic concerns two
exploratory projects; one concerns a certain family of virtual representations
of the symmetric groups, which arises as a degenerate limit of splitting
properties of polynomials (modulo p), associated to properties of the
discriminant locus of the polynomial. It asks if there is an underlying
geometric structure explaining the observed limit properties, possibly with an
associated dynamical system. Another exploratory project studies polyharmonic
modular forms, which are functions with modular invariance that are annihilated
by a power of the Laplacian. A third topic is to investigate of circle packings
on Riemann surfaces, a topic in the area of discrete geometry. It considers
formulation of scaling limits of such packings in two directions, a complex
variables limit and a Diophantine approximation limit. Whether or not this can
be done precisely, special questions are proposed to initially investigate these
areas, including study of surfaces having rigid packings with a finite number of
circles.
