
* 1402121
* The circle method, character sums, and sieves: Applications to number theory and harmonic analysis
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2014,08/22/2014
* Lillian Pierce,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2017
* USD 157,001.00

Many questions in mathematics concern the behavior of curved objects. In a
discrete setting, certain of these questions date to antiquity and take the form
of seeking integral solutions to Diophantine equations, which can also be viewed
as points lying on a "curved" variety. In a continuous setting, such questions
can take the form of asking how an operator transforms a function when it
averages the function over a curved submanifold. This proposal considers a broad
class of questions in number theory and harmonic analysis involving objects with
curvature.

The PI will develop methodological advances for the circle method, character
sums, and sieves, leading to applications to a wide array of number theoretic
questions that can be interpreted as counting solutions to systems of
Diophantine equations. In addition, the PI will investigate polynomial Carleson
operators of Radon type, for which the presence of curvature introduces both new
difficulties and beautiful new structure. Finally, the PI will apply number
theoretic and analytic methods to prove operator bounds for discrete arithmetic
operators involving curvature. At the heart of all these problems lies the
investigation of oscillatory integrals and their discrete cousins character
sums. Throughout the duration of the research program, the PI will promote
mathematics to the broader community and encourage the participation of
underrepresented groups.
