
* 1405708
* Langlands Functoriality in Nonsolvable and Relative Settings
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2014,06/12/2014
* Jayce Getz,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2018
* USD 153,000.00

In elementary school one learns how to solve quadratic equations using the
quadratic formula; it involves taking a certain square root. One can also find
solutions for degree three polynomials and degree four polynomials by taking
radicals, but in general by the Abel-Ruffini theorem there is no formula for the
roots of polynomial of degree five or higher in terms of radicals. This theorem,
first proven in the 1800's, is an indication of a profound difference between
so-called solvable polynomials (those that can be solved by radicals) and
nonsolvable polynomials (those that cannot be solved by radicals). The latter
are much harder to understand. Existing techniques in the so-called Langlands
program are often limited to the solvable setting. Part of this proposal is
dedicated to providing new techniques in the Langlands program that will work in
nonsolvable settings.

Though only proven in special (albeit important) cases the Langlands
functoriality conjectures have become a cornerstone of modern mathematics. The
conjectures had their genesis in the area of automorphic forms, which lies at
the intersection of number theory, representation theory, and harmonic analysis
on Lie groups. The theory developed to understand and prove cases of the
conjectures has become crucial to understanding these subjects, and has reached
beyond them, leading to important applications in other areas such as topology,
algebraic geometry and mathematical physics. This proposal aims to develop tools
to resolve important cases of the conjectures and their analogues in other
contexts. The proposed research has two parts. First, it will investigate
Langlands' so-called ``Beyond Endoscopy'' idea in settings designed to establish
descent and base change of automorphic representations along nonsolvable Galois
extensions. Second, it will develop relative analogues of the theory of twisted
endoscopy. This will lead to a better understanding of special cycles on Shimura
varieties with a view towards establishing cases of the Tate and Beilinson-Bloch
conjectures.
