
* 1407657
* Displacement Convexity, Curvature and Concentration in Discrete Settings
* DMS,PROBABILITY, Combinatorics
* 07/01/2014,06/03/2016
* Prasad Tetali,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2018
* USD 288,000.00

The concept of mass transport was introduced by the French geometer G. Monge in
1781 and rediscovered and crucially developed and applied to areas in economics
by L. Kantorovich, eventually earning him the Nobel prize in 1939. The
renaissance of the classical Monge-Kantorovich mass transport topic in the late
1980's is attributed to independent developments by the French mathematician Y.
Brenier (studying fluid dynamics), U.S. mathematician J. Mather in dynamical
systems, and British meteorologist Mike Cullen. The mathematics of the optimal
transport and its extensions has made a tremendous impact on several fields
including calculus of variations, functional analysis, geometry, and
probability. In recent years the geometry of optimal transport, particularly its
link with the so-called Ricci curvature in Riemannian geometry, and connections
to functional and isoperimetric inequalities has been extensively investigated
resulting in deep and beautiful connections to the above-mentioned topics. The
new book by the recent Fields medalist C. Villani is a testament to this
explosive development. What is currently lacking in our understanding, and is
actively being sought by various isolated groups, is the analogous development
of the topic in discrete spaces -- developing appropriate "discrete calculus" on
graphs and finite Markov chains. The PI and his collaborators (including
students and postdocs) have identified several concrete directions to make
progress, as well as find new applications, in this important and exciting
topic.

In recent collaboration, with various collaborators, the PI has initiated a
fruitful line of frontier research in developing discrete aspects of the
exciting topic of Optimal Transport & Applications. Besides strengthening and
refining classical notions, this work identifies several interesting new
directions to pursue -- new notions of (Brunn-Minkowski) convexity in graphs,
new concentration inequalities (dimension-free, infimum-convolution and
transport-entropy inequalities) refining Talagrand's convex distance
concentration (and extensions by Marton and others) on non-product spaces, as
well as connections to classical sumset inequalities in additive combinatorics.
Much of this is motivated by the attempts to understand appropriate metrics and
geodesics in optimal transport (of measures) on discrete spaces. Developing the
necessary discrete calculus and relating the recently introduced notions of
discrete Ricci curvature, displacement convexity and Wasserstein-type metrics in
finite graphs and Markov chains, is a technically as well as conceptually
challenging objective of the proposal. Connections to other functional
inequalities (such as versions Talagrand, Marton transport inequalities) and
their equivalent dual formulations provide an important motivation. A second
objective is to explore the full extent of applications of the methods developed
and the recent theorems proved. While classical theorems (such as the log-
Sobolev inequality for the Gaussian measure, Strassen's martingale existence
theorem, Talagrand's theorem on the symmetric group) have already been re-
derived in the recent initiative of the PI and his collaborators, the full
potential needs to be more thoroughly investigated. Concentration inequalities
on the noncrossing partition lattice and consequences are a concrete example of
new questions that have arisen from this investigation. Another goal of the PI
is to compare and constrast the various independent suggested notions of (RiccI)
curvature and displacement convexity in discrete spaces.
