
* 1410144
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical Foundations of Topological Quantum Computation
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, TOPOLOGY, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 12/15/2015,12/17/2015
* Eric Rowell,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 11/30/2017
* USD 89,999.00

Recently discovered topological phases in materials such as topological
insulators have potential use in (quantum) computational devices that can out-
perform standard microchip based computers. The most commonly encountered model
for quantum computation, the quantum circuit model, requires challenging, if not
impossible, accuracy on the hardware to be of practical value, due to local
interactions of the system with the surrounding environment. The topological
model based on exotic states of matter, while mathematically more complicated,
has a built-in tolerance for such interactions. This research project studies
mathematically the application of topological phases of matter to new
computational paradigms with potentially significant benefit in quantum
computation.

In this project the investigators study mathematical models for topological
phases, focusing on their applications to topological quantum computation.
Topological phases of matter in two spatial dimensions are well-described in the
framework of modular categories, but relatively little is known in three spatial
dimensions. A large part of this project is devoted to developing appropriate
mathematical models in three spatial dimensions and analyzing the corresponding
computational paradigms. Specifically, the project will study (3+1)-dimensional
topological quantum field theories and representations of the loop braid group,
and symmetry enriched topological order and gauging symmetry. In addition,
because locality and universality are two desirable properties for quantum
computation that are manifested in the representations of the braid group, this
project also aims to formulate conjectures characterizing when these properties
hold and to verify and adapt these conjectures where appropriate to better
characterize physical and computational aspects. To compare the computational
power of topological quantum computers to that of classical computers, the
project investigates the complexity of the most natural computation in this
setting: topological invariants.
