
* 1430032
* Number theory: from Arithmetic statistics to Zeta elements, June 5-6, 2014
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2014,05/20/2014
* John Voight,NH,Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 04/30/2015
* USD 49,999.00

This award supports the participation of US-based researchers in a series of
workshops to be held in Montreal on various topics in the theory of numbers.
This is a subject that has seen a major breakthrough and subsequent remarkable
progress during 2013. The major breakthrough established that the set of prime
numbers have small gaps between them infinitely often. To date it is now known
that there are infinitely many primes for which the next prime is at most 270
larger. This is not the case for other naturally occurring sequences of numbers;
for example, the squares do not have small gaps infinitely often.

The series of workshops will take stock of the broad range of recent
developments in the field and will catalyze further progress. This award will
help bring junior US mathematicians (students, postdoctoral fellows, and other
young researchers with limited access to resources) to the Centre de Recherches
Mathematiques (CRM) in Montreal to participate in four workshops in Fall 2014 on
the following topics: -- Statistics and number theory, September 15-19, 2014
(http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/act/theme/theme_2014_2_en/stats_e.php): A better
understanding of the distribution of important statistics in the study of
arithmetic objects; -- Additive combinatorics and expanders, October 6-10, 2014
(http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/act/theme/theme_2014_2_en/combinatoire_e.php): A
vibrant subject in pure mathematics today, with fundamental recent breakthroughs
on prime k-tuples, and group expansion properties; -- Counting arithmetic
objects, ranks of elliptic curves, November 10-14, 2014
(http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/act/theme/theme_2014_2_en/counting_e.php): The
inaugural meeting on the latest developments stemming from the ideas of Manjul
Bhargava; -- New approaches in probabilistic and multiplicative number theory,
December 8-12, 2014
(http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/act/theme/theme_2014_2_en/nombres_e.php): An area
with an exciting renaissance, led by extraordinary recent work on primes and
fragmentation, moments of the Riemann zeta function, and better understanding of
running times of algorithms.

These subjects are hot topics in number theory of a broad scope. The meetings
will provide opportunities for junior US researchers to interact with the
leading researchers in the world in their field. Developments in Manjul
Bhargava's methods have largely been well understood only by his students and a
few others; with a summer school at the CRM preceding this focused year and
these workshops, many more people will be included and have an opportunity to
learn these techniques. The meeting in additive combinatorics follows a mini-
school at the Institute for Mathematics and its Applications, and this workshop
will give junior researchers a chance to present their work in front of leaders
in the field, with the goal of these interactions leading to long-term working
relationships.
