
* 1439356
* CONFERENCE PROPOSAL: MEETING ON COMBINATORIAL COMMUTATIVE ALGEBRA (MOCCA 2014), September 1, 2014
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 08/01/2014,07/26/2014
* Ezra Miller,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2015
* USD 12,000.00

Combinatorial commutative algebra concerns discrete methods or structures that
govern or are governed by systems of polynomial equations, for example in
algorithmic computations of their solution sets. This field is growing rapidly,
to the extent that some of the key researchers in the area have never met in
person. The MOCCA conference <http://www.uni-magdeburg.de/mocca>, to be held in
Levico Terme, Italy for a week in September, 2014, will rectify this situation
with an unusual worldwide portfolio of two dozen invited speakers and a
particular focus on early career participants; it is the major event in the area
of combinatorial commutative algebra in Europe in 2014. Funding through this
grant enables the organizers to support U.S.-based mathematicians traveling to
Levico and thus allow these researchers to interact face-to-face with other
MOCCA participants, integrating them fully into the international community.

The MOCCA conference will provide an opportunity for researchers in commutative
algebra to interact, exchange ideas, and establish new connections. Developments
are expected in the applications of combinatorics to positive-characteristic
methods as well as to representation theory and algebraic geometry. The two
dozen invited speakers have diverse backgrounds broadly covering combinatorial
commutative algebra. Special focus on early-career participants will allow for
an active, stimulating, hands-on atmosphere. With an expected 50 attendees other
than the invited speakers, the conference is small enough so that people will
know each other while at the same time diverse enough to foster innovation. The
conference is expected to serve as an inspiration to participating students and
as a source of new ideas and new colleagues for speakers and participants.
