
* 1440537
* Homological commutative algebra, polyhedral structure, and algebraic geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/15/2013,04/03/2014
* Christine Berkesch,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2017
* USD 104,001.00

At the heart of each project in this proposal is a homological question related
to combinatorial structure resulting from a group action in geometry. The first
projects provide structural results via polyhedral geometry for free resolutions
over a polynomial ring and a smooth toric variety. The later projects focus on
hypergeometric systems; these are certain systems of linear PDEs that arise
naturally from a torus action, or more generally, from a reductive group action,
and are expressible through a D-module variant of Koszul homology. In each
project, group actions induce algebraic gradings that contain combinatorial and
geometric information. This proposal aims to isolate and exploit the induced
polyhedral data structures through graded complexes from homological algebra,
including free resolutions, Koszul complexes, cellular resolutions, and
complexes that compute local cohomology. The projects call on methods from a
broad span of mathematical areas, including homological algebra, toric geometry,
representation theory, computer algebra, complex analysis, topology, and
tropical geometry.

This proposal will improve diversity in the mathematical sciences and education
in commutative algebra and algebraic geometry, at the undergraduate and graduate
levels. Specifically, it contributes to broader impacts in three ways: mentoring
undergraduate and graduate students, with special attention to female students;
development of a graduate course and other opportunities for learning and
dissemination; and software development to bring universal access to
computational advances that result from current research. The PI has a history
of commitment to these activities and is currently organizing a mentoring groups
for women, compiling lectures aimed at graduate students, presenting at and
organizing conferences, and developing computer algebra software.
