
* 1460023
* Ramsey Theory: Central Sets and Related Combinatorially Rich Sets
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, FOUNDATIONS, Combinatorics
* 09/01/2015,05/09/2017
* Dennis Davenport,DC,Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 155,999.00

This research project concerns the mathematical subject of Ramsey theory. Ramsey
theory is that part of combinatorics that deals with the question of what sort
of homogeneous structures one can expect to find in some one cell of a finite
partition of specified sets (or sometimes in any suitably "large" subset). For
example, the simplest nontrivial instance of the infinite version of Ramsey's
theorem says that whenever the two-element subsets of the natural numbers N are
finitely colored, there must be some infinite subset of N all of whose two-
element subsets are the same color. Ramsey theory has applications in a wide
variety of areas of mathematics as well as in theoretical computer science,
communications, and information theory. The principal investigator will continue
to mentor graduate students in projects on finite Ramsey Theory; this award
consists solely of support for graduate students, facilitating the training
through research involvement of the next generation of mathematicians.

The principal investigator will continue his research in Ramsey theory,
including the interactions between this part of combinatorics and the algebraic
structure of the Stone-Cech compactification of a discrete semigroup. The
principal investigator proved many years ago that whenever N is finitely
colored, there must exist in one color an infinite sequence together with all of
its finite sums of distinct terms without repetition. The original proof was
elementary, but very complicated. Subsequently, other proofs were found that
were less complicated. But in 1975, F. Galvin and S. Glazer showed that this
"Finite Sums Theorem" is a completely trivial consequence of the fact that the
Stone-Cech compactification of N can be given an algebraic structure extending
ordinary addition which is a compact right topological semigroup, and therefore
has idempotents. Sets with the property that they contain all the finite sums
from a sequence are called IP sets. By virtue of the connection discovered
above, a set is an IP set if and only if it has an idempotent in its closure.
Those that have special idempotents which are called minimal in their closure
are central sets. These sets have much stronger properties, many of which are
consequences of the Central Sets Theorem. But central sets have a very
complicated elementary description. Sets that satisfy the conclusion of the
Central Sets Theorem are called C sets, and are much easier to describe in an
elementary fashion. Investigation of these various algebraically characterized
large subsets of N should continue to yield new Ramsey theoretic results.
