
* 1500834
* Algebraic, Combinatorial, and Analytic Applications of Symmetric Functions
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 09/01/2015,08/25/2015
* Greta Panova,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 130,000.00

From the lattice structure of crystals, to states of matter, to matrices and
differential operators, the traits of systems and their evolution are classified
by symmetries. Algebraic combinatorics studies symmetries via their
manifestations in well-known discrete objects like graphs, permutations, and
partitions. Its methods have successfully solved problems in other sciences such
as physics, computer sciences, and biology. This project concerns the
application of algebraic combinatorics, in particular its subfield the theory of
symmetric functions, to solve such problems.

This project is centered around the tools used, namely, the theory of symmetric
functions and the associated combinatorics. Various complexity problems in
representation theory concern the computation of certain structure constants and
multiplicities that are expressible via the Kronecker and plethystic
coefficients of the symmetric group, which can be defined using Schur functions.
In statistical mechanics, the partition functions of some integrable lattice
models like lozenge tilings are often Lie group characters, and their asymptotic
study reveals probabilistic behavior like Gaussian unitary ensemble eigenvalue
distribution near the boundary or the existence of limit shapes and surfaces.
This project aims to expand these applications to study other models and
distributions. Studying combinatorial and algebraic properties of Schubert
polynomials, as representatives of the cohomology classes of flag varieties, can
lead to combinatorial interpretations for the corresponding structure constants.
Further, computational properties of their stable versions, the Stanley
symmetric functions, could lead to understanding of the mysterious limit
behavior of random sorting networks, corresponding to the reduced decompositions
of permutations into adjacent transpositions.
