
* 1500316
* Selmer Groups, Euler Systems, and Rational Points on Curves
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2015,06/24/2015
* Karl Rubin,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2018
* USD 169,999.00

This project concerns work in the general area of number theory, which is
studied in this proposal using methods from geometry. Algebraic varieties --
geometric objects defined by equations -- play a central role in many parts of
mathematics, including its most applied areas. For example, special algebraic
varieties called elliptic curves are used in algorithms to encrypt data for
transmission and for efficient digital signatures. In its most basic form, an
elliptic curve is a curve defined by a certain type of polynomial equation in
two variables. Historically number theorists have been interested in finding
solutions of these equations in which the variables take values that are either
whole numbers or fractions. The investigator will study some new questions about
points on algebraic varieties, and the connections between these points and
other mathematical objects and concepts.

Some of the most basic and important questions in number theory are about
rational points on varieties. These questions include connections with
L-functions, such as the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture. In this project
the investigator plans to use many different techniques, including algebraic,
p-adic, and analytic tools, to study various aspects of these questions. One set
of questions to be studied includes refined class number formulas over number
fields and higher rank Kolyvagin systems. In previous work of the investigator,
Kolyvagin systems have proved to be a very useful tool for relating L-values and
arithmetic. In another direction, the investigator plans to use Selmer groups of
twists of abelian varieties to study how the set of rational points on a curve
changes when the base field is increased.
