
* 1501612
* Algebraic Geometry and Moduli Spaces in String Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2015,08/07/2015
* Duiliu Diaconescu,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 07/31/2019
* USD 160,000.00

This research project aims to construct a bridge between abstract mathematics
and two areas in theoretical particle physics, quantum gravity and string
theory. The main goal of this project is twofold. On the one hand, it aims to
discover new constructions and shed new light on longstanding mathematical
problems using natural physical phenomena as a source of conceptual inspiration.
On the other, a rigorous mathematical formulation of physical problems is
expected to provide valuable insight into important theoretical physics problems
such as black hole entropy and quantum particle dynamics. A concrete
illustrative example is the classification of knots in three dimensions, a
problem with deep ramifications both in abstract mathematics and theoretical
physics. Three-dimensional knots can be easily visualized: a knot is simply a
piece of rope tangled up in a complicated way with its ends joined together. The
main goal of the knot classification problem is to assign concrete mathematical
invariants to such objects that can distinguish between two different tangles.
This question turns out to be surprisingly difficult. A significant part of the
proposed research is focused on constructing polynomial knot invariants by
counting quantum particles in abstract models emerging from string theory. While
such theoretical models are not directly related to our world, they do lead to
novel and fascinating mathematical constructions, as well as important
conceptual advances in theoretical physics. The other projects contained in this
proposal are similarly centered on the relation between quantum particle
counting in string theory and counting of geometric objects in enumerative
algebraic geometry. This research program offers multiple opportunities for
students of all levels -- ranging from undergraduate to advanced graduate -- as
well as postdoctoral fellows to get involved in research at early stages in
their careers.

From a more technical point of view, the current proposal aims to make
significant advances in several long standing mathematical problems such as the
cohomology of character varieties, the construction of knot invariants, and
questions related to modularity in enumerative geometry. The central idea of
this work is that such problems are naturally related to BPS states counting
problems in string theory. Then string duality ultimately leads to new and
precise mathematical conjectures showing that many such problems occur naturally
in the context of motivic Donaldson-Thomas invariants of Calabi-Yau threefolds.
This provides new proof strategies and opens new directions of research,
unraveling further unexpected relations. More concretely, the aim is to apply
this strategy to the study of the cohomology of wildly ramified character
varieties, Khovanov-Rozansky invariants for non-algebraic knots, and the
relation between modular forms and Donaldson-Thomas invariants of K3-fibered
Calabi-Yau threefolds.
