
* 1501059
* Polytopes in Combinatorics and Algebra
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/15/2015,07/10/2015
* Karola Meszaros,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2019
* USD 170,000.00

Polytopes are geometric objects with flat sides: polygons in two dimensions,
polyhedra in three dimensions, and higher-dimensional generalizations. Polytopes
are ubiquitous in mathematics and play important roles throughout science and
engineering. The simplest n-dimensional polytopes have only n+1 vertices and are
called simplices: triangles, tetrahedra, and their higher-dimensional
generalizations. While it is straightforward to determine the volume of a
simplex in any dimension, the volume of a general polyhedron in high dimension
can be challenging to compute. One way to calculate volume is to dissect a
polytope into simplices. This research project studies dissections, volumes, and
integer points of special families of polytopes known as flow and root
polytopes. Flow and root polytopes naturally appear in problems in several areas
of mathematics, such as representation theory and algebraic geometry. Results of
this project will have impact in these areas of mathematics as well as in
scientific and engineering applications.

A number of important conjectures and questions in algebraic combinatorics have
flow polytopes and root polytopes at their core. These special polytopes can be
systematically dissected into simplices. The project will investigate a
conjecture of Haglund about the bigraded Hilbert series of the space of diagonal
harmonics that can be stated in terms of a sum of a certain weight function over
the integer points of a flow polytope. The research will also study the subword
complexes introduced by Knutson and Miller, conceived to illustrate the
combinatorics of Schubert polynomials and determinantal ideals, by relating them
to root polytopes.
