
* 1501052
* Dimer systems with gaps and their connections with statistical physics, plane partitions, and alternating sign matrices
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 08/01/2015,07/04/2017
* Mihai Ciucu,IN,Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2018
* USD 210,000.00

This project is in the general area of Combinatorics. One of the goals of
Combinatorics is to find efficient methods of studying how discrete collections
of objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely
important to modern communications. For example, the design of large networks,
such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in
computer science, deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of
combinatorial research. The specific problems in this project are instances of
the dimer model of statistical physics. A basic illustration of this is the
real-world process (relevant in the study of lubricants) of adsorption of a
liquid consisting of diatomic molecules---the dimers in the model---along the
surface of a crystal, whose fixed atoms form a lattice pattern, with any two
neighboring positions capable of holding one molecule, and any given crystal
atom being involved in the adsorption of at most one molecule. The main issue in
this setting is the asymptotic behavior of the quantities that are studied
(specifically, the number of different ways the surface of the crystal can be
covered by molecules). In some of the instances we encounter, the usually more
difficult problem of determining quantities exactly turns out in fact to be more
tractable, and allows progress in the asymptotic study.

This project is concerned with the exact and asymptotic enumeration of dimer
packings with gaps. More specifically, using work of Fisher and Stephenson as
its starting point, it studies how the total number of dimer coverings of the
complement of the gaps changes as the gaps are moved around on the lattice
graph. The joint correlation of a collection of gaps is a non-negative real
number measuring this change, and is the central object of study of this
proposal. In earlier work, the proposer proved that the correlation of gaps on
the hexagonal lattice is governed, for large separations between the gaps, by a
law closely resembling the superposition principle of electrostatics: If each
gap is regarded as a point charge of magnitude given by the signed difference
between the number of white and black vertices in it (in a fixed white-black
coloring of the vertices in which each edge has oppositely colored endpoints),
then, for large distances between the gaps, their correlation is proportional to
the exponential of the negative of the two-dimensional electrostatic energy of
the resulting system of charges. Other previous results concern two naturally
defined fields, which the proposer proved approach the electric field in the
limit when the lattice spacing approaches zero. In the current project, the
proposer presents a program organized in several inter-related groups comprising
twenty seven specific problems and conjectures. This program is aimed at
developing further the analogy to phenomena from physics (in particular to heat
flow in a block of material, which turns out to correspond to the interaction of
gaps with boundary) and also understanding the connections with independent
combinatorial problems, such as conjectures on tiling enumeration of new regions
and generalizations of classical results on plane partitions.
