
* 1502236
* Problems in Higher Dimensional Algebraic Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/15/2015,04/27/2017
* Zsolt Patakfalvi,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 07/31/2019
* USD 162,000.00

As a link between algebra and geometry, the main goal of algebraic geometry is
to understand geometrically certain objects called algebraic varieties (i.e.,
common zero sets of multivariable polynomials). These very natural and
fundamental algebraic objects appear frequently in many branches of mathematics
and science. Hence, algebraic geometry sees many applications in other parts of
mathematics such as number theory or complex geometry, and also in other
scientific or engineering disciplines such as physics, coding theory, robotics,
and computational biology. In particular, any general structure theory of these
algebraic objects can be very useful in many fields of study. The part of
algebraic geometry devoted to this structure theory is called higher dimensional
algebraic geometry and it is the main subject of this research project. The
project aims to further develop the theory of higher dimensional algebraic
geometry.

For studying varieties over a field of characteristic zero and of positive
characteristic, there are very different tools available. Examples of the former
are Hodge theory and the related vanishing theorems, while examples for the
latter are Frobenius lifting techniques or quotients by p-closed foliations. In
particular, the above dichotomy yields two remarkably different cases to most
conjectures of higher dimensional algebraic geometry. The particular flavor of
this project is that it concerns standard topics and conjectures of higher
dimensional algebraic geometry both in characteristic zero and in positive
characteristic, such as higher dimensional moduli spaces, minimal model program,
subadditivity of Kodaira dimension, and Shafarevich type hyperbolicity
conjectures.
