
* 1502107
* Non-Commutative Desingularizations and Representation Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2015,08/13/2015
* Graham Leuschke,NY,Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 08/31/2018
* USD 155,000.00

There is a classical dictionary between geometry and algebra, dating back at
least to Descartes and Fermat in the seventeenth century, which has been
developed and sharpened to allow the detailed study of geometric spaces in terms
of algebraic objects known as commutative rings. (Commutativity means that order
of multiplication doesn't matter: x times y is equal to y times x.) As our
understanding of the physical world has grown, however, in such areas as quantum
mechanics, string theory, and the study of fundamental particles, we have come
to understand that the fine structure of the universe is essentially non-
commutative. New dictionaries are being built to understand the connections
between geometry and the non-commutative world. This research project concerns
non-commutative analogues of a geometric operation called resolution of
singularities, which "unfolds" a pinched or creased geometry to replace it with
a smooth one.

The investigator will work on problems at the intersection of commutative
algebra, algebraic geometry, and non-commutative algebraic geometry. The
research plan involves applying tools and techniques from the representation
theory of local rings, Artin algebras, and algebraic groups, to the problems of
constructing non-commutative analogues of resolutions of singularities, studying
their structure, and applying their existence to study further problems in
representation theory. The foundations of the theory of non-commutative
resolutions (NCRs) are still in active development, and this proposal would
contribute to the maturation of the theory. Furthermore the investigator
proposes constructions of new examples of NCRs, which would expand our
understanding of the limits of the theory. Some of these new examples would rely
on new constructions in geometric tilting theory over homogeneous varieties.
