
* 1504537
* Arizona Winter School in Arithmetic Geometry
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2015,08/26/2017
* Bryden Cais,AZ,University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2019
* USD 550,000.00

With support from this award, the Southwest Center for Arithmetic Geometry will
continue its series of annual "Winter Schools" in 2016, 2017, 2018, with the
2016 Arizona Winter School taking place March 11-16, 2016 at the University of
Arizona in Tucson, AZ. Since its founding in 1997, the primary activity of the
Southwest Center is the Arizona Winter School (AWS), an annual meeting which has
become a prominent national event and provides high-level training and research
experience for graduate students in arithmetic geometry and related areas. The
AWS is an intensive five-day meeting, organized around a different central topic
each year, that features a set of courses and accompanying research projects
carefully designed and delivered by leading and emerging experts. At the Winter
School, connections among peers are formed, and mentoring relationships between
students and senior researchers are developed. As has been the case at previous
Winter Schools, subsequent collaborations between participants at all levels are
the norm. Students make concrete strides toward becoming research
mathematicians, post-doctoral assistants gain valuable mentoring experience in
their academic careers, and faculty develop new interests and see new
connections that lead to important published results. The Southwest Center
website shares reusable content from the Winter Schools, including lecture
notes, project descriptions, and audio and video of lectures. Through these
thorough records, the dialogues begun at the AWS are extended to the greater
community, and the efforts of the AWS participants are made freely and
indefinitely available to all.

The AWS is a unique fusion of traditional mathematics conference and intensive
research workshop: the speakers organize courses of four lectures, provide
lecture notes in advance, and propose research projects for graduate students to
work on during the meeting. Nightly working sessions on these projects and on
separate problem sets are run by the speakers and postdoctoral fellows. On the
last day, students present their findings to the participants of the meeting.
The result is a particularly intense and focused five days of mathematical
activity for everyone involved. Recent Winter School topics have included
"Modular forms and modular curves", "Arithmetic statistics", and "Arithmetic and
higher dimensional varieties." The topics of upcoming Winter Schools will be
guided by future mathematical developments. More information about the upcoming
and past Arizona Winter School programs can be found at the Southwest Center's
website: http://swc.math.arizona.edu/
