
* 1518871
* Midwest Algebra Geometry Combinatorics (ALGECOM) Conference Series
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Combinatorics
* 06/01/2015,06/02/2015
* Alexander Yong,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2019
* USD 33,981.00

This award supports participation in the Midwest Algebra Geometry Combinatorics
(ALGECOM) meetings, a series of biannual one-day conferences the Fall 2015
edition of which will be held on October 24, 2015, at the University of Michigan
in Ann Arbor. The goal of these conferences is to provide an informal and
collaborative atmosphere to promote interaction among Midwest mathematicians.
Travel support is for graduate students and speakers. The conference will
include a poster session that will permit students and postdocs to present their
work. This will assist in the development of STEM research and training at a
variety of Midwest institutions. Venues and dates are chosen several months in
advance. Past/future locations also include DePaul University, Loyola
University, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, and the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The conference website is
https://sites.google.com/site/algecomday/

The conference series grew from a desire to bring together mathematicians with
common interests (combinatorics and its interplay with commutative algebra,
algebraic geometry and/or representation theory). In particular, it deepens the
links between hosting Chicago universities (Depaul and Loyola) with the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Purdue University, and Indiana
University-Purdue University Indianapolis. These institutions have significant
geographic separation; ALGECOM provides a regular meeting to stimulate
interaction and synergies. Continuing support allows extension from Illinois and
Indiana towards Michigan. This award continues this trend, which will in
particular benefit graduate students both from the Midwest and elsewhere.
