
* 1565352
* Singularities and Moduli Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2016,05/05/2020
* Sandor Kovacs,WA,University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2022
* USD 490,000.00

This research project is in the field of algebraic geometry, one of the oldest
parts of modern mathematics, but one that blossomed to the point where it has
solved problems that have stood for centuries. In its simplest form it treats
figures defined in the plane by polynomials. Today, the field uses methods not
only from algebra, but also from analysis and topology, and conversely it is
extensively used in those fields. Moreover it has proved itself useful in fields
as diverse as physics, theoretical computer science, cryptography, coding
theory, and robotics. A central problem in algebraic geometry is the
classification of all geometric objects. In turn, an important part of
classification theory is the theory of moduli. The latter's core idea is that
one does not only want to understand these objects, but also understand the way
they can be deformed. Moduli spaces play a very important role in theoretical
physics: studying curves on moduli spaces provides information on how an object
is changing in space-time. One of the foci of this project is on compact moduli
spaces, which give additional information about singular deformations, ones that
are essentially different from others. The investigator is also involved in
promoting mathematics to high school students; he and fellow directors of the
Summer Institute for Mathematics at the University of Washington make special
efforts to involve women at all levels of the program, from students through
teaching assistants to instructors, to reinforce their leadership roles in
mathematics.

This project concerns several topics in higher dimensional algebraic geometry,
especially moduli theory and singularities. The overarching theme of the
research is centered on compact moduli spaces of stable log varieties, an
important area that is still in the developmental stage. In particular, even the
correct moduli functor needs to be identified, and most of the research is
motivated by understanding the basic properties of these moduli spaces. This
involves understanding the singularities that can occur on stable log varieties.
Important classes of singularities in this regard are that of rational
singularities and other singularities of the minimal model program. The
investigator will work on advancing our currently very limited understanding of
these singularities in arbitrary characteristic. The project also aims to
develop cohomological methods to deal with rational pairs and thrifty
resolutions in arbitrary characteristic. In particular, the investigator will
study logarithmic versions of Hodge cohomology and of Grothendieck's fundamental
class. Also stemming from the moduli project, the investigator plans to study
properties of Du Bois singularities and Du Bois pairs. The main objectives of
this part of the project are to develop a definition of these singularities that
makes sense in arbitrary characteristic and to prove a subadjunction theorem for
rational and Du Bois pairs.
