
* 1565624
* The p-Adic Langlands Program and Related Topics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/01/2016,01/22/2016
* Matthias Strauch,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 04/30/2017
* USD 46,700.00

The conference "The p-adic Langlands Program and Related Topics" will be held
May 16-20, 2016 at Indiana University Bloomington. The main theme of the
conference is the interplay between number theory and group theory, as
envisioned by Robert Langlands and known as the Langlands Program. The
conference will be devoted to a recently developed branch of the Langlands
program that has close ties with the spectacular solution of Fermat's Last
Theorem by A. Wiles. One scientific aim of the conference is to provide a
roadmap of the current avenues of research in this rapidly developing field that
will serve as a guide to this area for the mathematical community, in particular
graduate students and young researchers. The main activity of the conference
will be twenty-three lectures by leading experts from the United States and
overseas that will be videotaped and made freely available on the conference
website http://pages.iu.edu/~mstrauch/conference_2016/. An important purpose of
the conference is to foster communication and collaboration. In particular, the
organizers will publish the conference proceedings, with research articles as
well as introductory surveys.

The p-adic Langlands correspondence seeks to relate p-adic Galois
representations to Banach space representations of p-adic reductive groups. The
fundamental work of Pierre Colmez in the case of two-dimensional Galois
representations has confirmed the expectation that such a correspondence should
exist. The current focus of research is on higher-dimensional representations
and on base fields other than the field of p-adic numbers. Important progress in
closely related areas has recently been made, namely in the study of
eigenvarieties, deformations of Galois representations, p-adic Hodge Theory,
modular representations of p-adic groups, and geometric realizations of
Langlands correspondences. The conference will bring together experts who have
made substantial contributions in each of these areas and thereby pave the way
for new insights.
