
* 1600569
* Tropical Combinatorics and Applications
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/15/2016,07/12/2018
* Josephine Yu,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2020
* USD 130,197.00

This project aims at fundamental development of tropical combinatorics as well
as its applications. Combinatorics is the art and science of distilling a
complex mathematical structure into simple attributes and developing from this a
deeper understanding of the original structure. Tropical mathematics, named
after Brazilian mathematician Imre Simon of Sao Paulo on the Tropic of
Capricorn, is a young area of mathematics arising from a number system with a
pair operations: addition and maximum, instead of the more traditional pair of
addition and multiplication. Tropical mathematics has applications in a wide
range of areas including mirror symmetry, computational algebra, optimization,
statistics, phylogenetics, and economics. The solutions of algebraic equations
and inequalities are the main objects of interest in algebraic geometry;
likewise the solutions of tropical algebraic equations and inequalities are the
main players in tropical geometry. There is a precise relationship between
algebro-geometric objects and their tropical counterparts, so tropical
mathematics provides new insights into classical problems as well. It also
provides a natural language and a new perspective for understanding deep and
sometimes surprising connections between different mathematical entities. This
project will make contributions to the foundation of tropical geometry, focusing
on the combinatorial structures.

The main geometric objects of study in this field are tropically convex sets and
tropical algebraic sets, which can be constructed analogously to the usual
convex sets and algebraic sets, but using the max-plus algebra. The investigator
will study relationships between various combinatorial structures associated to
an algebraic set, namely, its tropical variety, its algebraic matroid, and its
Chow polytope. She will develop Ehrhart theory for enumeration of lattice points
in tropical polytopes. In the other direction, the investigator will use
tropical point of view to study classical objects in combinatorics and convex
geometry. She will continue developing an approach to polytopes and
triangulations based on tropical geometry and will investigate the relationship
between the cone of positive semidefinite matrices and affine buildings. On the
computational front, new algorithms for computing tropical varieties will be
developed using numerical algebraic geometry, which has become one of the most
powerful tools in algebraic geometry due to its highly parallelizable nature and
advancements in numerical computations. These new methods will be useful for
problems concerning polynomial systems which are ubiquitous in mathematical
models in science and engineering. Specific applications include finding
competitive equilibrium prices in product-mix auctions and discovering causal
relationships between random variables in probability.
