
* 1600768
* The Interplay between Spectral and Combinatorial Properties of Graphs and Association Schemes
* DMS,Combinatorics, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 08/01/2016,07/02/2016
* Sebastian Cioaba,DE,University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2020
* USD 130,002.00

Graph theory is essential for analyzing the structure and function of networks.
Often the sizes of such networks are so large that analyzing their structures by
brute force is not feasible. The challenge is to use parameters that can
efficiently capture the shapes of networks. Spectral graph theory provides
important tools for studying structural properties of graphs and has close
connections to computer science and network design. Although the eigenvalues do
not determine a graph in general, they contain important structural information
that in some situations, could not be obtained by any other means. Association
schemes are combinatorial and algebraic structures with high degree of
regularity that sit at the core of algebraic combinatorics and have important
applications in coding theory, geometry and quantum computing. In this project,
the close connections between the spectral and combinatorial properties of
graphs and association schemes will be investigated. This project will involve
graduate and undergraduate students at University of Delaware. This project
encompasses recent progress in spectral graph theory on combinatorial and
spectral problems and conjectures involving simplicial rook graphs, Wenger
graphs and friendship graphs as well as in the theory of association schemes by
answering questions of Brouwer regarding the connectivity of strongly regular
and distance-regular graphs and their subconstituents. The project will
investigate conjectures of Haemers that almost all graphs are determined by
their spectrum, of Godsil and Brouwer regarding the edge- and vertex-
connectivity of graphs in association schemes as well as related problems such
as understanding the spectral and isoperimetric properties of graphs defined by
systems of equations over finite fields or graphs arising in other combinatorial
problems.
