
* 1600653
* Combinatorics of Koornwinder polynomials and stable double affine Hecke algebras
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 06/01/2016,09/03/2019
* Mark Shimozono,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2020
* USD 210,000.00

The research of this project will focus on combinatorial aspects of structures
arising in representation theory. The power of combinatorics lies in its ability
to illuminate and clarify the structure of representations. A basic yet guiding
example of this phenomenon is the famous formula expressing a Schur polynomial
as a weighted sum over semi-standard Young tableaux. In this project, the PIs
will study Koornwinder polynomials, double affine Hecke algebras (DAHAs), and
their large-rank stabilizations. An important theme of the project is the
universality of Koornwinder polynomials. This has two facets. First, by
specialization of parameters, the Koornwinder polynomials project to the
Macdonald polynomials of all classical and mixed affine types. The proposed
research aims to prove analogues in the Koornwinder case of celebrated results
on type A Macdonald polynomials; specialization then projects such results onto
classical and mixed types. An example is the integrality property of type A
Macdonald polynomials, which has deep connections to combinatorics and geometry.
The second facet of universality is that of large-rank stabilization.This
involves applications to creation operators for the Koornwinder polynomials,
specializations to deformed universal characters, duality and stabilization of
torus knot polynomials, canonical bases of stable DAHA, and elliptic Kostka
polynomials for classical types. The training of graduate students, through
their direct involvement as research assistants, is an important component of
the project. The project will also involve substantial symbolic computation. All
resulting software will be made publicly available in the open-source software
system Sage.

The PIs will develop a stable (large rank) limit of the spherical DAHA of
Koornwinder type and use this study the combinatorics of Koornwinder polynomials
and their lifts to symmetric functions. The aim is to prove foundational results
on the stable Koornwinder DAHA and apply these results to solve problems and
outstanding conjectures in the following areas: - Creation operators for
Koornwinder polynomials, with applications to Rains' integrality conjecture for
Koornwinder symmetric functions - Duality conjectures for DAHA torus knot
polynomials of non-reduced affine type and generalizations of the rational
shuffle conjecture beyond type A - Combinatorial formulas for Koornwinder
polynomials in the spirit and specializations of such formulas to classical
affine root systems - Specializations of Koornwinder symmetric functions to
q-deformed universal characters - Explicit formulas for symmetric function
operators arising from the stable DAHA
