
* 1601026
* Unique Functionals and Quantum Groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2016,07/09/2018
* Daniel Bump,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2020
* USD 189,999.00

This is a research project at the interface of number theory, representation
theory, and theoretical physics. Recent work of the investigator and
collaborators has shown that certain matrices, known as R-matrices, that arise
in theoretical physics in the study of statistical mechanics and phase
transitions also arise in the study of a class of functions, known as Whittaker
functions, that encode arithmetic information when these functions are viewed
representation-theoretically, that is, when inherent algebraic symmetries are
taken into account. This discovery opens the door to a rich collection of
questions that will be explored in this project. It is anticipated that in the
process, important new connections between number theory and mathematical
physics will be developed.

In more detail, Whittaker functions on p-adic groups are a fundamental tool in
automorphic forms. Whittaker functions on metaplectic covers of these groups are
less well-understood, but the corresponding matrices on intertwining operators
have been computed. The investigator and collaborators have shown that these
matrices for the n-fold mataplectic cover of GL(n) agree with the R-matrices for
a quantum group, which is a Drinfield twist of the quantized enveloping algebra
of the affinized Lie superalgebra gl(1/n). The effect of the Drinfield twisting
is to introduce Gauss sums into the R-matrix, and therefore to make it "number-
theoretic." This clarifies a great deal, but also presents new questions that
will be explored in this project. A separate but related project that will be
pursued is an on-going study of connections between unique models and
representations of Hecke algebras.
