
* 1601862
* Research in Noncommutative Algebra
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2016,05/21/2018
* Milen Yakimov,LA,Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2020
* USD 235,001.00

Many models in the sciences and engineering lead to mathematical problems about
solutions of equations in commuting variables. However, starting with quantum
mechanics, a great number of models emerged that led to mathematical problems
involving variables that no longer commute. Noncommutative algebra is one of the
areas of mathematics that studies those structures. This research project
investigates the interrelations between the commutative and noncommutative
settings, and the possible ways to study the latter via geometry and
combinatorics. The geometric approach attaches structures, called Poisson
manifolds, to noncommutative objects. The combinatorial approach studies
intricate internal transformations of the objects, called cluster mutations.
Both approaches will be used to carry out a detailed study of the properties and
symmetries of noncommutative objects. In the opposite direction, the
noncommutative objects will be shown to exhibit various forms of rigidity, which
in turn will be used to address algebraic, geometric, and combinatorial problems
of independent interest. These research activities will be used as the
foundation for the training of graduate and undergraduate students and for
mentoring mathematics postdocs.

This research project investigates problems in noncommutative algebra and the
relations of these structures to Poisson geometry, representation theory,
combinatorics, homological algebra, and noncommutative geometry. The program
aims at using techniques from those areas to settle problems in noncommutative
algebra, and in the opposite direction, to apply rigidity properties of
noncommutative algebras to resolve problems of independent interest to other
areas of mathematics. One direction of this program is the description of the
automorphism groups and invariants, such as discriminants, of noncommutative
algebras via Poisson geometry and cluster algebras. Another direction targets
the study of the properties of Nichols algebras and quantum groups by realizing
them as cluster algebras. The geometric and combinatorial approaches will be
merged in the investigation of the topology of the spectra of quantum function
algebras. Noncommutative projective spaces and Calabi-Yau algebras will be
studied using techniques from cluster algebras. In the reverse direction, these
connections will be used to investigate homological and Poisson geometric
properties of cluster algebras.
