
* 1601350
* RUI: Hurwitz Number Fields
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2016,08/17/2018
* David Roberts,MN,University of Minnesota Morris
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2021
* USD 140,000.00

Two of the oldest areas of mathematics are number theory and geometry. Number
fields play a central role in number theory, while surfaces play a central role
in geometry. The research project concerns number fields that arise naturally
from the geometry of surfaces, via a construction dating back to work of the
mathematician Adolph Hurwitz around 1900. These Hurwitz number fields have a
combination of properties that is very unusual from a purely number-theoretic
point of view: their degrees and Galois groups are typically very large, while
their sets of ramifying primes are very small. In fact, Hurwitz number fields
are so extreme with respect to these invariants that their existence contradicts
a heuristic that has successfully guided other recent research into number
fields. The goal of this research project is to establish that these outlying
number fields all behave in a uniform and highly structured way. The results of
the project are expected to support future developments interrelating several
disciplines surrounding number theory. The project includes collaborations with
three undergraduates, designed specifically to better prepare them for
scientific careers. These collaborations will serve as models for future
involvement of students in high-level mathematics research.

Hurwitz number fields arise as fields of definition of maps for Riemann surfaces
to the Riemann sphere. The main focus of the research project will be on the
explicit description of ramification in an arbitrary Hurwitz number field. From
the geometric data defining the field, one can read off a finite set of primes
outside of which ramification is known to be tame. The project will pursue exact
formulas for ramification at these tame primes and sharp upper bounds for the
wild ramification at the remaining primes. Besides studying ramification, the
investigator will aim to establish a geometric analog of a conjecture on the
unboundedness of degrees for a given set of ramifying primes. In a different
direction, where the set of ramifying primes is allowed to grow, the
investigator aims to demonstrate further uniformity of behavior by finding
multi-indexed sequences of multivariate polynomials that define infinitely many
Hurwitz number fields at once.
