
* 1601024
* Symbolic Powers, Configurations of Linear Spaces, and Applications
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 09/01/2016,06/19/2019
* Alexandra Seceleanu,NE,University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Spiroff
* 08/31/2021
* USD 153,641.00

This research project is in the area of commutative algebra, with connections to
algebraic geometry and computational algebra. Commutative algebra has
applications in a range of areas, from statistics to game theory, from robotics
to string theory. The main theme of this project is the study of configurations
of linear subspaces, such as finite collections of lines in the plane. These
problems are classically motivated by algebraic geometry and have received
renewed interest in the last fifteen years. Despite a rapidly growing body of
work, there is still much progress needed to understand the subtle behavior of
these configurations. This research program aims to take advantage of the
combinatorial structure inherently present in this context. The project will
also study potential applications of this work to coding theory.

The common thread for the investigations in this project concerns the asymptotic
properties of symbolic powers. One goal of the project is the determination of
certain invariants that measure these asymptotic properties (resurgence,
Waldschmidt constants). Another goal is to characterize families of ideals that
display extremal behavior with respect to the containment between ordinary and
symbolic powers. Among the tools to be employed are methods involving the study
of Rees algebras, minimal free resolutions, and local cohomology for powers of
ideals. Another line of inquiry will consider the symbolic powers for singular
loci of line arrangements, or more generally hyperplane arrangements, with
special emphasis on reflection arrangements because of their additional
structure. Despite their undoubted theoretical significance, not much is known
about the practical applications of symbolic powers. The investigator and
collaborators plan to start an investigation on the implications of this recent
progress on symbolic powers from the point of view of applied algebraic
geometry. Some computational tools in the form of scripts for the computer
algebra system Macaulay will be developed to aid with the inquiry.
