
* 1664227
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Categorifying Quantum Three-Manifold Invariants
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2017,05/06/2022
* Sergei Gukov,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2023
* USD 210,000.00

Quantum topology is a branch of mathematics that provides a testing ground for
the structures needed in a quantum theory of gravity. This field has brought
about unprecedented interaction between mathematics and theoretical physics. It
has been extremely successful and well studied in 3-dimensions. However, since
we live in 4-dimensions (including time), a full theory of quantum gravity
requires an extension of these tools to 4-dimensions. An emerging mathematical
philosophy known as "categorification" provides an avenue to uncover a hidden
layer in mathematical structures, revealing a richer and more robust theory
capable of describing more complex phenomenon. This project will use the
perspective of categorification to enhance one of the most successful theories
in 3-dimensions to a full 4-dimensional theory.

This collaboration will harness the interplay between low-dimensional geometry,
representation theory, and higher-dimensional gauge theory. Through this
coordinated effort the PIs will make substantial progress on the problem of
categorifying 3-manifold invariants. The PIs will capitalize on recent
breakthroughs in theoretical physics and higher representation theory that have
created new possibilities for significant progress on this problem. Among the
techniques to be employed include: fivebrane compactifications to provide a
universal description of various old and new homological invariants of
3-manifolds, the use of infinity categories for defining tensor products of
higher representations of quantum groups, and the theory of Hopfological algebra
for categorifications at roots of unity, as well as recent work on odd link
homology theory and categorifications of Habiro's universal invariant.
