
* 1664215
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Moduli Spaces, Birational Geometry, and Stability Conditions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2017,09/01/2022
* Emanuele Macri,MA,Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2023
* USD 155,751.00

Many processes in life, ranging from credit card transactions to the growth of a
sunflower, are modeled by systems of polynomial equations. Algebraic geometry
studies solutions of such systems. A major feature of these systems is that they
vary in families by varying the coefficients of the polynomials. Some equations
in the family are easier to solve, and properties of more complicated systems
can be deduced from the solutions of the simpler systems. The investigators
study the geometry of certain spaces defined by polynomial equations that are
ubiquitous in mathematics and physics, called moduli spaces of vector bundles.
They compute geometric invariants of these spaces by relating them to simpler
spaces using a recent breakthrough called Bridgeland stability. The
investigators are also dedicated to training the next generation of U.S.
scientists and researchers. In this project, they will train undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral researchers to use the new technique of Bridgeland
stability. The Focused Research Group grant will support these young researchers
to visit and collaborate with several senior researchers and to attend
conferences and workshops on the topic. The investigators will also organize two
large conferences and four workshops to help attract young talent to the area.

Moduli spaces of vector bundles are fundamental objects in algebraic geometry,
with applications to commutative algebra, representation theory, combinatorics,
and mathematical physics. In the last five years, Bridgeland stability
conditions have revolutionized the understanding of moduli spaces of vector
bundles on surfaces. They have allowed the computation of the ample and
effective cones of divisors on these moduli spaces and led to the solution of
longstanding problems such as the existence of Lagrangian fibrations on certain
hyperk√§hler manifolds of K3 type and the higher rank interpolation problem for
general sheaves on the plane. It is timely to apply these new techniques to
central problems in the geometry of moduli spaces of vector bundles on surfaces
and threefolds. This Focused Research Group project centers on three lines of
inquiry: (1) Prove cohomology vanishing results using Bridgeland stability and
consequently construct Ulrich bundles on surfaces and threefolds and effective
Brill-Noether divisors on moduli spaces of vector bundles on surfaces. Give
applications to Le Potier's Strange Duality Conjecture. (2) Determine when
special bundles, such as Lazarsfeld-Mukai bundles or null-correlation bundles on
surfaces and threefolds, are Bridgeland stable. Apply the stability to classical
problems on syzygies and Koszul cohomology. (3) Study the birational geometry of
moduli spaces of Bridgeland stable objects via wall-crossing. The investigators
plan to train ten undergraduates, ten graduate students, and seven postdoctoral
associates through research involvement in the project.
