
* 1700280
* Applications and Theory of the Algorithmic Hypergraph Regularity Method
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 09/01/2017,09/20/2021
* Brendan Nagle,FL,University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2022
* USD 155,584.00

In combinatorics, one often considers graphs and hypergraphs, which are
mathematical structures used to model pairwise and group-wise relations among
objects. Applications of these objects then appear in many branches of
mathematics, computer science, and the natural sciences. In some settings, it
can be very useful when these objects possess quasirandom properties. As such,
quasirandom graph and hypergraph theory constitutes a well-studied area of
modern combinatorics. Important and applicable results here include Regularity
Lemmas, which guarantee that all large graphs and hypergraphs admit
decompositions into relatively few parts, where most of these parts are
quasirandom. Moreover, it is also known that these decompositions can be
efficiently constructed. Constructive regularity lemmas form the primary area of
the research supported by this award. the PI studies applications of algorithmic
(hypergraph) regularity lemmas to constructive combinatorial problems arising in
theoretical computer science. Moreover, the research proposes that several
distinct theories of quasirandom hypergraphs are essentially interchangeable,
which would say, in particular, that all of them are constructive. These
projects, and others, will contribute to an existing and long-studied
regularity-based infrastructure within graph theory, combinatorics, and
theoretical computer science. These projects also serve as a basis for the
mentoring activities of the current researcher at a large metropolitan
university, and the funds help to support public students working in this area.

The Szemeredi Regularity Lemma (1975) guarantees that all large graphs G can be
partitioned into a number of classes, where most of these classes are epsilon-
regular, and where the number of classes depends only on the choice of epsilon.
For over four decades, this result has been highly impactful and influential in
Combinatorics, and its varied use became known as the Regularity Method.
Szemeredi's Regularity Lemma was extended in important ways. One extension due
to Alon et al. gives a polynomial-time algorithm for constructing the partition
it guarantees. Other work by several authors extended it to a hypergraph
setting, where the partitions which arise are necessarily technical, and where
different authors considered different points of view. Rodl et al. considered a
concept of r-discrepancy, while Gowers considered a concept of deviation. Recent
work of the PI, Rodl and Schacht showed that the deviation-based Regularity
Lemma can be made constructive. The project seeks to show that the underlying
concepts of discrepancy and deviation are essentially equivalent, and therefore
both regularity lemmas can be made algorithmic. (This is known to be true for
3-uniform hypergraphs, where discrepancy and deviation are also equivalent to a
third concept known as minimality.) The PI also considers a handful of
applications of the work above to several constructive combinatorial problems,
including coloring, packing, and testing problems for hypergraphs, among others.
