
* 1700233
* Representation Theoretical Methods in the Theory of Special Functions
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 08/01/2017,07/27/2022
* Adriano Garsia,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 215,000.00

The proposed research is in the field of Algebraic Combinatorics. This is a
growing field whose beginnings were prompted by the dawn of the computer age.
Its practitioners have the same goals as the invariant theorists of the 19th
century. The emphasis is on constructions and algorithms. At the start of the
20th century Hilbert showed how much easier it is to prove the existence of a
mathematical object than to construct it. At the time when all constructions had
to be done by hand it was very alluring to abandon constructions. Abstract
mathematics flourished with powerful new results and methods to the present
date. Computers combined with emergence of powerful symbolic software brought
back interest and ability to construct. The power of combinatorial constructs
emerged at the same time to create a field of growing promise. What is a
combinatorial construct? The answer is simple: it is a visual realization of a
mathematical construct. The old saying "A Picture is Worth a Thousand Words"
cannot be more appropriate in this case. When we translate a mathematical
construct into a single visual image a variety of properties of the construct
emerge that were not as evident in the original purely mathematical formulation.
We must see to believe how these properties predict identities relating some of
the most abstruse mathematical constructs. The interplay between algebra and
combinatorics is at the heart of the research activities supported by this
award.

Research of the last two decades has shown in a unequivocal way that symmetric
function theory is a powerful computational tool not only for theoretical
investigations also but for obtaining computer data in various branches of
mathematics. Therefore the most significant by-products of the planed research
are new symmetric function tools and identities. Early computer explorations by
the principal investigator and Haiman yielded data which revealed a surprisingly
intimate connection between the space of Diagonal Harmonics, Parking Functions,
and the Theory of Macdonald polynomials. This development produced a variety of
problems and conjectures some of which are still open. Parallel to this
development the researchers in the Theory of Torus Knots obtained symmetric
function constructs identical to those derived in our field using Parking
Functions. The proposed work aims to exploit this connection. The resulting
discoveries can positively affect areas that have been connected with the
present field: Representation Theory, Symmetric Function Theory, Combinatorics,
Algebraic Geometry, and Computational Algebra. Algebraic Combinatorics is
particularly suitable for computer experimentation. This activity is highly
effective for training young researchers and allowing them to discover the
manner in which research can be carried in our Computer Age. Under this setting,
even students with limited background can be brought to experience the joy of
discovery. The variety of discoveries that research in the proposed areas has
already created, and has the potential of creating, is an enrichment of the
Mathematical Magics that can inspire future generations of young researchers.
