
* 1701577
* Applications of Random Matrix Theory to Analytic Number Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Brad Rodgers,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2020
* USD 106,007.00

This project explores several problems at the intersection of random matrix
theory and analytic number theory. The first of these areas historically draws
much of its impetus from mathematical physics and broadly concerns statistical
patterns found in matrices where entries have been chosen at random; ideas from
this area have found applications in a large number of subjects ranging from
epidemiology to telecommunications. The second area makes use of mathematical
analysis to study properties of the integers -- for instance to study the
distribution of primes or the way large integers tend to factor; these are
natural problems which mathematicians have been interested in for a long time
and which have applications to data-security. The two areas were first linked by
the surprising and still largely conjectural resemblance between the local
distribution of zeros of L-functions -- these are certain functions which are of
central interest in analytic number theory -- and the distribution of
eigenvalues of a random matrix. In fact, distributions of this sort have been
found in a diverse range of situations, and it is an important problem to
understand why these distributions arise so universally.

In more detail, the project consists of two related parts. The first is to study
the link between zeros of L-functions and eigenvalues of random matrices by
making use of combinatorial decompositions of arithmetic functions; analogous
decompositions can be found in a function field setting and have shed light on
related problems there. The second part is to investigate the extent to which
certain pseudo-random walks on compact matrix groups equidistribute in the same
fashion as classical random walks do; results pertaining to this second project
have recently been used to resolve open questions about the distribution of
certain trigonometric polynomials. The two components of the project share in
common the use they make of combinatorial representation theory and also their
study of sequences of random variables that are weakly dependent, with a
dependence characterized by arithmetic/combinatorial considerations.
