
* 1701704
* Moduli Spaces: New Directions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/15/2017,04/23/2019
* Evgueni Tevelev,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Algebraic geometry studies varieties: shapes defined by systems of polynomial
equations. Polynomial constraints on parameters are quite common both in
mathematics (for example, Diophantine equations in number theory, such as the
famous Fermat equation) and in broader applications ranging from physics, where
algebraic varieties are used to describe various configuration spaces (and even
the shape of the universe!), to engineering and algebraic statistics. The
inherent rigidity of polynomials, especially compared to more flexible
transformations allowed in topology and differential geometry, makes possible to
apply a wide range of techniques coming from algebra (the study of rings and
modules) and even number theory, for example reduction modulo prime numbers. One
of the most basic problems in algebraic geometry is to learn how to classify and
distinguish geometric properties of algebraic varieties. In addition to discrete
parameters, mostly of topological nature, algebraic varieties also have
continuous parameters called "moduli". For example, Riemann surfaces (such as a
sphere or a torus) are classified topologically by the number of holes (the
genus). It was known already to Riemann that they also have 3g-3 continuous
complex parameters (g is the genus). Quite remarkably, these parameters can be
interpreted as coordinates on the "moduli space": the master space that encodes
all possible geometric structures of a given topological shape. The PI is an
expert on moduli spaces of low-dimensional varieties (curves and surfaces). The
project will focus on developing new techniques and approaches to their study.
The first approach is based on convex geometry, which studies shapes defined by
linear inequalities (such as polygons and polyhedra). An idea that goes back to
Newton is to capture asymptotic behavior of a distinguished system of functions
to construct a polyhedral approximation of a curved geometry. Another approach
is linearization. Derived categories linearize geometries just like tangent
lines approximate graphs of functions. The PI aims to understand derived
categories of several moduli spaces. Finally, moduli spaces can be studied using
number theory by reducing them modulo prime numbers. To this end, moduli spaces
have to be equipped with extra data to parametrize complex and finite geometries
simultaneously. In addition to advancing algebraic geometry, the proposed
research program contributes to the development of a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce through recruiting, training, and supervising of
graduate and undergraduate students and providing resources for their research,
teaching, and professional development. In particular, the project includes
three problems specifically tailored for REU (Research Experience for
Undergraduates) as well as several PhD thesis problems. The PI will also
continue to develop graduate and undergraduate courses, including courses
designed to introduce a broader public to mathematics and science.

The PI will work on several fundamental problems in algebraic geometry with a
focus on compact moduli spaces of local systems, curves and surfaces. The PI has
previously developed applications of classical "commutative" tropicalization of
subvarieties in algebraic tori to moduli spaces. Recently, classical tropical
geometry was extended by the PI and his graduate student Vogiannou to a "non-
commutative" setting and the PI proposes to use this generalization to construct
a geometrically meaningful compactification of the moduli space of local systems
on a punctured Riemann sphere. In collaboration with Castravet, the PI intends
to verify a conjecture of Orlov and Kuznetsov on derived category of the moduli
space of stable rational curves (and related spaces) and to apply this
description to find its non-commutative deformations. The PI also intends to use
the theory of windows as developed by Halpern-Leistner to solve some open
problems about derived categories of toric and log Fano varieties. In
collaboration with Freixas i Montplet, the PI proposes to systematically develop
Arakelov geometry of the moduli space of curves and to apply it to questions in
number theory. The PI proposes several new projects on moduli of surfaces in
collaboration with Urzua, including constructions of moduli spaces of surfaces
with QHD singularities (admitting smoothings with rational homology disc Milnor
fiber) and families of antiflips of total spaces of deformations of cyclic
quotient singularities in the direction of answering a question of Kollar. In
addition there are three projects tailored for REUs: Seshadri constants on toric
and elliptic ruled surfaces, and equations of log canonical compactifications of
complements of hyperplane arrangements.
