
* 1701237
* Hodge Theory and Classifying Spaces
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2017,05/09/2022
* Burt Totaro,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2023
* USD 355,002.00

Mathematics has become central to the modern economy, based on information and
computation. In particular, algebraic geometry studies the geometric spaces
defined by algebraic formulas. The grand challenges of algebraic geometry, such
as the Hodge conjecture, seek to describe all the subspaces of a given space in
computable terms. This project will engineer new connections between geometric
spaces and the corresponding formulas. Looking at familiar spaces through the
eyes of algebraic geometry yields new results in topology and group
representation theory. The project will bring undergraduates, graduate students,
and postdocs into mathematical research.

In more detail, the theory of algebraic cycles aims to describe all the
subvarieties of a given algebraic variety. This subject has recently led to
dramatic progress on the old problem of which varieties have a rational
parametrization. One main theme of the project is to study varieties in positive
characteristic, where there are direct connections between algebraic cycles and
more computable theories such as Hodge cohomology. The PI will use these
connections to make new calculations in representation theory and the theory of
algebraic groups. Finally, the PI will prove new cases of the integral Hodge
conjecture for complex varieties.
