
* 1702218
* On the Discrete Spectrum of Classical Groups and Converse Theorems
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2017,06/26/2017
* Baiying Liu,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2022
* USD 162,631.00

This research project concerns certain problems within the Langlands Program, a
program proposed by Robert Langlands in 1960s. The Langlands Program is a web of
far-reaching and influential conjectures that predicts surprising connections
between arithmetic (e.g., properties of solutions to polynomial equations) and
analysis (e.g., highly symmetric solutions to certain differential equations on
symmetric manifolds, known as automorphic forms). The celebrated proof of
Fermat's Last Theorem by A. Wiles, for instance, uses early results in the
Langlands program proved by Langlands and Tunnell. In another direction,
automorphic forms have deep connections with the string theory and the study of
black holes in physics. In this project the PI will investigate analytic
properties of automorphic forms and their number-theoretic consequences in the
Langlands program.

A main theme in the theory of automorphic forms is to study the discrete
spectrum of connected reductive groups defined over number fields. By the
pioneered work of Arthur, followed by many others, the discrete spectrum of
classical groups has been classified into Arthur packets parametrized by Arthur
parameters. The first part of this project is to analyze the finer structure of
Arthur packets, including: concrete constructions of modules in each Arthur
packet; Fourier coefficients of automorphic representations in each Arthur
packet, including Jiang's conjecture; cuspidality of each Arthur packet; and
relations among Arthur packets of different but closely related groups (via
automorphic descent). The second part of the project is about converse problems.
Converse problems aim to recover modular/automorphic forms from their Fourier
coefficients. For example, the famous converse theorems of Hecke and Weil give
sufficient conditions for a Dirichlet series to be the Mellin transform of a
modular form. It is known that converse theorems play an important role in the
establishment of Langlands functoriality. In this part of the project the PI
will develop approaches to several conjectures, including Jacquet's conjecture
and Cogdell-Piatetski-Shapiro conjecture, in order to prove optimal local and
global converse theorems.
