
* 1707808
* Interactions Between Representation Theory and Algebraic Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2017,03/21/2017
* Vladimir Drinfeld,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2018
* USD 55,000.00

The conference "Interactions between representation theory and algebraic
geometry," will take place at the University of Chicago, August 21-25, 2017. It
will be a major gathering of researchers in these two interacting branches of
mathematics. Representation theory is the algebraic study of symmetries in
geometry and physics and is at the crossroads of many important areas of modern
mathematics. Algebraic geometry is concerned with the study of shapes that can
be described using polynomial equations, and with applying geometric ideas to
commutative algebra and number theory. In the past decades, some of the most
important results in representation theory have been obtained by applying ideas
and methods from algebraic geometry, and conversely many important problems in
algebraic geometry have benefited from applying representation theory. The
conference will feature one-hour lectures by leading experts in the field,
poster presentations, and evening talks by junior mathematicians. The conference
will stimulate productive interactions between mathematicians in diverse fields
and career stages, including Ph.D. students and postdoctoral researchers.

The conference will address recent developments in the interconnected areas of
representation theory and algebraic geometry, as well as related subjects,
including p-adic Hodge theory, arithmetic geometry and non-commutative algebra.
In particular, cutting-edge research related to categorification, symplectic
resolutions, quantization, D-modules, quiver varities and the Langlands program
will be presented. The conference aims not only to disseminate this research but
to make it accessible to junior mathematicians. The webpage is
https://sites.google.com/site/2017uchicagomathconference/.
