
* 1717543
* Underrepresented Students in Topology and Algebra Research Symposium
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 01/01/2017,12/30/2016
* Erik Insko,FL,Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 12/31/2018
* USD 34,391.00

The Underrepresented Students in Topology and Algebra Research Symposium (USTARS
2017) will take place March 31-April 2, 2017 at Amherst College, in Amherst,
Massachusetts. The symposium will highlight research being conducted by
underrepresented students in the areas of algebra and topology. Most speakers
will give thirty-minute research talks in parallel sessions. Graduate students
will give at least three-quarters of these presentations. Two distinguished
graduate students and one invited faculty member will be chosen to give one-hour
presentations. A poster session featuring invited undergraduates, a panel
discussion, and a professional development session are also planned. USTARS
exposes participants to the research and activities of underrepresented
mathematicians, encouraging a more collaborative mathematics community.
Participants are also given the opportunity to meet and network with students
and faculty members who will later become collaborators and colleagues.

At this unique meeting, attendees are exposed to a great variety of current
research, ideas, and results in their areas of study and beyond. The topics of
the presentations will vary over a wide range of areas in algebra and topology.
There will be parallel sessions focused on combinatorics, number theory,
commutative algebra, algebraic geometry, associative algebras, nonassociative
rings and algebras, group theory and generalizations, topological groups and Lie
groups, general topology, algebraic topology, and manifolds and cell complexes.
Further details may be found on the conference website at http://www.ustars.org.
