
* 1719538
* Sums of Squares Polynomials in Optimization, Combinatorics, and Computer Vision
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Combinatorics
* 07/01/2017,06/02/2017
* Rekha Thomas,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 250,000.00

Many questions in science and engineering can be modeled as questions in
polynomial optimization, in which the goal is to find an optimal solution given
a set of practical constraints on the model parameters. This field has undergone
a revolution in the last two decades by incorporating novel ideas originating
from several fields of mathematics and computer science. These advances have
made polynomial optimization a viable tool in many applications. An important
example is computer vision, for which a key goal is to estimate and characterize
the three-dimensional shapes within a scene, given a set of two-dimensional
images. This research project tackles such challenges by combining techniques
from optimization, computer vision, and combinatorics. Special emphasis is
placed on designing efficient and practical computational algorithms. Graduate
students will be involved in this cross-disciplinary research project, providing
the students with broad training in mathematics that intertwines theory and
computation.

This research investigates three topics in the field of polynomial optimization.
The first project extends prior work on positive semi-definite representations
of polytopes for the creation of a canonical model of realization spaces of
polytopes. This research has the potential to initiate a new algebraic viewpoint
of polytopes via their slack ideals, simplifying geometric results and settling
longstanding questions such as understanding projective uniqueness. For the
second project the focus is on algebraic vision, for which the aim is to apply
techniques from algebraic geometry and polynomial optimization to questions in
computer vision, with potentially important practical application. Concurrently,
the study of applied formulations has the potential to inspire new mathematical
theories. Research in algebraic vision continues to create strong ties to the
computer vision community and will help create an intellectual exchange between
mathematics and vision, benefiting both fields and providing a stimulating
training environment for mathematics students looking toward careers in
industry. The long-term aim of the last project is to develop the computational
aspects of polynomial optimization in the presence of symmetry. Numerous
problems in applications come with symmetries, and the ability to exploit this
feature often determines whether or not the problem can be solved.
