
* 1743011
* Workshop: Structures on Free Resolutions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2017,08/21/2017
* Peder Thompson,TX,Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2018
* USD 16,500.00

This award supports participation in a workshop-style mathematics conference
entitled Structures on Free Resolutions and taking place at Texas Tech
University in Lubbock, TX, from October 26-28, 2017. It will bring together
established and early-career researchers to give lectures and participate in
workshop activities on closely related topics, with a goal of fostering an
environment conducive to collaboration and discussion. The topics to be included
in this workshop are representative of the rich area of commutative algebra and
its quickly changing landscape. About 45 participants are expected, which
includes 9 invited speakers. Participation by women and members of
underrepresented minorities is particularly encouraged. This workshop will
contribute to the fields of commutative and homological algebra by providing a
focus for a topic that has seen a lot of progress recently: structures on free
resolutions. Topics represented at this workshop will include generic free
resolutions, linearity, Boij-Söderberg theory, Tate resolutions, detection of
Koszul and Golod properties, rationality of Poincaré series, growth and
structure of Betti numbers, and studies of syzygies, which represent a wide
range of approaches to studying structures on free resolutions. One can expect
that this meeting will set the ground work for future research in this area by
identifying important motifs and questions as well as starting new conversations
and collaborations related to these topics.
