
* 1751281
* CAREER: Structure and Interpolation in Number Theory and Beyond
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 08/01/2018,08/08/2022
* Ellen Eischen,OR,University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

The principal investigator (PI) will investigate connections between seemingly
disparate data arising in number theory, a field of mathematics with deep ties
to many areas in sciences and engineering. In particular, the PI will study
structures associated to the whole numbers, fractions, and related sets called
"number fields." The PI aims to elucidate how these structures vary across
certain infinite collections of number fields, and furthermore, how their
behavior explains currently mysterious phenomena in number theory, geometry, and
beyond. In the course of the project the PI will organize workshops to educate
graduate students about recent research developments and to promote diverse
collaborations. To engage undergraduate students in topics motivating her
research, the PI will develop an innovative, interactive course integrating
approaches from the arts. Partly through a collaboration with museum curators,
the PI will also organize public exhibits for the broader community.

The research in this project focuses on L-functions, automorphic forms, and
p-adic methods as tools to understand particular structures and how they vary in
families. Anticipated consequences include progress toward instances of the
Greenberg-Iwasawa main conjectures (connecting the structures of Galois groups
with p-adic L-functions) and the Bloch-Kato conjectures (equating ranks of
certain groups with the order of vanishing of associated L-functions at the
central point, in analogy with the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture). Key
components, which are interconnected so that progress on one advances the
others, include investigating the interplay between p-adic and archimedean
properties of L-functions and automorphic forms, studying p-adic aspects of
unitary Shimura varieties, and bridging different approaches to p-adic
automorphic forms to gain insight into the behavior of associated data whose
significance extends into number theory, homotopy theory, and arithmetic
geometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
