
* 1764123
* Global and Local Properties of Discrete Structures
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 06/15/2018,06/27/2022
* Jozsef Balog,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2024
* USD 425,000.00

The theory of combinatorial structures is closely related to several areas of
mathematics, including algebra, logic, number theory, and probability, as well
as to other fields such as information theory, coding theory, theoretical
computer science, and statistical physics. Investigating random and pseudo-
random structures has become an important research topic, particularly because
the results and the techniques developed proved to be useful in the study of
large networks in important applications. A recently-discovered connection
between sparse combinatorial structures and enumeration problems yielded several
deep results that call for further study. This research project focuses on
understanding the robustness of important properties of dense structures and
testing whether they are inherited by random sparse substructures, with the goal
of developing a unified theory. The project will involve training of graduate
students through involvement in the research, and it is anticipated that some of
the results will be integrated into courses for graduate student training.

A central focus of combinatorics over the past twenty years has been the
introduction and proof of various random analogues of well-known theorems in
extremal graph theory, Ramsey theory, and additive combinatorics. Recently, the
so-called container method was developed, which proved to be useful to attack
these questions and many others. One direction of research in this project will
focus on applications of the method, and it is expected that this exploration
will lead to new exciting questions and directions. In particular, the following
related areas are to be investigated: (1) extremal questions in sparse
structures; (2) embedding in subgraphs of sparse random and pseudo-random
graphs; (3) applications of flag algebras; and (4) problems in bootstrap
percolation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
