
* 1800053
* Induced Subgraphs and Coloring
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/01/2018,06/04/2020
* Paul Seymour,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 210,000.00

This mathematics research project will investigate several connections between
the local and global structure of a graph. The connections under study have the
form "if a graph does not contain this (small, local) object then the graph has
a global structural property that most graphs do not possess." Such results,
relating the non-existence of a local object and the presence of a global
structure, can be of immense importance. Prior work established exactly this for
a different kind of graph containment, namely graph minors, and this result has
been of great interest and has had very many applications. This project seeks
analogous results for induced subgraphs.

The project investigates two such connections: the Gyarfas-Sumner conjecture,
that for any tree and any complete graph, all graphs that contain neither of
them can be vertex-partitioned into a small number of parts each containing no
edge; and the Liebenau-Pilipczuk conjecture, that for any tree, all graphs not
containing it or its complement admit two disjoint linear sets of vertices,
either completely joined or with no edges between them. In both cases, "tree"
cannot be replaced by any more general kind of graph. The first conjecture is
one of several problems about so-called "chi-boundedness;" the Gyarfas-Sumner
conjecture is the main chi-boundedness conjecture that is not yet resolved. The
second conjecture grew from attempts to resolve the Erdos-Hajnal conjecture. The
latter asserts that for any graph, all graphs not containing it have a clique or
stable set of polynomial size, unlike general graphs, in which the largest
clique or stable set might only have logarithmic size. It is planned to
investigate several conjectures of the form that for any graph, all graphs not
containing this fixed graph or its complement have two large sets of vertices,
either completely joined or joined by no edges (not sets of linear size, just of
polynomial size).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
