
* 1800832
* Turan-Type Extremal Problems and Applications
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/01/2018,05/04/2020
* Jacques Verstraete,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 195,000.00

The questions under study in this research project are central to an area of
mathematics known broadly as extremal combinatorics, which develops tools to
classify and analyze mathematical structures in which certain substructures are
forbidden. A typical question asks for the classification of graphs with a
maximum number of edges that do not contain certain subgraphs. The mathematical
theory behind such questions is at the foundation of many areas of mathematics,
including combinatorial number theory and geometry. Applications are found in
diverse areas of science, including theoretical computer science, coding and
cryptography, algorithmic complexity, as well as other areas of mathematics.
Extremal structures are particularly valuable in the construction of error-
correcting codes. This project explores innovative approaches to the theory,
whereby an original question is embedded in a geometric setting and the imposed
geometry is used to obtain additional information. The project includes training
of graduate students through their involvement in the research.

This project concerns research in combinatorics, focusing on Turan-type extremal
problems and applications. By exploring the connection between pure Turan-type
problems and other areas of mathematics, the project aims for new insights to
solve some important open problems. Such connections have resulted in recent
success, such as the polynomial method for breakthroughs on the mathematical cap
set problem, a Turan-type problem closely related to the complexity of
multiplication of two square matrices, which is at the heart of many practical
applications. In this project, some new approaches are explored, whereby we
embed a Turan type problem in a geometric setting, and then use the imposed
geometry to obtain information regarding the original problem. This approach has
been particularly effective in recent work for certain well-known hypergraph
Turan problems. The researcher plans to employ some of the most recent
mathematical tools, including probabilistic and polynomial methods, to solve
some central problems in the area.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
