
* 1801976
* Advances in Moduli Spaces and Algebraic Stacks
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2018,07/29/2018
* Jarod Alper,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 07/31/2023
* USD 150,001.00

The investigator will research various problems within the field of algebraic
geometry and related fields. Algebraic geometry is one the most ancient subjects
in mathematics with its origins traced to the algebraic study of curves by Greek
mathematicians more than 2400 years ago. Algebraic geometry drastically
transformed around 60 years ago with the seminal work of Grothendieck. This
transformation led to more rigorous and much broader foundations with immensely
powerful techniques which were employed to resolve a number of long-lasting
conjectures not only within algebraic geometry but also other mathematical
fields such as number theory, topology and statistics. Most recently, the last
few decades have seen the reach of algebraic geometry expand even further with
an astounding array of practical applications. Algebraic geometry now provides
the technical backbone to cryptosystems governing online transactions, to
computer graphics used in movies, games and virtual reality, to the
computational methods in the study of biological systems and the effectiveness
of drug treatments, and to many other fields including data science, machine
learning and computer vision.

This project aims to study a wide collection of ideas encircling the concept of
moduli spaces. In algebraic geometry, there is a large disparity between
geometric intuition and the technical tools needed to prove results, and this
disparity is perhaps no greater than in the study of moduli spaces. A
fundamental yet highly technical tool used to study moduli spaces is the theory
of algebraic stacks. The investigator will further the development of the
foundations of algebraic stacks by in particular developing an intrinsic method
to construct projective moduli spaces parameterizing objects that may have
positive dimensional automorphism groups. The investigator will pursue
applications of these foundational results to study the birational geometry of
moduli spaces such as the D-equivalence conjecture motivated by mirror symmetry.
Finally, the investigator will attempt to apply sophisticated algebro-geometric
techniques to tackle questions in algebraic complexity theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
