
* 1801530
* Cohomological Invariants and Motives of Classifying Spaces
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2018,05/20/2020
* Alexander Merkurjev,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2023
* USD 330,000.00

Algebraic geometry is the study of shapes, called algebraic varieties, defined
by polynomial equations. This project develops methods of algebraic geometry for
the study of algebraic varieties with a large set of symmetries using the theory
of invariants. The results obtained by these methods may provide a new insight
into the rationality problem of algebraic varieties that measures the complexity
of algebraic objects. Much of this project concerns the development of algebraic
techniques to obtain a better understanding of certain problems in geometry.

The project covers a wide range of aspects in algebra such as algebraic
geometry, algebraic groups and motivic cohomology. The classifying spaces of
certain algebraic groups classify classical objects such as simple algebras,
algebras with involutions, and quadratic forms. The PI will study cohomological
invariants of algebraic groups. There are two applications of cohomological
invariants. The first application is related to the classification of algebraic
objects when the objects are determined up to isomorphism by their cohomological
invariants. The second application considered in the project is the rationality
problem for classifying spaces of algebraic groups. In particular, an old
problem on the rationality of classifying spaces of connected algebraic groups
is addressed. The problems to be studied require elaborate techniques including
representation theory of algebraic groups, motivic cohomology, algebraic cycles
and Chern classes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
