
* 1801237
* Arithmetic Intersection on Shimura Varieties and Properties of Abelian Varieties
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2018,04/20/2018
* Yunqing Tang,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2022
* USD 166,960.00

This research project concerns work in arithmetic geometry, a branch of
mathematics that studies polynomial equations over the integers. Such equations
define geometric objects; among them the most accessible and fundamental ones
are elliptic curves (one-dimensional case) and abelian varieties (higher-
dimensional analogue). A modern way to approach these objects is to study them
in families, and certain geometric objects, so-called Shimura varieties, have
been used to parametrize these families. Arithmetic properties of abelian
varieties can be translated into arithmetic-geometric properties of the
corresponding Shimura variety. In this way, the principal investigator and her
collaborators will be able to use methods from different areas of mathematics
such as algebraic geometry, number theory, and representation theory to study
the arithmetic of abelian varieties.

The main theme of this project is the infinitude of certain thin sets of primes
arising from reduction types of abelian varieties. When the abelian varieties
are over number fields, the principal investigator and her collaborators are
aiming for results along the line of Elkies' theorem on supersingular reductions
of elliptic curves. The research will focus on nonsimple reductions or
reductions with higher Picard rank and establish a general framework to treat
certain abelian varieties of arbitrarily high dimension. In the function field
case, certain new phenomena appear and are related to the geometry of the Newton
strata of the corresponding Shimura variety. The philosophy of this project is
related to the Kudla program on arithmetic intersection of special cycles on
Shimura varieties. In addition to the usual setting of the Kudla program,
certain non-special cycles are studied in the framework of this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
