
* 1801969
* Cluster Algebras in Representation Theory and Symplectic Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2017,11/15/2017
* Harold Williams,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* michelle manes
* 09/30/2020
* USD 107,022.00

Representation theory is the study and classification of different kinds of
symmetry, specifically in the context of linear algebra. Historically it has
played an important role in mathematics because analyzing a given mathematical
object, for example a system of equations, is often dramatically simplified when
the object is symmetric in a suitable abstract sense. Symplectic geometry, on
the other hand, grew out of Hamiltonian mechanics and today occupies a prominent
place in mathematics due to the wide range of contexts, for example in topology
and algebraic geometry, where the underlying geometric structures of Hamiltonian
mechanics appear. This research project aims to advance understanding of both
subjects, as well as unearthing deep new connections between them, by leveraging
new ideas from algebraic combinatorics, in particular the recently developed
theory of cluster algebras. These connections are in turn all informed by recent
advances in mathematical physics, specifically string theory and supersymmetric
gauge theory.

On the side of representation theory, the main objects of study in this project
include the affine Grassmannian and its relatives, in particular their derived
categories of equivariant coherent sheaves. On the side of symplectic geometry,
the main objects are categories of Lagrangian branes or microlocal sheaves in
noncompact symplectic 4- and 6-manifolds. In the former context, cluster
structures appear at the level of the equivariant K-rings of the geometric
objects involved, and describe certain combinatorial structures inherited by
these rings. In the latter, cluster structures appear on moduli spaces of
Lagrangian branes in 4 dimensions, or through Hall algebra-type constructions
based on Fukaya categories in 6 dimensions. Through its combinatorial nature the
language of cluster algebras provides a means of isolating tractable aspects of
otherwise very rich and complicated mathematical objects, as well as uncovering
new relations between these objects.
