
* 1801806
* Homotopy Theory of Algebras and Its Applications
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2018,05/25/2019
* Zhenbo Qin,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2021
* USD 56,634.00

This award supports research at the interface between mathematics and physics.
The proposed projects lie at the intersection of several areas including algebra
and geometry. The origin of these problems is from mirror symmetry, a recent and
fascinating phenomenon discovered by theoretical physicists. As such, solutions
of the proposed projects will enhance our understanding of the interaction
between interesting, deep mathematics and applicable, exciting ideas from
physics. Part of the funding will also be used to support graduate students to
work on the proposed projects, and to travel to conferences.

The proposed projects use the homotopy theory of algebras to study categorical
mirror symmetry, moduli spaces, and derived geometry. The investigator plans to
work on: (1) a Whitehead type theorem for L-infinity spaces which simultaneously
generalizes the classical inverse function theorem and the Whitehead theorem of
L-infinity algebras; (2) proving some essential properties of the PI's previous
work on the mirror construction, such as its Calabi-Yau property, vanishing of
monodromy, and compactifications; (3) a general approach to define genus zero
Gromov-Witten invariants of compact smooth Calabi-Yau A-infinity categories.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
