
* 1801915
* Quiver Varieties and Symmetric Pairs
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2018,07/18/2018
* Yiqiang Li,NY,SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2023
* USD 127,041.00

Algebraic geometry and representation theory are two highly-developed branches
of mathematics. The former studies geometry by using algebraic equations and its
rich history can be traced back to the Greeks, such as solving the Delian
problem of doubling the cube. The latter studies abstract algebraic structure by
presenting their elements by matrices. It was first developed by Frobenius about
a century ago and has become pervasive across all fields of mathematics. This
research project sits at the crossroads of the above two branches of
mathematics. The goal of the project is to understand the intricate relations
between two seemingly unrelated, but fundamental, objects: Nakajima quiver
varieties from algebraic geometry and representations of symmetric pairs from
the representation theory.

Nakajima varieties provide a natural home for geometric representation theory of
simply-laced complex simple Lie algebras. This project will address the
following two long-standing, fundamental problems in Nakajima theory. The first
is to develop a Nakajima theory for the non-simply-laced complex simple Lie
algebras. Ultimately, Nakajima theory is a theory about the interaction of
symplectic geometry and representation theory. The second problem arises from
this perspective: deduce representation theoretic information from the partial
symplectic resolutions recently shown to arise from Nakajima varieties as fixed-
point loci of symplectic and anti-symplectic automorphisms. It turns out that
the two problems are two sides of a coin and they provide answers to each other.
Furthermore, via the geometric R-matrix theory of Okounkov and his
collaborators, the study of the two problems converges to a Nakajima theory for
symmetric pairs, for which a research plan is laid out in this project. The
latter can be thought of as an infinitesimal version of a Nakajima theory of
real simple Lie groups/algebras, upon which this project aims to shed light.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
