
* 1802059
* Polynomial Methods in Discrete Geometry
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/01/2017,05/16/2019
* Adam Sheffer,NY,CUNY Baruch College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2022
* USD 155,359.00

Starting around 2009, a series of difficult longstanding combinatorial problems
have been solved by using algebraic techniques. This led to a new subfield that
is sometimes called "the Polynomial Method". The philosophy behind this subfield
is that collections of objects that exhibit an extremal behavior often have
hidden algebraic structure. As a simple example, if a finite set of points in
the plane contains many pairs that are at a distance of 1 from each other, one
might expect this set to have a grid structure. Once the algebraic structure is
found, it can be exploited to gain a better understanding of the original
problem. To expose the algebraic structure, one defines polynomials on the
studied objects and explores their properties by using algebraic tools, often
from Algebraic Geometry. For example, for a problem involving a finite set of
points in the plane, one might wish to study the properties of a minimum-degree
polynomial that vanishes on the point set. Beyond solving various longstanding
problems, this new subfield is also leading to the discovery of interesting
connections between Combinatorial Geometry and other fields, such as Harmonic
Analysis and Theoretical Computer Science. This project is based on the
assumption that the new "algebraic era" in Combinatorial Geometry has not yet
reached its peak. It investigates further problems that seem approachable via
algebraic techniques, and aims to further develop the current algebraic tools.

The first part of this project involves studying several main open problems in
Discrete Geometry by using algebraic methods. Specifically, studying the
distinct distances problem in R^d, the characterization of point sets that
determine few distinct distances, and the problem of deriving stronger and more
general bounds for incidence problems. Part of the importance of deriving
stronger incidence bounds is that many problems can be reduced to incidence
problems (including problems from Combinatorics, Harmonic Analysis, and Number
Theory). The second part of the project concerns connections between Discrete
Geometry and Additive Combinatorics, also by using polynomial methods. This
partly involves further studying known connections between the two fields, but
focuses mainly on establishing a new type of connection. This connection
consists of defining geometric variants of additive energy and extending some of
the known additive energy results to these variants (such as the Balog-
Szemeredi-Gowers theorem and higher moment energies).
