
* 1802067
* Applications of Representation Theory in Commutative Algebra
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2018,05/27/2021
* Jerzy Weyman,CT,University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2022
* USD 282,000.00

This project involves the study of problems from several branches of algebra.
Commutative algebra studies sets defined by polynomial equations. The first and
second part of the project are devoted to studying polynomial equations defining
certain sets characterized geometrically. The third part of this project will be
a systematic study of certain kinds of graphs from a geometric point of view.

This project consists of several interrelated parts. The first part is to study
the structure of generic rings for finite free resolutions. The principal
investigator proposes to develop his discovery of a link between the generic
ring for resolutions of length 3 and Kac-Moody Lie algebras related to T-shaped
graphs. The second part is related to calculating local cohomology. The PI plans
to develop his calculation of local cohomology for certain classes of
commutative rings. The third part involves several other projects on
noncommutative algebra. The PI will study picture groups defined for modulated
quivers and the geometry of the components of representation spaces for quivers
with relations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
