
* 1802094
* Moduli Spaces in Representation Theory and Symplectic Algebraic Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/15/2018,08/19/2021
* Christopher Dodd,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 04/30/2023
* USD 330,000.00

Mathematical studies of diverse problems, from the dynamics of particles, to
spatial symmetries, to quantum physics, rely on the formulation of a particular
type of geometry called symplectic geometry. The structures of symplectic
geometry that arise in all these different problems possess certain common
features that will be further isolated, explored, and catalogued in this
project. The project will then develop general techniques to exploit those
common features to calculate fundamental quantities in symplectic geometry. The
resulting techniques and calculations will be applied to solve a number of
outstanding problems in geometry, the mathematical study of symmetry, and
mathematical physics.

Symplectic algebraic varieties provide the natural geometric setting for basic
constructions in geometric representation theory. Such varieties appear
naturally in the study of supersymmetric quantum field theories, as moduli
spaces of vacua in 3D N=4 theories. The two appearances are deeply inter-
related, as quantum field theory provides insight to geometric representation
theory, which representation theory repays by answering questions of importance
in physics. The project locates diverse symplectic algebraic varieties in a
common framework---as moduli spaces in noncommutative Poisson geometry---
develops general tools for their exploration, and yields applications to
representation theory, topology, geometry, and supersymmetric quantum field
theories. In particular, the project will develop and apply new methods to find
generators for topological and categorical invariants associated to symplectic
algebraic varieties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
