
* 1802373
* Singularities and Sheaves in Symplectic Geometry and Geometric Representation Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2018,05/11/2020
* David Nadler,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2022
* USD 329,970.00

The research supported by this grant lies at the crossroads of mathematics and
physics. It involves a mix of pursuits, including the development of new tools
and the solution of open problems. A main theme is finding new approaches to the
geometry of infinite-dimensional spaces and nonlinear differential equations.
For example, a primary aim of the project is to describe the dynamics of quantum
particles in terms of a short list of combinatorial building blocks. This
promises a new language to capture intricate phenomena through an elementary
syntax. The methods are inspired by singularity theory, where symmetry-breaking
often reveals hidden structure. In addition to original research, a broad goal
of the project is the education of students in the new frontiers of rapidly
developing fields. There will also be ample opportunities for outreach across
fields and for increased public engagement with mathematics.

The research tackles symplectic manifolds, the modern descendant of classical
phase spaces, and their quantum invariants. More specifically, the projects
focus on symplectic manifolds arising in algebraic geometry (Kaehler manifolds)
and gauge theory (moduli of bundles and connections). Specific directions focus
on Lagrangian singularities and skeleta of Weinstein manifolds, microlocal
sheaves in mirror symmetry, and the Betti Geometric Langlands correspondence.
The main goals include a combinatorial approach to symplectic geometry, a
strengthening of the applicability of microlocal sheaves to homological mirror
symmetry, and a Verlinde formula for automorphic categories. The methods span a
range of modern techniques in symplectic geometry, algebraic topology, and gauge
theory. They also connect with central pursuits in supersymmetric gauge theory,
specifically the study of phase spaces of gauge fields, their A-models, and
higher structures coming from four-dimensional topological field theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
