
* 1802044
* Discrete Quantum Integrability, Quantum Q-Systems, and Generalized Macdonald Operators
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/01/2018,04/13/2020
* Rinat Kedem,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 04/30/2023
* USD 265,000.00

This research project investigates questions at the intersection of mathematics
and theoretical physics. The project is focused on questions that originate in
statistical mechanics, which describes the average behavior of systems with
large numbers of components. The algebraic study of these systems, and their
symmetries, leads to new algebras, whose structure is in turn encoded
combinatorially by collections of functions that arise as solutions to systems
of equations. These new algebras, their generalizations, and the resulting
combinatorics are the main topics to be studied. The research will be conducted
in association with students at the graduate and undergraduate level, and will
enhance our understanding of how these fields of study connect to each other.

More precisely, the project concerns graded tensor products of cyclic current
algebra modules, specifically Kirillov-Reshetikhin modules. The combinatorial
framework is the quantum cluster algebra of the associated Q-systems, the
solutions of which can be expressed in terms of plane tilings and non-
intersecting path models. By investigating the discrete integrability of these
systems, the investigators expect to produce conserved quantities, so far
achieved only in type A. In turn, these should lead to difference equations for
the graded characters of tensor product product, which generalize the difference
Toda equations. Moreover, the solutions of these equations can be expressed as
iterated action of difference creation operators, closely related to generalized
Macdonald operators defined within the context of polynomial representations of
double affine Hecke algebras. Relations to quantum affine and elliptic Hall
algebras will also be investigated, as well as more combinatorial questions such
as the existence of some (quantum) non-commutative counterpart to the Gessel-
Viennot determinant for non-intersecting path enumeration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
