
* 1802460
* Termination and Vector Bundles on Projective Space
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/15/2018,08/02/2022
* James McKernan,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2023
* USD 380,000.00

The Principal Investigator will conduct research on the classification of
algebraic varieties. Algebraic Geometry concerns the study of polynomial
equations. The subject started with the work of the ancient Greeks, who
considered sections of a cone; these are circles ellipses, parabolas and
hyperbolas. Algebraically conic sections correspond to quadratic equations. The
PI will consider the problems of finding the most convenient way to describe
surfaces in four dimensional space. Is it always possible to use only two
equations? How can one describe the geometry intrinsically, without reference to
equations.

The PI will work on Hartshorne's conjecture on smooth codimension two subvariety
of projective spaces being a complete intersection. By work of Serre this is
equivalent to the statement that every rank two vector bundle on a projective
space having dimension greater or equal than seven splits as a direct sum of
line bundles. Vector bundles come in two types, unstable and stable and the PI
will work on each piece separately. The PI will also work on a conjecture of
Shokurov to do with the ascending chain condition for the log discrepancy and
which is a big step toward proving termination of flips.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
