
* 1802211
* Diophantine Analysis: From Structured to Random
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2018,08/17/2022
* Peter Sarnak,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2023
* USD 700,000.00

The award is concerned with the tension between the random versus deterministic
properties of integer and real solutions to certain equations as well as for the
illusive parity of the number of prime factors of an integer. These features in
special cases have applications to the design of efficient circuits and
algorithms. In terms of practical applications of the project, the PI expects
that the design of optimally efficient universal quantum gates using the
richness of solutions to Diophantine equations associated with arithmetic groups
will be used if a physical quantum computer is built.

Understanding solutions of algebraic equations in integers is a central theme in
the theory of numbers. The focus of this project is on equations which have many
such solutions. The only general method known to produce solutions is the Hardy-
Littlewood "circle method" which applies when there are many variables and the
solutions are very abundant. This project is concerned with the study of the
richness of solutions to such equations over the integers and the reals, when
there are few variables and especially in the critical dimension. Among the new
tools to be employed to make progress are, the dynamics affine polynomial
morphism groups, the method of auxiliary polynomials from transcendence and the
theory of random Gaussian Fields. A theme that is captured in the study of these
and related problems, is determinism versus randomness and it allows one in
certain special cases to design various optimally efficient universal quantum
gates. Another direction to be pursued with this theme is the theoretical and
computational study of the parity in the number of prime factors of a number.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
