
* 1802410
* Enumerative Geometry, Algebra, and Combinatorics in String Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2018,06/05/2020
* Duiliu Diaconescu,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 09/30/2022
* USD 185,000.00

This award supports research that aims to further build the bridge between
abstract mathematics and theoretical physics (in particular string theory). This
relationship follows naturally from the concept of supersymmetry, which
postulates that at very small length scales there is an exact parity between
bosonic and fermionic particles in nature. The resulting algebraic structure
leads to new and deep relations between string theory and black hole entropy on
one side, and abstract algebraic geometry and topology on the other. This unique
interaction leads in turn to important advances and novel ideals in both
disciplines. It also promotes a new way of thinking combining mathematical rigor
with the physical insight and flexibility of string theory.

The goal of this project is to make significant advances in the refined
Donaldson-Thomas theory of orbifolds as well as develop a new approach to
cohomological invariants of moduli spaces of sheaves on Calabi-Yau threefolds.
The first direction aims to prove new combinatorial formulas for orbifold
refined stable pairs invariants using localization and wall-crossing. This is an
important component of at least two current major open problems, concerning the
cohomology of tamely ramified character varieties, as well as an algebraic
geometric construction of knot invariants. The second part of the project aims
to develop a new approach to the cohomology of moduli spaces of two dimensional
sheaves on Calabi-Yau threefolds using string duality. The main idea is to build
a concrete relation between the cohomology of such moduli spaces sheaves and
chiral algebras on Laumon spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
