
* 1802371
* Combinatorial Methods in Algebraic Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Combinatorics
* 10/01/2018,07/19/2018
* Erik Carlsson,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 09/30/2021
* USD 150,100.00

This research project concerns algebraic aspects of a range of surprising recent
conjectures due to several authors, relating topics in algebraic geometry, the
algebraic theory of knots, topology, difficult combinatorial (counting)
problems, number theory, and mathematical physics. Conjectures that relate such
a broad range of topics are often especially compelling to mathematicians, and
can lead to particularly powerful results. To give one example, mathematicians
often find it useful to "count points" on spaces that parametrize mathematical
objects. So-called HLV conjectures mentioned below predict not only a formula
for doing this for certain spaces commonly called "character varieties," but
also generalize them in a way that is connected to their topology. Other
conjectures in this family connect closely related spaces with some extremely
compelling formulas involving diagrams, called parking functions, that are
elementary to test by hand. While this project is based on algebraic methods, a
full mathematical understanding of this topic is expected to reveal the geometry
behind many deep open problems, some of which have roots in physics. The
investigator also plans to involve undergraduate and graduate researchers in the
project. This activity will focus on combinatorial methods that require minimal
student prerequisites, and on the creation of algebra software for conducting
computational experiments, an especially effective approach for student
researchers unfamiliar with these topics. The development of general computer
software is another impact of this project, which is expected to be useful to
researchers in computational fields.

Some of the topics this project examines are the cohomology of the affine
Springer fiber, Khovanov-Rozanksy knot invariants, some famous conjectures of
Hausel, Letellier, and Rodriguez-Villegas (HLV), conjectures relating four-
dimensional gauge theory to conformal theory due to Alday, Gaiotto, and
Tachikawa (AGT), and related combinatorial extensions of the proof of the
shuffle conjecture, such as the nabla-positivity conjecture. On one side of
these conjectures, nearly all these topics have in common (conjectured)
relationships with sheaves on the Hilbert scheme of points in the complex plane.
On the other side, they are connected by the presence of a Riemann surface whose
significance is hidden on the Hilbert scheme side, except through formulas. For
instance, this Riemann surface would be the punctured disc C^* in the example of
the Springer fiber, the punctured surface of genus g defining the character
variety in the case of the HLV conjectures, or the two-dimensional surface on
which the conformal field theory takes place in the case of AGT. The goal of
this project is to make progress towards mathematical proofs of these
conjectures, discover new ones, and ultimately understand the general
mathematical picture. A major aspect of the approach is to extrapolate from
explicit combinatorial formulas when they are available, such as the sort that
appear in the shuffle conjecture, often called "nabla formulas" in Macdonald
theory. Understanding this connection is of considerable interest to number
theory, algebraic geometry, and combinatorics. A second aspect is the creation
of sophisticated computer software for testing new conjectures, as well as for
generating data to make predictions about the general relationship with
geometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
