
* 1811971
* Applications of Microlocal Sheaves of Spectra and K-Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
* 09/01/2018,05/15/2018
* David Treumann,MA,Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2021
* USD 205,398.00

This research project concerns algebraic topology and symplectic geometry.
Algebraic topology is the theory of those properties of space that are unchanged
by large continuous deformations; for example, the property of having a hole.
Algebraic topologists organize their subject using number systems called ring
spectra or extraordinary homology theory. Symplectic geometry is a mathematical
formalism for classical mechanics. Many questions in symplectic geometry have
been resolved through use of a tool called Lagrangian Floer theory. This project
aims to develop a single tool that generalizes both theories, forging new
connections between the subjects.

Floer homotopy theory is an emerging refinement of Floer homology. It bears the
same relationship to Floer homology that extraordinary homology bears to
ordinary homology. Ultimately it should attach a category, enriched in spectra,
to a symplectic manifold. This project aims to construct this category using the
microlocal theory of sheaves, to give new techniques for computing it, to use it
to prove some conjectures about the algebraic topology of symplectic manifolds,
and conversely to symplectically illuminate some aspects of the category of
spectra.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
