
* 1820718
* Vector Bundles of Conformal Blocks on Moduli Spaces
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2017,12/08/2017
* Angela Gibney,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Spiroff
* 07/31/2020
* USD 91,784.00

This project studies the relationship between the families of algebraic curves,
a central topic in algebraic geometry, and related notions arising in
mathematical physics. In algebraic geometry, families of curves are studied by
the use of moduli spaces, which parametrize the different curves in the family.
Besides providing deep insights about curves, moduli spaces exhibit important
behaviors which help shape our understanding of how geometric objects may be
parametrized, and therein serve as envoys of a larger mathematical world, giving
valuable insights into the development of higher dimensional theory. Recent work
has revealed that certain aspects of moduli spaces of curves reflect underlying
geometric structures. This research project investigates open questions related
to these discoveries. Graduate students are involved in the project, and the
investigator co-organizes the Mathematics Department's MathCamp high-school
program.

The projects are organized along four general themes. For smooth curves,
conformal blocks are identified with global sections of certain ample line
bundles on a projective variety. Project One aims to study to what extent this
description may or may not hold for non-smooth curves. Project Two proposes
birational models of the moduli space as configurations of weighted points
supported on curves embedded in homogeneous varieties, generalizing those given
by pointed rational normal curves in projective space. To answer open problems
about the multiplicative eigenpolyhedra from representation theory, and cones
spanned by certain sets of first Chern classes of vector bundles of conformal
blocks, the goal of Project Three is to leverage information gathered from maps
between subsets of the two. Project Four aims to understand positive cycles of
higher codimension given by vector bundles of conformal blocks.
