
* 1840234
* RTG: Number Theory and Representation Theory at the University of Michigan
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 07/01/2019,07/14/2022
* Kartik Prasanna,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,300,000.00

This award will support a Research Training Group in Number theory and
Representation theory at the University of Michigan. The RTG will build a
research group around the faculty in these areas, supporting postdocs, graduate
students and undergraduates. A team of eight faculty members (Bhargav Bhatt,
Stephen DeBacker, Wei Ho, Tasho Kaletha, Jeffrey Lagarias, Kartik Prasanna,
Andrew Snowden, and Michael Zieve) will oversee the project. The project will
support a number of initiatives to broaden participation in these areas of
mathematics, and to encourage new modes of collaboration. These initiatives
include among others (i) the Teams of Three collaborations, in which vertically
integrated teams of at least three participants work jointly on research
projects; (ii) a series of Undergraduate Computational Initiative Workshops,
through which undergraduates will be introduced to research in mathematics by
working on computational problems that involve a mix of theory and coding; (iii)
a series of summer workshops with varying formats that will involve and benefit
young mathematicians from across the country; (iv) a more traditional REU
program; and (v) a "Number theory day" involving other universities in Michigan.
There will be several new recruitment initiatives that will include an expansion
of a bridge Masters program and the development of undergraduate classes that
will popularize the mathematics in this proposal and make it more accessible to
diverse audiences within the undergraduate population at Michigan.

Number theory and Representation theory are both central areas in mathematics,
and are highly interconnected. The connection between these areas is most
visible in the Langlands program, which predicts relations between the roots of
polynomials over number fields and the representations of algebraic groups; this
connection is responsible for some of the most striking achievements in
mathematics, such as the proof of Fermat's last theorem. Training the next
generation of mathematicians in these areas is of vital importance to the
country both because of the central role that they play in mathematics and
because of important practical applications of these areas to topics such as
cryptography, cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology. In recent years, there
have been major developments in the field, including the theory of perfectoid
spaces, the classification of automorphic representations, the geometry of
numbers and arithmetic invariant theory, and the arithmetic theory of algebraic
cycles. The PIs on this grant together have expertise covering all of these
recent developments and will pass this along by training postdocs, graduate
students and undergraduates, with the goal of increasing the number of US
citizens pursuing careers in these areas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
