
* 1840702
* Group Representations and Applications
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/01/2018,05/06/2021
* Pham Tiep,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2023
* USD 410,000.00

The concept of a group in mathematics grew out of the notion of symmetry. The
symmetries of an object in nature or of a theoretical construct can be encoded
by a group, which itself carries important information about the structure of
the object. Representation theory allows one to study groups in a uniform way
via their actions on vector spaces, which model common ways groups act in
applications. Representation theory has been a central topic in mathematics for
more than a century and has important applications in physics and chemistry,
particularly in quantum mechanics and the theory of elementary particles. Finite
groups and their representations have important applications in coding theory
and cryptography, and play an important role in modern computation and digital
communications. This project aims to advance understanding in the representation
theory of finite groups and in a number of applications.

In more detail, this project focuses on several important questions in group
representation theory and its applications. It ties together different areas of
mathematics, such as finite groups and algebraic groups, permutation groups,
probabilistic group theory, group cohomology, combinatorics, vertex operator
algebras, and algebraic geometry, with representation theory as the main
unifying ingredient. Many of the questions addressed in the project come up
naturally in the study of group representations, and others are motivated by
applications. The investigator will study several problems along the lines of
the global-local principle, including conjectures of McKay, Alperin, Brauer, and
others that extend and generalize classical results in the representation theory
of finite groups. The investigator also intends to study classification of
modular representations of low dimension and to develop a theory of character
level, with the goal of establishing strong bounds on character values for
finite quasisimple groups. It is anticipated that the results can be applied to
study Aschbacher's conjecture on subgroup lattices and the Kollar-Larsen problem
on exterior powers, Miyamoto's problem, problems on random walks and anti-
concentration, representation varieties of Fuchsian groups, word map
distributions and Waring-type problems for quasisimple groups, refinements of
Holt's conjecture on second cohomology groups, and representations of
quasisimple groups with special properties.
