
* 1844206
* Local-Global Principles in Arithmetic
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2018,06/16/2021
* Ila Varma,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 02/28/2022
* USD 212,467.00

Number theory is one of the oldest branches of mathematics, and yet it continues
to have more and more applications within the sciences. In this project, the
principal investigator (PI) will investigate the relationship between two of the
main focuses of number theory, both of which are utilized in computer science as
well as physics: (1) prime numbers and the divisibility of integers and (2)
algebraic solutions to polynomial equations. The fundamental idea is to
understand the extent to which global objects can be arithmetically determined
by the collection of its local pieces. The strategies and techniques that will
be utilized in this project originate in a broad range of other mathematical
subjects, including analysis, geometry, algebra and in some cases, statistics.
Some of the specific questions the PI is interested in are at a level accessible
to undergraduate and high-school students, and throughout the course of the
project, the PI plans to utilize this to continue in educational efforts
supporting an increase in diversity within mathematics. This project surrounds
the widespread phenomenon of local-global principles throughout algebraic and
analytic number theory, ranging from understanding obstructions of unique prime
factorization in rings of integers to determining the asymptotic number of
global fields with fixed invariants via the number of local extensions with
fixed p-adic invariants to proving local-global compatibility results within the
Langlands program. First, the PI will conduct research that furthers the
statistical study of class groups that originated with the Cohen-Lenstra
heuristics; amongst others, this will include proving asymptotics for class
groups of families of orders. Second, the PI will study number field
distributions and the local-global principles that can control their
asymptotics, beginning with the case of octic quaternion number fields. The
strategy for obtaining such results will rely on arithmetic invariant theory,
sieve methods, and geometry-of-numbers techniques utilized frequently in the
field of arithmetic statistics. On the automorphic side, the PI will investigate
arithmetic and geometric properties of p-adic families of Galois representations
arising from non-conjugate self-dual regular algebraic automorphic
representations of the general linear group over CM fields. This will involve
studying eigenvarieties and strengthening p-adic interpolation methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
