
* 1854113
* Workshop on Automorphic Forms and Related Topics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 03/01/2019,02/01/2019
* Anna Haensch,PA,Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* michelle manes
* 02/29/2020
* USD 14,987.00

The 33rd Annual Workshop on Automorphic Forms and Related Topics (AFW) will take
place March 6-10, 2019 at Duquesne University in Pittsburgh, PA. The AFW is an
internationally recognized, well-respected conference on topics related to
automorphic forms, which have played a key role in many recent breakthroughs in
mathematics. Continuing a three-decade long tradition, the AFW will bring
together a geographically diverse group of participants at a wide range of
career stages, from graduate students to senior professors. Typically, about
half of the attendees at the AFW are at early stages of their careers, and we
make a particular effort to support women at all career stages. The AFW will
continue to provide a supportive and encouraging environment for giving talks --
including the opportunity to give 3-minute "speed talks" on preliminary results
-- exchanging ideas, and beginning new collaborations. In addition to the
research talks, the AFW will continue the longstanding tradition of having two
professional development panels on topics such as facilitating engagement and
success in mathematics for underrepresented groups, preparing for the job
market, and balancing professional responsibilities. To increase accessibility
to a wider audience, the Workshop will begin with a one-day "bootcamp" to be
held March 6th.

Automorphic forms constitute a major area of study in number theory and related
areas. One of the goals of the AFW is to promote new interactions and
collaborations between researchers working in different areas concerning
automorphic forms. Thus, the workshop will highlight a wide range of
developments in areas including the analytic, algebraic, combinatorial, and
p-adic theory of automorphic forms and related topics such as L-functions.
Automorphic forms have played a key role in many breakthroughs in mathematics,
including the proofs of Fermat's Last Theorem (by Andrew Wiles), Serre's
Conjecture (by Chandrashekhar Khare, Mark Kisin, and Jean-Pierre Wintenberger),
the Sato-Tate Conjecture (by Thomas Barnet-Lamb, David Geraghty, Michael Harris,
and Richard Taylor), Serre's Uniformity Conjecture (by Yuri Bilu and Pierre
Parent),the Monstrous Moonshine Conjecture (for which Borcherds was awarded the
Fields Medal), and the Fundamental Lemma (for which Ngo Bau Chau was awarded the
Fields Medal). The topics covered in this year's workshop are likely to include
Bianchi, elliptic, Jacobi, Hilbert, and Siegel modular forms, elliptic curves
and abelian varieties, special values of L-functions, p-adic aspects of
L-functions and automorphic forms, connections with representation theory, mock
modular forms, quadratic forms, and additional related areas of research. The
workshop website is http://automorphicformsworkshop.org/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
