
* 1854903
* Hadwiger's Conjecture and Ramsey Related Problems
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 06/01/2019,04/19/2021
* Zixia Song,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

This research project aims to study a variety of fundamental problems in the
areas of structural graph theory and extremal combinatorics. Often such problems
are related to other areas including theoretical computer science, geometry,
information theory, harmonic analysis and number theory. Progress on these
problems will advance our understanding of related aspects of graph theory and
combinatorics. The PI and her collaborators have recently made progress on most
of them. It is expected that further work on these problems will lead to new
methods and applications. The project investigates problems related to the well-
known Hadwiger's conjecture and Ramsey related problems. Specifically the PI and
her collaborators plan to explore the following problems: proving every graph
with no clique minor on seven vertices is 7-colorable; generalizing Mader's
bound for graphs with no clique minors; studying the minimal counterexamples to
Hadwiger's conjecture for graphs with independence number two; and studying the
extremal function for graphs with small Colin de Verdiere parameter; determining
the exact values of Gallai-Ramsey numbers of even cycles, wheels, and complete
graphs; and estimating the minimum number of edges of co-critical graphs.
Progress on these problems will undoubtedly lead to the development of new
methods and approaches that were too far out of reach before, and are likely to
allow further exciting developments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
