
* 1855165
* Geometric Combinatorics and Discrete Morse Theory
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/01/2019,07/06/2021
* Bruno Benedetti,FL,University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Discrete geometry deals with objects that have corners and ridges, such as
cubes, pyramids, or surfaces sewn out of triangles. Objects of this type are
called polytopal complexes and have been studied since the beginning of mankind.
They also provide a schematic way to model real-world interactions. When the
interactions are binary, i.e. when they involve only two agents at the same
time, the resulting model is one-dimensional, and called a "network" or "graph";
when the interactions are not binary, the model has to be higher dimensional.
For example, "friendship" is a binary interaction: That is why social networks
are, indeed, networks. In contrast, "co-starring in a movie" is not a binary
interactions: For a group of actors, the fact that "any two of them co-starred
in a movie" does not mean that "they all co-starred in a movie". To distinguish
the two situations, one should place a d-dimensional simplex whenever d+1 actors
have co-starred in a movie, thereby creating a higher-dimensional model. The
main advantages of using discrete models is that they adapt well to many deep
areas of mathematics, bringing to such areas the option to leverage
computational tools. Simple questions on the structure of polytopes, such as the
Hirsch conjecture, have foundational importance in optimization. Discrete Morse
theory, a reduction tool to simplify a given polytopal complex, is employed both
in pure mathematics and in big data analysis, to understand high-dimensional
shapes. The project builds on these tools and expands their application.
Combinatorial and probabilistic approaches may shed light towards classical
aspect of geometry, like intersection patterns of lines on smooth surfaces.

Enumerative aspects on the number of polytopes and spheres with given number of
facets have importance beyond pure mathematics, in Regge calculus and simplicial
quantum gravity. Techniques from metric geometry can provide desired exponential
upper bounds. Another problem with importance in applied mathematics is the
polynomial Hirsch conjecture, which was proven with metric methods for flag
polytopes. Techniques ranging from knot theory to differential and hyperbolic
geometry may be applied to better understand obstructions and constructions in
Discrete Morse Theory, thereby revealing when and how we can simplify a given
shape. A new perspective in this project is to connect discrete Morse theory
with the notion of embeddability. A further goal is to lift the classical theory
of polytope graphs (for example Balinski's theorem or the Hirsch conjecture)
into a more general theory of intersection patterns of algebraic varieties,
where algebraic tools such as liaison theory and local cohomology can be
employed. Integrating this theory with the study of random simplicial complexes
may provide some new random models in commutative algebra.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
