
* 1855592
* New Applications of Combinatorics to Representation Theory and Schubert Calculus
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Combinatorics
* 09/01/2019,07/18/2022
* Cristian Lenart,NY,SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 227,612.00

The main goal of the research is to use combinatorial structures and methods in
order to perform computations in algebra (more specifically, representation
theory), geometry, topology, and number theory; hidden connections between
various areas are also revealed in this process. Combinatorics studies various
discrete structures (such as permutations, partially ordered sets, and graphs),
which are well suited for encoding complex mathematical objects and for the
related computations. Representation theory is a fundamental tool for studying
symmetry, by realizing the elements of abstract groups/algebras as linear
transformations (of some vector spaces). The PI studies representations of Lie
algebras and quantum groups, which have many applications to physics, such as
calculating the probability of a particle system being in a given state at a
particular time. In geometry, the PI focuses on Schubert calculus, which has its
origins in enumerative geometry (e.g., counting the lines or planes satisfying a
number of generic intersection conditions), but is currently related to modern
areas such as quantum cohomology. Some of the models developed by the PI have
been or will be implemented in the open source computer algebra system SAGE.

The proposed research consists of the following main projects, to be pursued
with several collaborators. (1) The PI will extend his work on uniform
combinatorial models for Kirillov-Reshetikhin (KR) crystals of affine Lie
algebras from the single column KR crystals to the arbitrary ones. (2) Uniform
combinatorial formulas are sought for the (non-metaplectic and metaplectic)
Iwahori Whittaker functions, which are a basic tool in the theory of automorphic
forms. Connections with Schubert calculus will also be investigated. (3) The
combinatorics of the geometric Satake correspondence (realizing geometrically
the irreducible representations of reductive groups) is studied via a
combinatorial decomposition of Lusztig's q-analogue of the Weyl character. (4)
In Schubert calculus, the PI has several projects related to various
cohomologies of generalized flag varieties. In particular, an extension of
Schubert calculus beyond K-theory is pursued based on the so-called Kazhdan-
Lusztig Schubert classes in hyperbolic cohomology (which gives a stalk version
of the elliptic cohomology of Ginzburg-Kapranov-Vasserot); these classes were
defined by the PI in previous joint work.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
