
* 1855542
* Extremal Problems on Graphs and Hypergraphs
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/01/2019,05/27/2020
* Tao Jiang,OH,Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2023
* USD 100,408.00

Fast technological developments have necessitated our efforts to understand
large complex networks, such as the internet. Questions studied in this project
are of the general theme: what kind of local substructures are forced to emerge
when a network/system is dense enough? Finding solutions to these problems will
allow us to perform tasks on large networks more efficiently and will yield
applications in areas such as computer science, coding theory, and information
theory. The specific problems studied fall into the realm of extremal
combinatorics: a study of discrete mathematical objects under various local
constraints. In recent decades, extremal combinatorics has witnessed significant
developments thanks to both practical problems arising from applications and an
infusion of ideas and tools from various other branches of mathematics such as
probability, algebra, geometry and analysis. For dense systems, a well-developed
method called the regularity method allows one to partition a system into well-
behaved uniform pieces. However, for sparser systems, no such universally
applicable tools exist. This project aims at developing more universal tools for
sparse systems through the study of supersaturation of substructures and through
finding effective applications of the sparse regularity method. The problems
pursued in the project are suitable for graduate students and early career
mathematicians whom the PI will actively engage.

The project focuses on Turan type extremal problems, in which we want to
determine how dense a system can be when certain sub-configurations are
forbidden. These problems are central to the development of extremal
combinatorics. For graphs, the problem is well-solved when the forbidden
subgraph is non-bipartite (i.e. not 2-colorable). When the forbidden subgraph is
bipartite, the problem becomes more intractable due to the host graph being
sparse. Much effort in developing this important field is driven by several
general conjectures of Erdos and Simonovits, particularly the two so-called
Turan exponents conjectures. In a recent breakthrough, Bukh and Conlon solved
one of the two conjectures, while the one for single bipartite graphs is wide-
open. The PI and his collaborators made initial progress on this second
conjecture through the so-called supersaturation approach. The idea is to use
supersaturation of certain subgraphs together with local constraints of the host
graph to build the forbidden subgraph once the host graph is too dense. This
method has the potential of being developed into a general tool to tackle Turan
type extremal problems in the sparse setting. The PI looks to fully develop this
method and make further progress on the Turan exponent conjecture. Another aim
of the project is to find effective ways to apply the sparse regularity method
for deterministic Turan type problems in the sparse setting. A third set of
problems the PI will pursue are extremal problems on cycles in graphs and
hypergraphs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
