
* 1855804
* Collaborative Research: Catalan Function and Schubert Calculus
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/01/2019,07/27/2021
* Jennifer Morse,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 195,000.00

Combinatorics is an area of mathematics concerned with analyzing, organizing,
and optimizing over discrete data. It is a fundamental tool in many scientific
areas such as genomics, computer science, statistics, and physics. This project
will develop combinatorial methods for attacking problems in algebra, geometry,
and symmetric function theory, an area with applications to probability and
statistical mechanics. A mutually beneficial component is the further
development of the SAGE open-source mathematics software, a crucial tool for
this investigation.

This project spans combinatorial problems in representation theory, algebraic
geometry, and physics. The inspiration comes from constructions such as tableaux
and Bruhat posets which lie at the heart of classical mathematics such as
Schubert calculus and the representation theory of the complex linear group.
Fundamental objects in our investigations are the Schur functions and
generalizations known as k-Schur functions, which are closely tied to (affine)
Schubert calculus. This project will capitalize on PIs' recent work connecting
k-Schur functions with certain Catalan symmetric functions to solve problems
involving Macdonald polynomials, parabolic Hall-Littlewood polynomials, Gromov-
Witten invariants, and the co(homology) and K-theory of affine Grassmannians.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
