
* 1855726
* Polytopes and Real Tropical Geometry
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 08/01/2019,08/03/2021
* Josephine Yu,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 212,790.00

Polynomial (algebraic) equations and inequalities are ubiquitous in all areas of
mathematics, sciences, and engineering, where it is interesting to ask: Are
there any solutions? How many? What is the shape of the space of all solutions?
What is the optimal solution? The answers depend on the chosen number system ---
whether we consider whole, rational, real, or complex numbers; positive or
negative numbers; and so on. Tropical geometry arises by considering algebraic
equations and inequalities over the tropical (max-times) algebra where addition
of two real numbers is replaced by taking their maximum. The tropical equations
are easier to solve, and surprisingly, some geometric features of the solution
set over real or complex numbers can be computed from the solution set over the
tropical numbers. This project aims at developing the tropical geometry for real
algebraic geometry (which studies the geometry of algebraic equations and
inequalities over real numbers) and polytope theory (which studies discrete
properties of linear equations and inequalities). Applications include
development of new computational tools for algebraic computations and
optimization, which can be used to solve a variety of problems arising from
statistics, economics, and engineering. As part of this award the PI will also
mentor students, and will continue her outreach efforts as well as her work in
promoting inclusiveness and equity in the mathematical sciences.

During the last decade tropical geometry has grown into a powerful tool in
combinatorics, particularly in matroid theory, and in algebraic geometry,
particularly in log geometry, analytic geometry, and computational geometry. The
project will solve combinatorial problems in three research directions at the
intersection of polyhedral, real, and tropical geometry, with an emphasis on
combinatorial theory. 1. On deformations of polytopes. Some classical problems
and constructions will be studied using tropical geometry. The focus is on
zonotopes and generalized permutohedra. 2. On real tropicalizations of
semialgebraic sets. Foundations of real algebraic geometry will be developed.
Important examples arise from combinatorics and optimization, such as oriented
matroids, hyperbolic varieties, and the cone of non-negative polynomials. 3. On
the relationship between algebraic matroids and Chow polytopes. The proposed
research will give a better understanding of these classical constructions. The
proposed work on polytopes has applications in statistics, in particular causal
inference, and the work on real tropical geometry has applications in polynomial
optimization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
