
* 1855136
* Codes from Curves: Structure, Decoding, and Modern Applications
* DMS,Comm & Information Foundations, Combinatorics, Secure &Trustworthy Cyberspace
* 08/01/2018,07/09/2019
* Gretchen Matthews,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2023
* USD 216,000.00

This award supports research into algebraic coding theory. The large volume of
data generated today motivates the need for distributed storage systems which
can provide long-term storage of data with highly reliable retrieval and
availability of information to users. A distributed storage system consists of a
network of storage nodes. A stored file may be retrieved by accessing these
nodes. In such a system, individual nodes may be unreliable; for instance, they
may become unavailable due to routine maintenance. For this reason, how
information is stored across the network is highly relevant. The goal is to
create a storage system that allows for recovery of lost data while limiting
both network traffic and the number of disks accessed. This project addresses
the problem by appealing to the underlying structure of a family of error-
correcting codes defined using algebraic geometry. The codes have robust
structure that yields powerful local properties and potential to balance storage
overhead, reliability, network traffic, and repair bandwidth. This project
considers the use of codes obtained via algebraic geometric constructions in
highly relevant applications. The following problems will be studied: coding for
distributed storage via algebraic geometric and combinatorial points of view,
with the goals of minimizing node access and repair bandwidth; and explicit
construction of locally correctable codes, quantum codes, and secret sharing
schemes using algebraic geometric tools. Code structure will be explored, and
decoding codes which are directs sum may be handled by decoding or repair within
its factors. Full use will be made of the automorphism group of the code as well
as natural nested structures inherited from the underlying algebraic geometry.
Much of the work in this proposal is focused on algebraic geometric
constructions utilized in situations where limiting network traffic in the
decoding process is desirable; the aim is to accomplish this by capitalizing on
the natural underlying structure of algebraic geometric codes rather than
appealing exclusively to locality. In doing so, the performance guaranteed by
the code construction is maintained (meaning code parameters do not suffer from
local requirements) while making the codes more amenable to current
applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
