
* 1855135
* Geometry of Cluster Algebras
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 08/01/2019,05/20/2019
* David Speyer,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 240,000.00

Cluster varieties are certain geometric spaces of parameters; certain functions
of those parameters form so-called cluster algebras. These have found
applications throughout mathematics and mathematical physics. This project
proposes to study the geometry of cluster algebras in two senses. The first is
to apply tools from algebraic geometry to the study of cluster varieties. This
will hopefully enable us to understand the structure of integrals computed on
cluster varieties, which are common in applications to particle physics. The
second sense is to describe cluster varieties using the geometry of reflection
groups. These are the symmetries formed by reflections over collections of
mirrors. Such connections are already well known for finite reflection groups,
but the typical cluster variety should be related to the properties of infinite
reflection groups, and these are still very poorly understood.

More precisely, the first project is to compute the mixed Hodge structure on the
cohomology of cluster varieties. This is joint work with Thomas Lam. In previous
work, the PI and his collaborator have discovered a "curious Lefschetz symmetry"
in these mixed Hodge structures. They intend to build a spectral sequence to
help compute these mixed Hodge structures, and they intend to study connections
between these computations, rational Catalan theory and character varieties. The
second project has as its ultimate goal describing cluster fans and cluster
complexes in terms of infinite Coxeter groups. Nathan Reading and the PI
previously did this for cluster varieties of finite type, which corresponded to
finite Coxeter groups, and partially succeeded in doing so in general. The
obstacle to further progress was that they needed a lattice into which they
could embed an infinite Coxeter group; in the finite case, the Coxeter group
itself is such a lattice. The current project, joint with Nathan Reading and
Hugh Thomas, proposes to solve this problem by using ideas from the
representation theory of quivers. They also intend to find combinatorial models
of these lattices, and hope to eventually find applications to cluster
varieties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
