
* 1855536
* Combinatorics of Skew Tableaux and Flow Polytopes
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/01/2019,05/27/2021
* Alejandro Morales,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 167,612.00

Enumerative combinatorics is an area of mathematics that studies counting finite
objects and has powerful applications in numerous areas of math and science
including representation theory, geometry, probability, statistical mechanics,
and theoretical computer science. Two important questions in combinatorics that
are of interest in computer science, algebra and optimization are how many ways
are there to order objects/tasks with certain constraints and to transport goods
through a network. This research studies special cases of these two problems
using two fascinating mathematical objects called partially ordered sets and
polytopes. The topics of this project are accessible to students and the project
includes collaboration with students. Also, the objects studied in the project
can be visualized and will be disseminated through videos, student lectures, and
STEM outreach activities. Partially ordered sets are fundamental objects in
combinatorics and computer science. A measure of the complexity of a finite
poset with is its number of linear extensions: the number of orderings of its
elements compatible with the order of the poset. The first part of this project
studies linear extensions for certain families of partial orders that appear in
algebraic combinatorics and can be computed efficiently like posets of (skew)
Young diagrams and trees (not necessarily rooted). The tools used include new
positive formulas coming from geometry to count skew Young tableaux and
determinantal identities for counting linear extensions of trees. The second
part of the project studies flow polytopes of graphs or networks and the
volumes, the number of lattice points and triangulations of these polytopes.
This project has two main goals. The first one is to compute the Ehrhart series
of flow polytopes using new objects that encode the volume of these polytopes.
The second goal is to study a phenomenon that flow polytopes share with another
family of polytopes called generalized permutahedra relating the volume of a
polytope with the number of lattice points of a related polytope.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
