
* 1855635
* Methods in Extremal Combinatorics
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/01/2019,05/24/2019
* Jacob Fox,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

The PI will study fundamental problems in combinatorics. Previous work on these
problems has led to a wide range of applications and the development of powerful
methods which have been used in many branches of mathematics and computer
science. For example, probabilistic methods were developed to estimate Ramsey
numbers and have had a tremendous influence on theoretical computer science,
such as in the design of randomized algorithms. As another example, the
regularity method led to the celebrated Green-Tao theorem on arithmetic
progressions in primes. It is expected that further work on these problems will
lead to new methods and applications.

The PI will focus on using and further developing methods to solve problems in
extremal combinatorics. Examples of these techniques are the regularity method,
the polynomial method, dependent random choice, and embedding techniques. The
first area of focus in this project concerns Szemeredi's regularity method.
Within this area, one of the main goals of this project is to obtain new bounds
on the triangle removal lemma and its variants. The second area of focus in this
project is estimating Ramsey numbers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
