
* 1855723
* Problems in Extremal Combinatorics and Finite Geometry
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 08/01/2019,11/06/2020
* Robert Coulter,DE,University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 210,000.00

The PI will develop algebraic tools for solving problems in extremal
combinatorics and finite geometry, which are two important subareas of
combinatorics. Combinatorics is an area of mathematics primarily concerned with
properties of finite structures. It is closely related to many other areas of
mathematics and has many applications ranging from logic to statistical physics,
from evolutionary biology to computer science, etc.

This project will focus on three types of problems in finite geometry and
extremal combinatorics. The PI intends to give improved upper bounds on the
sizes of partial spreads, partial ovoids, and 1-systems in some classical polar
spaces by using matrix rank argument. These bounds in turn will lead to non-
existence proofs of ovoids in certain classical polar spaces. The Erdos-Ko-Rado
theorem is a cornerstone in extremal combinatorics. Generalizations of the
Erdos-Ko-Rado theorem hold for many different objects that have a notion of
intersection. The PI will consider Erdos-Ko-Rado type problems for permutation
groups. In the third part of the project, the PI will investigate constructions
of difference sets, strongly regular Cayley graphs and related geometric
substructures in classical polar spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
