
* 1855265
* Texas-Oklahoma Representations and Automorphic Forms Conference Series
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 02/15/2019,05/19/2021
* Kimball Martin,OK,University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 01/31/2024
* USD 16,000.00

This award supports participation in three meetings of the Texas-Oklahoma
Representations and Automorphic Forms (TORA) conference series. The tenth
meeting of the series will be held at the University of North Texas in Denton,
TX, on April 5-7, 2019. Detailed information is available on the TORA X webpage:
http://www.math.unt.edu/~richter/TORA/TORA10.html . The subsequent two
conferences in the series are scheduled at Oklahoma State University in
Stillwater, OK in Spring 2020 and at the University of Oklahoma in Norman, OK in
Spring 2021, respectively. Each TORA conference will feature three invited
plenary speakers from outside the Texas-Oklahoma region: two prominent senior
researchers and one promising junior mathematician. In addition, regional
graduate students and researchers will present their work. These weekend
conferences will provide valuable opportunities for collaboration and
interaction among the students and researchers in the region specializing in
number theory, automorphic forms, and representation theory.

The interplay between automorphic forms and representation theory has recently
seen several exciting new developments, which also fuel applications to several
other fields. These developments include endoscopic classification of
representations of orthogonal and symplectic groups and a proof of
classification for classical groups that extends to covering groups. The TORA
conference series has been successful in bringing together researchers working
in automorphic forms and representation theory from the region and beyond, as
well as their students, and in propelling innovation and collaboration. TORA
X-XII will continue this success in collaborations and exchanges not only
between institutions, but also among mathematical areas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
