
* 1900396
* Branched Galois Covers of Curves: Lifting and Reduction
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2018,12/07/2018
* Andrew Obus,NY,CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* michelle manes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 28,786.00

This research project concerns algebraic geometry, the study of systems of
polynomial equations in many variables. The project focuses on equations
formulated in characteristic p for some prime number p. The "characteristic p
world" is one where, every time you take p steps forward, you wind up back where
you start. Far from being esoteric, such mathematical systems describe the
procession of the days of the week (p = 7), the fundamentals of computer
architecture (p = 2), and also the setting for important cryptosystems.
Algebraic geometry in characteristic p is the study of geometric objects
("varieties") given by solutions to polynomial equations in this setting. This
project investigates the relationship between varieties in characteristic p and
in characteristic zero ("standard" algebraic geometry), with the goal of
shedding light on both worlds. Graduate students will take a major part in the
research project. The research will be complemented by educational activities
involving the undergraduate math club.

The first part of this research project is devoted to understanding when
branched Galois covers of curves lift from characteristic p to characteristic
zero, and to obtaining information about the geometry and arithmetic of the
lifts. In particular, the project aims to obtain a classification of the so-
called "local Oort groups" and "weak local Oort groups". The second part of the
project involves analyzing integral models of Galois covers of curves over
p-adic fields. New tools involving deformation data shed light on stable models
of Galois covers of curves with complicated Galois groups. These tools will be
exploited further in order to understand stable models of Galois covers as
explicitly as possible.
