
* 1900743
* Polylogarithms, Motives, L-Functions, and Quantum Geometry of Moduli Spaces
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2019,05/30/2019
* Alexander Goncharov,CT,Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2023
* USD 315,000.00

This project concerns research at the boundary of Number Theory and Algebraic
Geometry and extends to several other branches of mathematics. In particular it
concerns work on polynomial equations and their solutions. Associated to the
solutions of a collection of polynomial equations is a mathematical object,
their zeta function. This research will investigate a deep collection of
conjectures concerning these zeta functions, made by Alexander Beilinson, Don
Zagier and others 30-40 years ago. These investigations also have consequences
for theoretical Physics. Another aspect of the project is that it will support
the training of graduate students in this area of research.

Any system of polynomial equations with integral coefficients gives rise to a
function of one complex variable, the Zeta Function Z(s). It encodes in a very
mysterious way the most important characteristics of the space of solutions. In
particular, the special values of the zeta function Z(s) at the integral values
of s should be expressed as periods, that is integrals of certain specific type.
The PI is going to study the special values of the zeta functions, relating them
to the very classical mathematical objects, going back to Euler - the classical
polylogarithm functions, which generalize the logarithm function. The technique
the PI is using came from several parts of Mathematics and Mathematical Physics,
such as the theory of motives, algebraic K-theory on one hand, and cluster
varieties and their quantization on the other. The very existence of deep
connections between polylogarithms and cluster varieties is surprising. It will
have many applications far beyond Algebraic Geometry and Number Theory, e.g. in
the investigation of Scattering Amplitudes in Theoretical Physics. The PI will
continue his work on quantum geometry of various moduli spaces and their
applications in Algebraic Geometry, Mathematical Physics and Number Theory,
including the study of classical and quantum polylogarithms, special values of
L-functions, motivic Galois groups, Quantum Hodge Field Theory, cluster
structure and quantization of moduli spaces of local systems. The main
priorities of the project are the following: a) To use the relationship between
cluster varieties and polylogarithms to prove Zagier's conjecture on the special
values of the Dedekind zeta function at least for s=5, and relate the motivic
cohomology to the cohomology of the polylogarithmic motivic complexes. b) To
develop the theory of quantum multiple polylogarithms, providing a quantum
deformation of the periods of the prounipotent completion of the motivic
fundamental group of the punctured projective line. c) To give a comprehensive
treatment of the cluster structure of various moduli related to the moduli
spaces of G-local systems on surfaces. Apply this to quantization of these
moduli spaces, representation theory of quantum groups, mirror symmetry and
Mathematical Physics. d) Develop Quantum Hodge Field Theory. Its tree level
gives a Feynman integral approach to Hodge theory. Derive it as a Hodge-
theoretic analog of Chern-Simons theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
