
* 1901791
* RUI: Harmonic Maass Forms, Mock Modular Forms, and Quantum Modular Forms: Theory and Applications
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2019,06/02/2021
* Amanda Folsom,MA,Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2022
* USD 252,174.00

This is an RUI award in the area of number theory, one of the oldest branches of
pure mathematics, which continues to be actively and extensively researched
today. The P.I. will primarily study functions which are natural relatives to
modular forms called mock modular and quantum modular forms, and harmonic Maass
forms. Modular forms are among the most fundamental objects in the area of
number theory in mathematics. For example, they are central to the Riemann
Hypothesis (1859), so significant a conjecture that the Clay Mathematics
Institute is offering one million dollars to anyone who can solve it. Major
developments in the theory of modular forms were also crucial to the 1995 proof
of Fermat's Last Theorem (1637), a conjecture which defeated mathematicians for
358 years. Beyond number theory, modular forms also yield applications to the
diverse areas of combinatorics, mathematical physics, cryptography, and more.
The newer related theories of harmonic Maass forms and mock modular forms have
evolved substantially over the last 10-15 years, and have opened the door to
many new applications and significant results; a comprehensive theory is still
lacking, however. Moreover, within the last few years, the relatively new
subject of quantum modular forms has shown intriguing connections to other areas
including topology, mathematical physics, representation theory, combinatorics,
and more.

The P.I. will study the theory and applications of harmonic Maass forms, mock
modular forms, quantum modular forms and related functions. An overarching
question is to understand the various roles played by the holomorphic parts of
harmonic Maass forms and related automorphic objects in mathematics and number
theory. Methods include tools from the theory of harmonic Maass forms, aspects
of the developing theory of quantum modular forms, transformation and other
properties of mock modular and mock Jacobi forms, zeta functions, analytic
properties of Mordell and Eichler integrals, theta functions, and combinatorial
q-hypergeometric series. The relatively new subject of quantum modular forms in
particular has shown rich connections to other areas including harmonic Maass
forms, Eichler integrals, radial limits and mock modular forms, combinatorics,
partial theta functions, Jacobi forms, topology, and vertex algebras, many of
which are included within the scope of this proposal. Some projects within this
RUI proposal are specifically designed for undergraduate research. Undergraduate
research mentoring and training, and (expository) writing for broad mathematical
audiences, are also components of this proposal.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
