
* 1901867
* Explicit Galois Deformation Theory, Modular Forms, and Iwasawa Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2019,06/16/2021
* Preston Wake,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 08/31/2023
* USD 141,871.00

Any scientific effort at classification proceeds in two steps: first, classify
the most basic objects, and, second, classify the different ways the basic
objects can be combined to form more complex objects. For example, in the
classifications of molecules in chemistry, the most basic objects are the
chemical elements appearing on the periodic table, and the combinations are the
various bonds that can form between them. In algebraic number theory, the
subject of this project, the goal is to classify algebraic structures called
Galois representations, which capture the symmetries of solutions to
"Diophantine equations," polynomial equations where we seek solutions among the
integers. The basic objects are called "irreducible," and the ways they can be
combined are called "extensions." There is a very rich theory of extensions even
between relatively simple irreducible pieces. In this project, the PI aims to
establish instances of conjectures that parameterize the structure of these
extensions by objects coming from other areas of mathematics, including analysis
and geometry. The guiding principle comes from deformation theory: starting with
the simplest possible extension between two irreducibles, if there are many ways
to deform it, then there must be many other extensions, whereas if it is more
rigid, the structure of extensions is simpler. When explicit deformations can be
found, this gives information about extensions. Deformation theory is crucial in
modern number theory and played a central role in Andrew Wiles's proof of
Fermat's Last Theorem.

In this project, the extension groups to be analyzed are Selmer groups. The PI
will develop techniques for studying the deformation theory of reducible
representations by systematically using pseudorepresentations. In this case,
explicit deformations come from congruences between Eisenstein series and
cuspidal modular forms. Analysis of deformations leads to results relating the
size of Selmer groups to special values of L-functions, as predicted by the
Bloch-Kato conjectures. Of particular interest are refined conjectures, such as
Sharifi's conjecture, which extract finer information about Selmer groups from
more delicate properties of congruences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
