
* 1901642
* Algebraic Cycles and L-Values
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2019,06/06/2022
* Wei Zhang,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2024
* USD 496,000.00

Finding solutions in integers or rational numbers of polynomial equations in
several variables dates back to Diophantus in the 3rd century. This central
subject in mathematics has seen contributions made by many well-known
mathematicians including Fermat, Euler, and Gauss. Modern study of Diophantine
equations in the early 20th century started with the theory of quadratic forms
by Hilbert, followed by the remarkable discovery of the local-to-global
principle of Hasse and Minkowski. Weil carried the idea of Hasse-Minkowski
further, incorporating the idea of Riemann zeta function, to define what is now
called Hasse-Weil zeta function, which is built up on the numbers of solutions
of polynomial equations in the much simpler setting of modular arithmetic. Can
one recover to a certain extent the integral or rational solutions from the
Hasse-Weil zeta function (and hence from the solutions in modular arithmetic)?
In the 1960s, based on computational experiment, Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer
conjectured that, for a class of polynomial equations (corresponding to elliptic
curves), the vanishing of the Hasse-Weil zeta function at the center of its
symmetry reveals the existence of infinitely many solutions. This research
project aims to deepen the understanding of Diophantine equations in the
direction pioneered by the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer (B-SD) conjecture.

The project is to study rational algebraic cycles (a natural high dimensional
generalization of the concept of rational solutions to Diophantine equations)
and their connection to the special values of L-functions over both functional
fields and number fields. The theorems of Gross-Zagier and of Kolyvagin proved
the B-SD conjecture when the analytic rank of the Hasse-Weil L-function of an
elliptic curve is at most one. One of the PI?s goals is to establish the same
type of results in certain high dimensional cases: the case of the Gan-Gross-
Prasad cycles from the product of unitary Shimura varieties, and the new case
arising from a symmetric pair of reductive groups. This would establish new
cases of conjectures of Beilinson, Bloch, and Kato. Another goal of the project
is to study special cycles on the moduli space of Shtukas, which is likely to
shed light on the B-SD conjecture over function fields. The methods in the
project are from the theory of automorphic L-functions and of relative trace
formula, algebro-geometric technique for cycles and moduli spaces, and
techniques from harmonic analysis and representation theory of reductive groups
over local fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
