
* 1901950
* Sums of Squares: From Algebraic Geometry to Extremal Combinatorics and Quantum Entanglement
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2019,06/26/2019
* Grigoriy Blekherman,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2023
* USD 176,000.00

This project is in the area of applied algebraic geometry, and lies at the
intersection of several different areas: algebraic geometry (real and complex),
combinatorics (graph density inequalities) and theoretical physics (quantum
entanglement). The thread linking these areas together is sum of squares
approximation to nonnegative polynomials, which additionally has extensive
applications in optimization and theoretical computer science. The study of
nonnegativity and its relation with sums of squares is one of the basic
challenges of real algebraic geometry, yet there is an emerging tight connection
of these questions with algebraic geometry over complex numbers. The PI and
students supported by the grant will investigate the computational power of the
sums of squares method, while pursuing applications in theoretical physics,
combinatorics and optimization, and connections with complex algebraic geometry.
Connections between mathematics, engineering and natural sciences enrich all
sides by bringing new types of questions and directions of research. This work
is firmly aligned with Quantum Leap, one of the NSF's 10 Big Ideas.

The study of nonnegativity and its relation with sums of squares is one of the
basic challenges of real algebraic geometry. Sums of squares methods found
applications in many diverse areas, such as optimization, physics and computer
science. Convex duality connects nonnegative polynomials to truncated moment
problems of real analysis. Quantum entanglement detection can be stated as a
symmetric truncated moment problem on a semialgebaric set in some cases. Within
extremal combinatorics the sum of squares approach was used to prove graph
density inequalities, which address so-called Turan problems. A natural
approach, generalizing questions of global nonnegativity, is to consider sums of
squares and nonnegative forms on a real projective variety. There is an emerging
understanding that sums of squares questions are intimately related to
classically studied properties, such as the minimal free resolution of the
coordinate ring of the variety. The PI and students supported by the grant will
investigate several directions for further research: connections between the
study of sums of squares on a variety and the properties of its free resolution,
degree bounds for rational sums of squares representations on real projective
varieties, limitations of sums of squares method in extremal combinatorics,
using non-sum-of-squares certificates of nonnegativity in proving graph density
inequalities, and effects of symmetry on sums of squares relaxations of
nonnegativity with applications to quantum entanglement detection.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
