
* 1901745
* Restriction Problems in Representation Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2019,06/21/2019
* Gordan Savin,UT,University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2023
* USD 236,001.00

A central theme in this project is Langlands program, which is a surprising
mixture of analysis on groups and number theory. A basic example is the Fourier
expansion of a function on the circle as a sum of trigonometric functions. The
circle is a very symmetric object. We can rotate it for any angle without
changing its shape. Rotations of a circle form what is called in mathematics a
group of transformations, or simply a group. Every function on the circle has a
Fourier expansion in which it is written as a sum of trigonometric functions.
Trigonometric functions are the simplest functions on the circle, and so the
analysis of functions on the circle, or periodic functions, is reduced to
trigonometric functions. It has been known for over a century that Fourier
expansions and their generalizations carry significant number theoretic
information. Motivated by this example, over the past fifty years a large class
of problems has been unified in a scheme known as the Langlands program. Roughly
speaking, the goal is to decompose any function on a group as a sum of the
simplest possible functions. This decomposition problem is the main theme of
this project. This project will include training of graduate students.

More specifically the main goal of this project is to complete the Langlands
classification for the group G2. This group was discovered by Eugene Dickson and
it has been found to play an important role in physics and string theory. The
principal tool employed in this research is the theory of exceptional theta
correspondences that was developed by the PI in previous work. Applications of
the exceptional theta correspondence to dual pairs of real groups and to
supercuspidal representations of p-adic groups will developed as well. This
project will include training of graduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
