
* 1901810
* Representation Theory and Integrable Systems
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2019,05/15/2019
* Evgeny Mukhin,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2020
* USD 20,000.00

The international conference "Representation theory and integrable systems" will
take place at ETH Zurich August 12-16, 2019. There will be twenty invited
lectures by renowned experts, contributed talks by younger faculty, and a number
of graduate student presentations. The goal of the conference is to study the
recent advances in the area in the title and to educate the younger researchers.
This award will fund participation of US scientists in this conference, with
priority given to recent PhDs and underrepresented minorities, so they can share
their research and learn about the new ideas in the field.

Quantum integrable systems are large families of commuting operators
(Hamiltonians) acting on a vector space. Such families naturally appear in the
representation theory of reductive Lie algebras and their corresponding quantum
groups. The main goal is to study the spectra of the Hamiltoninians. It turns
out that this question has deep connections to various mathematical theories:
differential and difference equations, equivariant cohomology and K-theory, the
theory of special functions, combinatorics, and more. The conference will
provide a common venue for a diverse group of researchers who study the subject
using different methods with different goals to interact and share recent
advances. More details about the conference are available at
http://rtis2019.math.iupui.edu/ and http://www.nccr-
swissmap.ch/events/representation-theory-and-integrable-systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
