
* 1901853
* Permutation Patterns 2019-2021
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 04/15/2019,03/18/2020
* Lara Pudwell,IN,Valparaiso University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 30,000.00

The 17th International Conference on Permutation Patterns will be held at
University of Zurich in Switzerland from June 17 to June 21, 2019. The 18th
edition of the conference will be held at Valparaiso University (Valparaiso,
Indiana) from June 29 to July 3, 2020. The conference will provide a high
quality program of speakers in the area of permutation patterns with
opportunities for collaboration between junior and senior researchers, as well
as between participants from around the world. Each year the conference will
feature two plenary one-hour speakers and a number of contributed talks, each
thirty minutes long. Researchers will present their new results and there will
be time for open discussions to explore unsolved problems in the field. This
award supports travel to the conference by students and early career
mathematicians from the United States. This conference is part of a series of
annual conferences devoted to the area of permutation patterns. Ever since the
first conference in 2003, which was hosted by the University of Otago in New
Zealand, it has been held every year at different institutions around the world:
in North America, Europe, and Australasia.

The conference will feature current research in the area of permutation patterns
and its applications. Major themes in the conference include the structural
theory of pattern classes, asymptotic behavior of pattern classes, generalized
pattern avoidance, packing densities, and algorithmic and decidability problems.
Research in the area is influenced by theoretical computer science, and traces
its historical origins to the study of sorting machines. Combinatorial interest
in permutation patterns focuses on centrally important enumeration and packing
problems, for instance the extremal problem to determine how one pattern can be
embedded as often as possible in a permutation. The statistics of permutations
also enters into the picture, garnering attention from probabilists. The
conference is expected to have a wide impact on a variety of different research
areas in mathematics and computer science. The website for the 2019 conference
is at https://sites.google.com/view/permutation-patterns-2019/ and more
information about the conference series is available at:
https://blogs.valpo.edu/permpat/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
