
* 1901819
* Measuring Galois Actions and Moduli Spaces
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2019,07/12/2021
* Rachel Pries,CO,Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 07/31/2022
* USD 230,576.00

The field of arithmetic geometry focuses on the study of shapes (called
varieties) that are defined by polynomial equations and the number of solutions
to those equations. The PI will investigate properties of curves and related
varieties that are of particular interest to number theorists. The project
includes studying Fermat curves (connected to the celebrated proof of Fermat's
Last Theorem by Andrew Wiles), curves with a large set of symmetries (for which
the interplay between the arithmetic and the geometry provides a rich
structure), and arithmetic invariants of more general curves. The PI also
proposes two projects to train students in number theory. The first is to train
undergraduates at Colorado State University in mathematics research during
summer 2020. The second is to host a video-conference training seminar in
arithmetic geometry, with world-wide open access. This will train graduate
students in this field and build connections among researchers in this area. The
PI will continue to mentor and train students and to provide service to the math
community.

The PI plans to study 3 topics: (1) Galois cohomology of Fermat curves: The
proof of Fermat's Last Theorem determined all of the points on the Fermat curves
that are defined over the rational field Q. The PI proposes to study a map in
Galois cohomology that measures an obstruction for rational points and to show
that this obstruction does not vanish for the Fermat curves defined over
cyclotomic fields. (2) Special Shimura varieties for Jacobians and Pryms: For
curves of genus g < 3, the image of the Torelli morphism is open and dense in
the moduli space of abelian varieties of dimension g. The PI proposes to study
families of curves with extra automorphisms for which the image of the Torelli
morphism is open and dense in an associated Shimura variety; these families are
called special. The PI proposes to find and analyze more special families of
curves and Prym varieties. The PI also proposes a method to deduce results about
non-special families, working inductively starting with the input of special
families. (3) Variation of p-torsion invariants for Galois covers: An elliptic
curve defined over a finite field can be ordinary or supersingular, as studied
by Hasse, Deuring, and Igusa. For g > 1, there are invariants that generalize
the supersingular property for a curve of genus g or an abelian variety of
dimension g. For example, the Newton polygon characterizes information about the
Frobenius operator on the cohomology. Measuring these invariants is important
because they determine arithmetic and geometric information about the curve. It
is a tantalizing open question to determine which of these invariants occur for
curves. The PI proposes numerous projects about the Newton polygon and p-torsion
group scheme of Jacobians of curves.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
