
* 1901985
* L-Values, Special Cycles, and Euler Systems
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2019,07/28/2022
* Christopher Skinner,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2024
* USD 533,350.00

Number theory, especially the study of properties of integers and rational
numbers and the integer or rational solutions to equations, is one of the oldest
branches of mathematics. It is also a meeting ground for many other branches of
mathematics -- analysis, geometry, representation theory (to name a few) -- and
progress on the fundamental problems in number theory continues to reveal
surprising connections between these branches as well as new applications to
other areas. This project is focused on one of these fundamental problems and
aims to establish new instances of these connections.

The fundamental problem at the heart of this project is to determine the
arithmetic nature of the special values of L-functions of an algebraic variety
or motive and to relate these values to the orders of algebraic quantities
associated to the variety or motive (such as a Chow group, a class group, or a
Selmer group). An important and motivating instance is the celebrated Birch and
Swinnerton-Dyer Conjecture for elliptic curves, vastly generalized by the Bloch-
Kato Conjectures. This project will extend progress toward this fundamental
problem through further development of connections between: L-functions, Galois
representations, automorphic forms, representation theory, p-adic variation of
L-values and modular forms, special cycles (especially on Shimura varieties),
and special classes in Galois cohomology groups. This progress will unfold in
two primary directions: (A) the proof of new instances of the Bloch-Kato
Conjectures or their consequences (such as new cases of the p-part of the Birch
and Swinnerton-Dyer formula), and (B) the development of new tools and new
methods for proving results towards these conjectures (such as new applications
of representation theory to the existence Euler systems).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
