
* 1902213
* K3 Surfaces, Derived Categories, and Cubic Fourfolds
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2019,07/25/2019
* Nicolas Addington,OR,University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Algebraic geometry occupies a central place in modern mathematics, interacting
with number theory, representation theory, homotopy theory, complex analysis,
mathematical physics, and other fields. The PI studies concrete problems in
algebraic geometry using the derived category, which first appeared in the 1960s
as a bookkeeping device for homological algebra but which in recent decades has
emerged as a fundamental geometric invariant in its own right, and as a conduit
of ideas from string theory to algebraic geometry. This project contains a
strong component aimed to the training of students at different levels in
algebraic geometry.

The research program consists of three related projects. The first aims to unify
a number of examples of "K3 categories," sometimes billed as "non-commutated K3
surfaces," that arise in connection with birational and hyperkaehler geometry,
in a common construction. The second aims to show that a derived Torelli theorem
does not hold for Calabi-Yau threefolds, using an invariant called BCOV torsion
to distinguish between two spaces with the same Hodge structure. The third deals
with several questions of a more classical flavor about four-dimensional cubic
hypersurfaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
