
* 1902148
* Perfectoid Spaces, Diamonds, and the Langlands Program
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2019,08/05/2021
* Jared Weinstein,MA,Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 07/31/2022
* USD 260,000.00

The Langlands program is like a grand unified theory of numbers. It a suite of
conjectures which encompasses classical patterns in numbers (called "reciprocity
laws") discovered by Euler and Gauss, as well as modern results like Fermat's
Last Theorem. In brief, the Langlands program unites two sorts of symmetries:
one coming from continuous entities (think of all the ways a sphere might be
rotated in space), and the other from roots of algebraic equations (think of the
"plus or minus" in the quadratic formula). The PI proposes research on the
Langlands program, specifically the part dealing with the p-adic numbers, which
are the strange cousins of the real numbers. (The letter p here stands for a
prime number. The real numbers form a connected continuum, whereas the p-adic
numbers are totally disconnected, like infinite fractal dust.) The Langlands
program as it applies to the real numbers was worked out by Langlands himself,
while the p-adic story remains somewhat mysterious. The PI intends to contribute
to this portion of the Langlands program by studying the geometry of some
fascinating new structures discovered in the last several years, namely
perfectoid spaces and diamonds. These structures were invented by Peter Scholze,
who received the Fields Medal in 2018 for their discovery. The project also
supports work of the PI's graduate student, Maria Fernandez, on related topics.

Since their introduction around 2012, perfectoid spaces have had some unexpected
applications. One of these is Laurent Fargues' program to geometrize the
Langlands program over the p-adic numbers. That is, he has brought it in line
with the parallel program of geometric Langlands, which seems rather more
tractable. Inspired by Fargues' program, the PI has proved (in joint work with
Tasho Kaletha and David Hansen) a form of Kottwitz' conjecture on the cohomology
of Rapoport-Zink spaces, using a version of the Lefschetz fixed-point formula
which can apply to perfectoid spaces. This can be recognized as a geometric
manifestion of Langlands functoriality between a p-adic group and one of its
inner twists. The PI will expand these methods to apply to other sorts of
functorialities. There is a further project concerning the "smoothness" of
perfectoid spaces (a beautiful concept dating to 2016), and another on the
modularity of elliptic curves over function fields, which is joint with the PI's
graduate student.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
