
* 1902152
* Structure and Cohomology in Fusion Systems
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 08/01/2019,07/11/2019
* Justin Lynd,LA,University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2023
* USD 135,000.00

The investigator will study problems at the interface between finite group
theory and topology. Finite group theory is the study of the symmetry of finite
objects by algebraic means. While the project involves fundamental research,
group theory is applicable in many of the natural sciences where highly
symmetric objects are found, including in biology, chemistry, and physics, and
in the study of communication networks and cryptographic schemes. A finite
simple group is akin to an atom in that it cannot be broken down into smaller
groups. Each finite group of symmetries is made up of simple groups stacked on
top one another analogously to the way molecules are built out of atoms. One of
the premier mathematical achievements of the 20th century was the description
and classification of all the finite simple groups (CFSG). Its proof is however
long and difficult, currently spanning around 10,000-15,000 pages, and it is
desirable to have significantly simpler proofs. The PI will investigate this
problem by using strategies that come form topology, a branch of mathematics
that studies properties of objects that are invariant under continuous
transformations. One bridge between group theory and topology is given by the
classifying space of a group. When the group is finite, there is an associated
set of prime numbers, and both the group and its classifying space can be
studied "one prime at a time". This strategy has been abstracted into the notion
of a p-fusion system, the basic object of study.

The project arises out of two recent major developments in fusion systems: a
program for the classification of simple 2-fusion systems of component type
(CSFS) whose ultimate aim is to give a substantially simpler proof of the CFSG,
and the recent solution of the existence and uniqueness of centric linking
systems, which provide the bridge from fusion systems to topology. Both
developments are brought together by their connections with the cohomology of
various functors defined on the orbit category and other related categories. The
investigator will: (1) investigate fusion systems at the prime 2 whose linking
systems support a noninner rigid automorphism by using methods from the CSFS,
(2) work to find necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence and
uniqueness of centralizers of fusion subsystems through the definition and
computation of the cohomology of functors which obstruct internal rigid actions
on centric linking systems, and (3) work directly within the nearly-completed
CSFS to solve certain outstanding problems, and to generalize others for use in
related problems such as in (3). The three interrelated projects aim to gain a
better understanding of some aspect of the p-local structure of finite groups
and/or the homotopy theory of p-completed classifying spaces by exploiting their
interplay. Project (1) uses finite group theoretic methods to provide a better
understanding of the group of self-homotopy equivalences of the p-completed
classifying space of a finite group, while project (2) provides an application
of functor cohomology to the open problem of constructing centralizers. The
construction of centralizers is a fundamental problem with applications within
the CSFS, e.g. in the defining and understanding of standard subsystems of
fusion systems, and it also has potential applications to the open problem of
describing maps between different p-completed classifying spaces. Project (3)
sits within the CSFS proper, simultaneously supporting the goals in (1) and the
completion of the classification program. This project is jointly funded by the
Algebra and Number Theory program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
