
* 1902033
* Studies on Local Cohomology, Derivations, Integral Dependence, and Blowup Algebras
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2019,07/25/2019
* Claudia Polini,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

This project is in commutative algebra, but has also been inspired by algebraic
geometry. Systems of polynomial equations in several variables occur in many
applications in science and technology, for instance in engineering, computer
science, cryptography, coding theory, robotics, pattern recognition, and
theoretical physics. Commutative algebra and algebraic geometry are concerned
with the qualitative study of such systems of polynomial equations. This project
focuses on the algebraic approach. One of the goals of the project is to
understand the vectors that are tangent to solution sets of systems of
polynomial equations. Another objective is to find systems of polynomial
equations describing a given geometric object. The latter has applications to
computer graphics, algebraic statistics, and rigidity of structures. The PI
intends to involve undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral
fellows in her research. She will continue to organize national and
international meetings. Throughout her activities, the PI will continue to
promote underrepresented groups in mathematics.

The first objective of this research is to relate degrees of vector fields on
projective space to invariants of curves, or varieties, that they leave
invariant. This is a difficult problem that has been studied for over a century,
mainly from the point of view of complex analysis, dynamical systems, algebraic
and differential geometry. The PI will investigate this question using tools
from commutative algebra. The second objective is to find criteria for a variety
in projective space to be a set-theoretic complete intersection. When there is
only one non vanishing local cohomology module the PI believes that the property
of being a set-theoretic complete intersection is encoded in the structure of
this module. The third objective is to prove a numerical characterization of
integral dependence of modules using a notion of multiplicity that arises in
intersection theory. Theorems of this kind have a bearing on equisingularity
theory, in fact they lead to fiber-wise numerical conditions for a family of
analytic spaces to be Whitney equisingular, hence topologically trivial. The
last objective is to study the implicit equations defining the graph and the
image of rational maps between projective spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
