
* 1902116
* Studies in Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/15/2019,06/10/2021
* Melvin Hochster,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2022
* USD 269,766.00

The Principal Investigator will work on several questions in commutative algebra
and algebraic geometry. Algebraic geometry studies solutions of many polynomial
equations in many variables. Understanding this problem is of fundamental
importance in many sciences, in engineering, and in other disciplines as well.
It is often difficult to determine whether to expect any solution, finitely many
solutions, or infinitely many: in the last case one wants to know how many
degrees of freedom one has in describing the solutions. One can study the
solutions geometrically, or algebraically, by investigating certain functions on
the solution space that form what is called a commutative ring. This dual
perspective creates a close connection between commutative algebra and algebraic
geometry that is very valuable. The problems that will be studied are long
standing and of fundamental, central importance. The results obtained will be
disseminated by journal and book publications, lectures at conferences and
workshops, and via the internet. There is a strong educational component. The
principal investigator will continue to mentor graduate students, postdocs, high
school students through several programs that he has established over the years
with a particular attention to attracting students that underrepresented in the
mathematical sciences.

The Principal Investigator will continue exploring several long standing
questions in the theory of Noetherian rings. Tigran Ananyan and the PI have
proved Stillman's conjecture in all characteristics, but the bounds on
projective dimension and on other properties, such as numbers of generators of
ideals associated with primary decompositions, can certainly be improved, and
this problem will be studied. The PI will also study whether there is an
analogue of tight closure in mixed characteristic that has the certain standard
properties: both the usual colon-capturing and Dietz's version of this property,
the property that all ideals of regular rings are closed, persistence, and a
test element theory. It is the final two that appear to be most difficult. It is
expected that new methods from perfectoid geometry will be among the tools
needed. Jointly with Sema Gunturkun, the PI is studying the long standing
Eisenbud-Green-Harris conjecture on quadratic forms, which predicts minimum
values for the Hilbert functions of certain ideals. Jointly with Bhargav Bhatt
and Linquan Ma, the PI will continue to study the existence and properties of
lim Cohen-Macaulay sequences of modules. This work, as well as some other
asymptotic approaches, may resolve the long open question of whether Serre
intersection multiplicities are positive, in general, in the case of mixed
characteristic regular rings. Another direction for research includes the
finiteness of support and other properties of local cohomology, such as the
faithfulness of the highest non-vanishing local cohomology module over a local
domain with support in a specified ideal. The PI has a continuing project with
Jack Jeffries exploring the latter problem. A number of these problems are
intended for collaboration with graduate students and postdoctoral faculty.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
