
* 1902005
* Motivic Class Groups and Iwasawa Theory of Function Fields
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2019,06/16/2021
* Bryden Cais,AZ,University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2023
* USD 180,000.00

The study of the rational numbers and their generalizations (number fields) has
occupied mathematicians for thousands of years, and today is the principal
object of algebraic number theory. In the past century, giant leaps of
understanding have been made by exploring the deep analogy between number fields
and and other number systems (called "function fields in positive
characteristic") closely related to geometry. The deep relationship between
arithmetic and geometry allows the techniques, tools, and intuitions from one to
be applied with great effect to the other, leading to new and important
insights, results, and conjectures. The research of the PI will continue this
tradition and push the analogy in new directions.

The project will develop a new analogue of Iwasawa theory for function fields by
investigating the structure and growth of the p-divisible groups of the
Jacobians associated to a pro-p branched Galois tower of curves over a finite
field of characteristic p. These p-divisible groups break up into three pieces:
an etale part, a multiplicative part, and a local-local part. Using Dieudonne
theory and its relation to p-adic cohomology, the PI expects to prove under very
general hypotheses that the etale and multiplicative parts exhibit strikingly
regular and predictable behavior in any such tower. While the local-local piece
can in many ways be as wild as the imagination allows, the PI nonetheless
expects to uncover certain kinds of exceptionally regular behavior and to
formulate new conjectures in the spirit of classical Iwasawa theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
