
* 1902677
* Thirty-First Cumberland Conference on Combinatorics, Graph Theory and Computing
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 03/01/2019,04/06/2021
* Zixia Song,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 16,000.00

The 31st Cumberland Conference on Combinatorics, Graph Theory and Computing will
be held May 18-19, 2019 at the University of Central Florida in Orlando,
Florida. This is the latest in a series of conferences, usually held annually,
that provide a venue for students and researchers, particularly but not
exclusively from the southeastern United States, to discuss the latest advances
in discrete mathematics and computer science. Discrete mathematics is a rapidly
expanding field with applications in communication, network and information
science, life sciences and engineering. The conference will promote applications
of discrete mathematics in computer science and encourage participation by
students and groups underrepresented in mathematics. It provides a setting where
researchers at all levels can present their work, exchange information and
collaborate on solving problems. It strengthens the regional network of
researchers while connecting that network to broader national and international
communities.

The conference scope includes all areas of discrete mathematics. Four featured
internationally-known speakers will give 50-minute plenary presentations.
Estimated attendance is around 120 participants, and about 70 contributed
20-minute talks are planned. There will be a special focus on structural graph
theory, supported by two of the plenary speakers and a special session for
contributed talks. Abstracts from the conference will be available indefinitely
through a conference abstracts service. Funding from this award will support
travel, accommodation and meal expenses for the featured speaker from outside of
US, and other participants identified through a selection process. The selection
process will prioritize women, members of underrepresented minorities, people
with disabilities, early-career mathematicians, and researchers without federal
funding.

The conference has its own website https://sciences.ucf.edu/math/cumberland2018/
(to be updated).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
