
* 1904107
* Geometry of Langlands Duality
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2019,06/19/2019
* Ivan Mirkovic,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2023
* USD 255,883.00

The project is directed towards building ideas that are expected to underlie and
explain various duality phenomena in mathematics (the Langlands program) and
physics (gauge theory and string theory). In each case, "duality" means that one
phenomenon has two equally valid descriptions. However, at the current level of
understanding these seem unrelated. Two distinct descriptions of the same object
suggest that a more comprehensive framework would serve to give a conceptual
explanation of the observed dualities. The aim of this project is to develop
such a framework. The mathematical origin of these developments is the so called
Langlands program, which is the modern view on classical number theory. The
Langlands program functions as a bridge between mathematics (representation
theory, algebraic geometry, homotopy theory) and physics (gauge theory, string
theory). Graduate students will be involved in the research.

In more technical terms, this project will extend the formulation of the
geometric Langlands program from one dimension to arbitrary dimensions. Going
beyond dimension one requires a reformulation of the geometric Langlands program
that better matches physical theories in higher dimensions. The basis of this
project is the construction of a conjectural "inner cohomology in algebraic
geometry," including noncommutative coefficients. Here, "inner" means that the
values of this cohomology would be objects in derived algebraic geometry rather
than simply sets. As a consequence, geometric class field theory in arbitrary
dimension should be Poincare duality for this inner cohomology and the geometric
Langlands program should be an extension of Poincare duality to non-commutative
cohomology. A classical problem is that cohomology with coefficients in a non-
abelian group is not defined beyond degree two and does not have much content
beyond degree one. The point of view taken in this project is that higher
cohomology with coefficients in a reductive group can be defined as certain
local distributions on cohomology with coefficients in tori.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
