
* 1937241
* RTG: Research in Combinatorics
* DMS,WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI, Combinatorics
* 06/01/2020,03/11/2020
* Jozsef Balog,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,788,257.00

The Research Training Group (RTG) in Combinatorics at UIUC will establish a
number of activities involving researchers at all career stages ranging from
undergraduate students to senior faculty. The project takes advantage of the
combined strength and leadership of UIUC's faculty in multiple areas of a
venerable field. The RTG has five PIs (Balogh, Di Francesco, Kedem, Kostochka,
and Yong) and one senior personnel (Ford), which includes three speakers of the
International Congress of Mathematicians (ICM). The depth and breadth of
faculty, courses, and events at UIUC combinatorics is unique in the United
States, as it includes algebraic combinatorics, graph theory and additive number
theory. Thereby, students experience a broad range of education and options
before deciding upon on their thesis direction. This fundamentally and
positively affects recruitment and retention of domestic students, and in
particular women and underrepresented minorities (URM). This claim is supported
by a recent 2017 AMS award to the UIUC mathematics department as a whole. This
RTG award is the first for the UIUC mathematics department, and is therefore of
special impact. It tremendously strengthens UIUC's position to educate and train
US students overall. Given the importance and applicability of combinatorics, it
tangibly contributes to America's mathematical and scientific prominence. The
RTG will provide a unifying structure for the development of researchers and to
foster collaborations. Activities of the RTG include research workshops, new
research seminars, conferences, and undergraduate mentoring.

The strengths of UIUC combinatorics faculty are in two major areas: 1.
Probabilistic and Extremal Combinatorics (Balogh, Kostochka), and 2. Algebraic,
Geometric and Physical Combinatorics (Di Francesco, Kedem, Yong). All RTG
faculty apply their work to other STEM fields, specifically physics and
theoretical computer science. Ford (senior personnel) is a world leader in the
related area of additive number theory. The primary purpose of this RTG is to
support combinatorics graduate students. It funds conference travel for
undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdocs. The program will be
bolstered by a biannual combinatorics lecture series. More external contact will
come from four annual summer schools layered with related conferences (ALGECOM
and the Graduate Student Combinatorics Conference) organized by RTG faculty. The
RTG supports non-local participation of students and (especially early career)
faculty at RTG events. The award also vastly expands ICLUE (Illinois
Combinatorics Lab for Undergraduate Experience), which is a novel UIUC career-
long research and mentoring program. The RTG will hire four postdocs. These
postdocs will not only assist in planned activities but also benefit from the
intellectual environment offered by this research training group.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
