
* 1939600
* Workshop on Symmetric Spaces, Their Generalizations, and Special Functions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Combinatorics
* 04/01/2020,12/28/2022
* Siddhartha Sahi,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 03/31/2024
* USD 17,840.00

This award will support participation by U.S.-based mathematicians, especially
graduate students and other early-career researchers, in the upcoming
international workshop and conference on Symmetric Spaces, Their
Generalizations, and Special Functions, which will be held at the University of
Ottawa from May 14 until May 17, 2020. The goal of the workshop is to foster the
international collaboration of researchers in several areas connected to
representation theory and algebraic combinatorics, including Lie superalgebras,
quantized enveloping algebras, and algebraic combinatorics. The rationale for
this activity is recent advancements that indicate new links between the
aforementioned areas, and its goal is to investigate open problems that are
spawned by these advancements and examine new strategies for solving them. The
workshop will also have a substantial pedagogical component in the form of three
mini-courses that will cover background and recent exciting progress in its
focus areas. These mini-courses will be accessible for non-experts, including
graduate students and junior researchers.

Recent results hint at a new and promising connection between quantized
symmetric spaces and interpolation polynomials. A natural and important problem
that lies at the intersection of the aforementioned areas is to define and
investigate the properties of q-deformations of Capelli operators in a uniform
way. In addition, for (non-quantized) symmetric spaces of Lie superalgebras that
are associated to BC-type root systems, an analogous relation between invariant
differential operators and interpolation polynomials is yet to be established.
We hope that the conference will provide an environment for experts to exchange
their ideas for these interdisciplinary problems. The website for the workshop
is http://www.fields.utoronto.ca/activities/19-20/symmetric-spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
