
* 1945452
* CAREER: New Directions in p-adic Heights and Rational Points on Curves
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 01/15/2020,02/01/2023
* Jennifer Balakrishnan,MA,Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 12/31/2024
* USD 373,875.00

Determining whole number solutions to polynomial equations has been an active
area of study for at least two millennia. Nevertheless, many questions remain,
and these equations continue to be crucially important, as the techniques used
to study them have helped shape the foundation of modern cryptosystems. In 1922,
Louis Mordell conjectured that equations defining curves of genus at least 2
have only finitely many rational solutions. Gerd Faltings proved this in 1983,
but his proof does not explicitly yield the set of rational points on these
curves. Algorithmically determining this set is one of the most fundamental open
problems in number theory. Quadratic Chabauty is a new approach to determining
the set of rational points, and through a combination of theoretical and
computational strategies, the PI will give quadratic Chabauty algorithms to
determine rational points on new classes of curves. This project also includes
several educational and outreach components, including a collection of
undergraduate-focused workshops in Guam on the topic of computational tools,
aimed at broadening participation of traditionally underrepresented groups in
STEM. The PI will also co-organize a week-long summer program in mathematical
exploration and computation for high school students in the Boston area, as well
as a semester program at Mathematical Sciences Research Institute on Diophantine
geometry.

The main research themes are centered on algorithms for determining rational
points on curves of genus at least 2, using p-adic heights. They include the
following: using p-adic heights to produce a quadratic Chabauty algorithm for
modular curves, developing an elliptic quadratic Chabauty algorithm to study
twisted Fermat curves, and building infrastructure in Coleman integration and
p-adic heights in families. These new algorithms will be run on large databases
of curves, and the resulting data will be analyzed and shared with the
mathematical community. This has the potential to yield new insight into refined
hypotheses under which theorems can be proved, as well as more precise
conjectures to investigate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
