
* 1949369
* Support of US Participants in the Research Program: K-Theory, Algebraic Cycles and Motivic Homotopy Theory, Cambridge, UK.
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 01/01/2020,11/09/2022
* Roy Joshua,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 12/31/2023
* USD 30,000.00

This award provides support for US based participants to the K-Theory, Algebraic
cycles and Motivic Homotopy Theory research program which will be held at the
Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences. The program will likely
involve 180-250 participants including the ones participating only in the
workshops, of which we expect around 50 to be from the US, including a
significant number of junior participants (i.e., junior faculty, post-doctoral
candidates and advanced graduate students from across US universities). The
program hopes to involve as participants most of the world's experts in the
focused areas, including some from the US, as well as Europe and other parts of
the globe. Moreover, the Isaac Newton Institute located on the campus of
Cambridge University provides excellent additional resources. We expect this
program will provide an excellent opportunity for exchange of key scientific
ideas and provide stimulus for further progress in these areas, as such
participation in this program is likely to provide stimulus and opportunities
for further progress and breakthroughs to the US participants. A significant
aspect of the program is targeted toward junior participants: in addition to a
week-long introductory workshop, each of the three themed workshops will be
preceded by several talks of an introductory nature.

This is an exciting area with applications to several fields like Arithmetic
Geometry, Hodge theory and Mathematical Physics. A theme of this program is to
explore connections between the following areas:

* Algebraic K-theory, Motivic Cohomology and Motivic Homotopy Theory * Hodge
Theory, Periods, Regulators and Arithmetic Geometry * Mathematical Physics

K-theory, Algebraic cycles and Motivic homotopy theory are fields at the
confluence of studying algebraic varieties (including related subjects such as
Arakelov geometry) from a cohomological point of view. This is a broad area with
numerous deep inter-connections. This area has also seen some spectacular
advances in recent years with several of the important problems that remained
conjectures in the area finally resolved positively: for example, the Milnor and
the Bloch-Kato conjectures as well as the Lichtenbaum-Quillen conjectures have
been solved during the past 15 years, with the latter two solved during the past
7-8 years. The techniques developed for work on these conjectures have
stimulated and provided possible attacks on related conjectures. One primary
goal of this program is to bring together mathematicians working on different
aspects of this broad area for an extended period so as to promote an exchange
of ideas and stimulate further progress. Further details are available at the
program website: https://www.newton.ac.uk/event/kah

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
