
* 1953148
* Recent Advances and New Directions in the Interplay of Noncommutative Algebra and Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2020,02/07/2023
* Jian Zhang,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2023
* USD 30,000.00

This NSF award supports participation in the international conference ``Recent
Advances and New Directions in the Interplay of Noncommutative Algebra and
Geometry,'' which is planned for July 13?17, 2020, at the University of
Washington in Seattle, Washington. It is expected that 80?100 participants from
all over the world will attend. Mathematics is the study of patterns.
Frequently, such patterns are described via systems of equations. Systems of
polynomial-style equations and their solutions play a critical role in almost
every scientific field, such as statistical mechanics, elementary particle
physics, quantum mechanics, robotics, crystallography, and networking. Often,
the solutions cannot be found by experimentation, and often they are not numbers
but are functions (e.g., differential operators or matrices), and so, in
general, they do not commute. The field of noncommutative algebra is the science
behind seeking methods that find all solutions to any system of polynomial-style
equations in noncommuting variables, and the planned conference will focus on
recent research activities that use different types of geometric techniques in
noncommutative algebra. The conference will consist of survey talks, research
talks, a poster session, a career panel, a public lecture, and research
discussions. The research talks will feature 50-minute, 25-minute, and 10-minute
lectures in order to accommodate researchers at various career stages. The
10-minute talks and poster session will take place early in the conference in
order to facilitate maximal discussion time during the conference between early-
career researchers and senior researchers. Funding will be prioritized for
junior participants and for researchers from groups that are traditionally
under-represented in the mathematical sciences.

The purpose of the planned conference is to generate new research in
noncommutative algebra and related areas, while contributing to the development
of the research workforce in noncommutative algebra. This major international
conference will cover several topics of active current interest in
noncommutative algebra, with broad connections to combinatorics, geometry,
mathematical physics, number theory, and topology. It will emphasize recent
exciting developments and emerging future directions, particularly in such areas
as noncommutative algebraic geometry, Artin-Schelter regular algebras, Calibi-
Yau algebras, Hopf algebras and quantum groups, category theory, and homological
techniques. The conference will bring together the leading experts from
different specialties within noncommutative algebra, encouraging interactions
between participants from a broad range of perspectives and approaches. Further
information can be found at the conference website:
https://sites.google.com/view/ndna2020/home

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
