
* 1953946
* Analytic and Algebraic Methods in Discrete Geometry
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 06/01/2020,03/25/2020
* Zilin Jiang,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 04/30/2021
* USD 48,505.00

This award supports the PI's research in building mathematical tools to solve
combinatorial problems in Discrete Geometry. Discrete geometry studies
fundamental geometric objects, such as points, lines and circles, and their
combinatorial properties. Thus most combinatorial problems in Discrete Geometry
are quite visual and can be presented in a simple manner: What is the minimum
total width of strips that cover a unit disk in the plane? Or, what is the
maximum number of lines through the origin pairwise separated by the same angle?
In contrast to the simple appearances of these problems, many of these problems,
including the ones considered in this project, remain unsolved for an extended
period or have been partly solved only recently following great efforts. This
project aims to further develop the toolbox of available approaches, most of
which are analytic or algebraic in nature. Simultaneously, the project
integrates these research problems and themes into educational and outreach
activities that extend from the high school level to the graduate.

The first topic of this project concerns extensions and variations of Tarski's
plank problem: How to efficiently cover a convex body in the plane using planks?
Generalizations of Tarski?s plank problem are central to geometric analysis and
convex geometry, and continue to generate interest in the geometric and analytic
aspects of coverings of a convex body. The second topic concerns equiangular
lines ?- a collection of lines through the origin pairwise separated by the same
angle. Investigation of the equiangular lines problem turns out to be fruitful
and unearthed many challenging problems in algebraic graph theory. Solutions to
some problems have practical consequences in Operational Research, Quantum
Computation and Communication Theory. Previous foundational work, including some
done by the PI, has shown that tools and insights from Ramsey Theory, Extremal
Combinatorics, Probabilistic Methods, Spectral Graph Theory, Algebraic
Combinatorics, Topological Combinatorics, and Algebraic Geometry can be helpful
in solving the problems in this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
