
* 1953931
* Topological and Algebraic Combinatorics of Posets and Stratified Spaces
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/01/2020,06/27/2022
* Patricia Hersh,OR,University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

This project is in combinatorics, namely the area of math that provides the
theoretical underpinnings for computer science and also arises naturally in
other areas such as the study of DNA and RNA mutation in biology. This project
in particular aims to develop new ways to combine combinatorial techniques with
methods in topology. There is a rich tradition of such interactions that really
began to flourish starting in the 1970's, the starting point being the
observation that counting by inclusion-exclusion (namely counting things up via
Venn diagrams and related enrichments) may be accomplished topologically. The PI
has begun bringing more geometric topological tools to the mix in addressing
offshoot questions about rather mysterious spaces, including spaces of real-
valued matrices. Her techniques involve breaking the spaces into more manageable
pieces and analyzing structures on these spaces called partially ordered sets
(posets) for organizing the pieces, using geometric ideas to study how pieces
glue together. The new work will focus on spaces arising from electrical
networks, spaces coming from totally nonnegative matrices (i.e. matrices of real
numbers where all subdeterminants are nonnegative), generalizations of these,
and other related stratified spaces which seem to share important features also
making them seem likely amenable to somewhat the same type of analysis. In
addition to carrying out this research, the PI also will continue her efforts to
encourage and train young mathematicians, including members of underrepresented
groups, and to disseminate her results.

Expressed in somewhat more technical terms, the PI will study the combinatorial
and topological structure of partially ordered sets and of stratified spaces
related to electrical networks, topological and combinatorial questions related
to the Bruhat graph and generalizations of this, electrical analogues of subword
complexes and Kazhdan-Lusztig polynomials, subword complexes and their interior
dual block complexes and generalizations of these, fibers of important maps
seemingly sharing with each other key structures encapsulated in part via the
structure of subword complexes and generalizations thereof, as well as questions
about polytope diameter and complexity of the simplex algorithm for linear
programming approached via poset-theoretic methods. Other methods to be used
include shellability, the application of poset-theoretic results of Dyer, Brenti
and others as well as potential new extensions of these, methods the PI began to
develop in her work on regular cell complexes in total positivity, new
definitions suggested by the PI which she believes give helpful new perspective,
and the PI's new techniques for combining poset-theoretic methods with tools of
discrete geometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
