
* 1953929
* Matching Theory in Hypergraphs
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 08/01/2020,08/03/2020
* Shira Zerbib,IA,Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 139,993.00

Matching theory is an area in discrete mathematics that asks for the minimum
number of elements needed to intersect all the sets in a given family of sets.
Such a minimal set of elements is called a cover of the family. Many practical
problems can be formulated as questions about covers of families of sets that
arise in different contexts (for example, subscribers in a social network,
geographical areas, biological cells). An example from public health is: How
many medical clinics should be placed in a given state, and where, so that every
resident has a clinic within 50 miles of home? Here the sets in question are
disks of radius 50 miles centered at every household, and clinics are to be
placed in every point of a cover. As apparent from this example, the questions
studied in matching theory can be basic and intuitive, easily formulated, and
are combinatorial, or discrete, in flavor. Nevertheless, they are often
notoriously difficult to answer and require sophisticated tools from different
areas of mathematics (such as algebra, probability, and topology) for their
solution. This project focuses on developing improved methods (primarily
topological ones) to approach several fundamental open problems in matching
theory. As the methods developed come from other areas of mathematics, this
project also contributes to building bridges between different branches of
mathematics, making problems in one branch amenable to the tools of another. The
project involves a graduate student in the research. This project studies
matching theory in abstract finite hypergraphs, as well as hypergraphs arising
from geometrical structures, whose edges are (generally, infinite) sets in a
Euclidean space. Two intriguing longstanding conjectures on abstract hypergraphs
motivate this project: one (Gyárfás-Lehel) concerns covers of hypergraphs
consisting of cross-intersecting families of sets, and the other (Tuza) deals
with covers of hypergraphs of triangles in graphs. Both conjectures received
considerable attention over the years, mostly using elementary approaches, which
now seem insufficient for their solution. One goal of this project is to develop
new tools from other areas of mathematics for tackling these conjectures and
related problems. Hypergraphs arising from geometrical structures are of special
interest to researchers, as they appear in many different practical
applications; consequently, questions in matching theory of geometrical
hypergraphs have been widely studied (under different names) for decades. Within
this direction, the project focuses on a conjecture of Wegner on covers of
families of axis-parallel rectangles in the plane (and families of axis-parallel
boxes in higher dimensions). The second main goal of this project is to develop
a topological method in higher dimensions for the resolution of Wegner?s
conjecture.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
