
* 1953785
* Questions and Experiments in Geometric Combinatorics
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/01/2020,06/27/2022
* Benjamin Braun,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 150,000.00

Polytopes have been studied by mathematicians, scientists, and artists for
thousands of years. The modern theory of polytopes connects diverse areas of
pure mathematics and is used in applied mathematics as well. Polytopes are used
to determine solutions of transportation problems, model possible outcomes of
elections, and investigate biological phenomena. The special class of lattice
polytopes have deep connections with combinatorial enumeration, which is the
precise counting of complicated but finite sets. This award will lead to a
deeper understanding of lattice polytopes and their relation to enumeration and
counting, using tools primarily from number theory and algebra. In addition to
expanding basic research in mathematics, this award will broaden and strengthen
the mathematical sciences workforce by supporting the training of graduate
students in both pure and experimental approaches to mathematics.

This research is focused on two broad goals: (A) prove theoretical results about
combinatorial properties of lattice polytopes and (B) generate and analyze data
about lattice polytopes resulting from computational experiments. The first
project in this proposal focuses on unimodality problems for Ehrhart h-star-
polynomials, with particular emphasis on challenging conjectures due to Stanley,
Hibi-Ohsugi, and De Loera-Haws-Koeppe. The study of Ehrhart h-star-unimodality
has led to a significant increase in our understanding of lattice polytopes, and
focusing on these difficult conjectures will lead to further advances. The
second project in this proposal involves a comprehensive study of geometric and
algebraic aspects of a family of lattice simplices related to weighted
projective spaces. By investigating Hilbert bases, Ehrhart h-star-vectors,
Poincare series, and geometric h-star-polynomial factorizations for these
lattice simplices, a refined understanding of their properties will emerge that
can inform our study of lattice simplices in general. The third project focuses
on the class of generalized permutahedra and their relationship to Hopf
algebras. The combinatorial enumeration of faces of these polytopes is known to
be a subtle and interesting problem, and this project will create an extension
of traditional face enumeration to refined face enumeration using symmetric
functions and combinatorial Hopf algebras for this class of polytopes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
