
* 1954163
* Combinatorial and Tropical Degenerations of del Pezzo Surfaces and Their Moduli
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/01/2020,07/06/2021
* Maria Cueto,OH,Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Tropical geometry is a young and rapidly growing area in mathematics, rooted in
algebraic geometry, complex analysis, commutative algebra, and combinatorics,
with applications in computer science, biology, and statistical physics, in
addition to other areas of mathematics. The recent decade has seen tremendous
development in the subject that both established the field as an area in its own
right and unveiled its deep connections to numerous branches of pure and applied
mathematics. This research project will provide a new combinatorial perspective
on a classical family of moduli spaces, namely del Pezzo surfaces. Computational
challenges in this direction are its driving force. The primary goal is to
deepen understanding of these objects and develop new techniques to analyze such
abstract spaces through concrete computations in tropical geometry. New findings
will contribute to the rapidly growing open source mathematical software Sage.
Several topics investigated in this project witness the interdisciplinary nature
of the subject and are suitable for research in collaboration with graduate
students.

Tropical geometry provides a framework for solving algebro-geometric problems
using concrete combinatorial tools: algebraic varieties are replaced by
weighted, balanced polyhedral complexes. These objects preserve just enough data
about the original varieties to remain meaningful, while discarding much of
their complexity. Their combinatorics depends strongly on the embeddings of our
varieties. The objective of this research is to develop effective combinatorial
methods to study moduli space of del Pezzo surfaces and related geometric
objects from the perspective of degenerations, tropical and nonarchimedean
geometry. The project has three components. First, to establish effective
methods for constructing faithful tropicalization and characterizing the
combinatorics of del Pezzo surfaces and their moduli in low degrees to harness
geometric and topological invariants via polyhedral combinatorics. Second, to
interpret well-known classical enumerative geometry results on del Pezzo
surfaces of low degrees in the tropical setting. Finally, the PI will apply
polyhedral techniques to establish new obstructions to lifting curves from the
tropical to the algebraic world, addressing "superabundance" of tropical curves,
and explore questions involving unirationality and transition maps between
various known coordinate systems on del Pezzo surfaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
