
* 1954170
* Pseudorandom Structures in Graphs and Combinatorics
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/01/2020,07/27/2021
* Louis DeBiasio,OH,Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 91,675.00

Many combinatorial problems in mathematics are motivated by numerous practical
applications in computer science and network design such as partitioning,
covering, packing, sequencing, routing, clustering, sorting, and degree
constrained spanning trees. These problems can arise from studying either
physical structures such as optical networks or more abstract structures such as
social networks. Broadly speaking, the PI seeks to better understand the
mathematical structures (graphs, directed/oriented graphs, hypergraphs, designs)
at the heart of these problems by exploiting the dichotomy between order and
randomness. Furthermore, this project will provide research opportunities for
undergraduate and masters students.

The PI and his collaborators will explore new territory in Ramsey theory and
Dirac/Hajnal-Szemerédi theory. In Ramsey theory we are given a mathematical
structure (say a collection of sets) and we want to know under what
circumstances is it true that no matter how the structure is partitioned into
smaller parts, one of those smaller parts must contain a desired substructure.
Dirac/Hajnal-Szemerédi theory is about the study of sufficient conditions which
guarantee the existence of certain spanning substructures within a host
structure. In both settings the goal is to find a desired substructure and in
both settings the PI's goal is to develop general methods for doing so. These
methods will typically have the following flavor: either the host structure is
highly ordered in some sense or else has psuedorandom properties which can be
exploited to build a robust "scaffolding" which can in turn be used to construct
the desired substructure. The PI will build upon a body of work including
fractional relaxations, regularity, expansion (and various other measures of
psuedorandomness), and absorption.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
