
* 1954475
* Arithmetic, Algebra, and Algorithms
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Secure &Trustworthy Cyberspace
* 04/01/2020,10/18/2022
* John Voight,NH,Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 09/30/2023
* USD 33,000.00

This award funds US-based participants, with special emphasis on early-career
researchers and members of underrepresented groups, to attend the workshop
"Arithmetic, Algebra, and Algorithms"(https://www.icms.org.uk/AAA.php), April
13-17, 2020, at the International Centre for Mathematical Sciences (ICMS) in
Edinburgh, UK. The main goal of the workshop is to bring together researchers in
the areas of algorithms, number theory, algebra, and cryptography. This meeting
will serve as a catalyst for exchange among these communities, as well as
offering early-career researchers a rapid entry into these fast developing
fields. In addition to numerous applications to theoretical mathematics, these
fields have immense importance through real world connections to computer
security. Major successes in these areas have immediate and profound effects on
many facets of modern life.

Arithmetic statistics studies the behavior of number theoretic objects in
families. Some of the most famous problems in the field go back to Gauss, but in
the last 15 years the field has been experiencing an explosion of activity and
spectacular success, with great potential for further developments in the near
future. Algorithmic number theory and algebra are concerned with fast
computation in number theoretic and algebraic structures, and have important
applications to cryptography. New ideas, constructions, and questions in
cryptography lead to interesting problems for mathematicians. Historically,
developments in cryptography, number theory, algorithms, and algebra have
influenced each other, and the communities depend on fruitful interaction. The
workshop will bring together these communities, building further interactions
among them, and will contribute to the development of human resources in the
mathematical sciences by exposing early-career researchers to the most up-to-
date advances in these fields and by allowing them the opportunity to interact
with senior mathematicians drawn from the top researchers worldwide.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
