
* 1954035
* Probabilistic Combinatorics
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 06/01/2020,06/27/2022
* Jeffry Kahn,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

The project focuses on a number of interrelated problems, all essentially
combinatorial (meaning, in particular, that they usually deal with finite
structures), but with connections to other areas. Though much of the PI's work
has ties to other disciplines---and some of it has had unanticipated applied
consequences---the emphasis here is on what seems most interesting from a
mathematical standpoint. The PI has long been interested in work that cuts
across mathematical boundaries. He has had success both in applying ideas from
other mathematical disciplines (algebra, geometry, topology, probability,
Fourier analysis, information theory) to settle well-known combinatorial
problems, and, on the other hand, in bringing combinatorial ideas to bear on
problems from other areas (e.g. geometry, computer science, probability,
statistical mechanics). He has---as in this project---most often been interested
in simple but seemingly basic questions with histories of resisting solution,
motivated especially by the idea that tackling such questions necessarily forces
one to go beyond existing methods. In addition the project provides research
training opportunities for graduate students.

The project treats combinatorial topics representing some of the PI's main
current interests, most with some probabilistic aspect. A common setting is the
collection of subsets of a finite set, or (the same object viewed differently)
the "Hamming cube" of binary strings of a given length. The more probabilistic
questions are largely concerned with thresholds and/or dependence among events;
the less probabilistic ones belong to "extremal" combinatorics. All involve
notions that have been at the hearts of their respective areas for decades. For
example, thresholds---roughly, the intensities at which various phenomena first
appear in a random system---have been central to probabilistic combinatorics and
related parts of statistical physics since about 1960, and the PI's most
consistent focus in recent years. Intersection properties of set systems and
isoperimetric problems (these are among the less probabilistic topics) are of
similar vintage and centrality.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
