
* 1954121
* Totally Positive Spaces and Cluster Algebras
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 03/01/2020,02/27/2020
* Pavel Galashin,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 02/29/2024
* USD 197,766.00

Combinatorics is the study of discrete structures such as permutations and
graphs, while topology deals with properties of geometric shapes that stay
invariant under continuous deformations. The goal of the project is to apply a
mix of topological and combinatorial techniques to questions arising in various
areas of mathematics and physics. For example, recent connections between
combinatorics and scattering amplitudes give rise to new methods to guide high-
energy particle physics experiments. Other applications arise in determining
interior properties of materials from boundary measurements, as well as in
electrical impedance tomography and other types of medical imaging. The
surprisingly natural combinatorial structures associated with the underlying
topological spaces allow one to find unexpected connections between seemingly
unrelated areas. The award provides research training of graduate studetns.

This work comprises several projects that directly involve the positive
Grassmannian. The topology of this space has been recently determined; however,
the topology of several related spaces remains not fully understood. For
example, the physics of scattering amplitudes is intimately related to the
amplituhedron, which is a linear projection of the positive Grassmannian. One of
the projects involves understanding its topological structure and the
combinatorics of its triangulations. Another example is the space of planar
Ising networks, which was shown to coincide with the positive orthogonal
Grassmannian. This approach has promising applications to the questions of
universality and conformal invariance of the Ising model. The resulting cell
decomposition of the space of planar Ising networks suggests a surprising direct
connection with the space of planar electrical networks. The underlying
algebraic structure of such spaces is described by cluster algebras; one of the
projects involves studying integrability properties of dynamical systems arising
from cluster algebras.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
