
* 2000533
* Trace Formulas, L-Functions, and Automorphic and Arithmetic Periods
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2020,03/18/2021
* Yifeng Liu,CT,Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The main objective of this project is to study the relation between L-functions
and various periods, both automorphic and arithmetic. The L-function is an
important object in the modern study of questions in number theory, in
particular, solving Diophantine equations like the famous Birch and Swinnerton-
Dyer conjecture and its generalizations. L-functions are also crucial in the
study of representations of transformation groups, which have an important role
in physics. The work is expected to provide important new understanding of these
relations in higher dimensional cases. The investigator plans to organize
workshops related to the project, which will provide students, postdocs, and
other researchers in the area substantial opportunities for instruction,
discussion, and collaboration.

The scope of this project consists of four parts. In the first part, the
investigator will use some new techniques in the study of trace formulas to
solve questions concerning the relation between L-functions and automorphic
periods -- those periods obtained by integrating automorphic forms along certain
subgroups. The second part aims to extend some explicit formulas of automorphic
periods, known as the Ichino-Ikeda formula, to more general cases by removing
certain assumptions that are usually hard to check. The third part aims to
provide unconditional evidence toward the Beilinson-Bloch conjecture on the
relation between L-functions and Chow groups, which will generalize parallel
results in the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture to higher dimensional cases.
In the last part, the investigator plans to adopt a new approach via a relative
trace formula to obtain variants of the arithmetic triple product formula
concerning the height of certain cycles on a product of three modular elliptic
curves.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
