
* 2001280
* Relating Special Values of L-Functions with Orders of Tate-Shafarevich Groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/15/2020,07/11/2020
* Florian Sprung,AZ,Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2023
* USD 152,976.00

Finding rational numbers that solve a polynomial equation is harder than finding
solutions that are real numbers. This is because the real numbers form a number
system called a completion of the rational numbers, and the solutions in a
completion can usually be found more easily. One may hope to find the hard
rational number solutions by scrutinizing the easier solutions living in the
completions, but there may be a discrepancy between these two types of
solutions. One central object in number theory designed to measure such a
discrepancy is the Tate-Shafarevich group, and this group is only understood in
some special cases. Two central conjectures (the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer
conjecture and the Bloch-Kato conjecture) relate sizes of Tate-Shafarevich
groups to special values of an appropriate function. This project outlines some
progress on these conjectures via a theory called Iwasawa theory. Another goal
is to understand the interplay between the special values from the perspective
of a modern form of analysis, called p-adic analysis, and use this interplay to
give an easy explanation of complicated phenomena of certain crystalline
representations.

The Iwasawa main conjecture for elliptic curves at supersingular primes was
proved by Wan in the case in which the trace of Frobenius vanishes, and the PI
in the general supersingular case. The plan is to extend this work to more
general modular forms. One central idea in the supersingular case is the
construction of two appropriate p-adic power series, which is known explicitly
by work of Pollack when the Frobenius trace is zero. The PI will work with
Otsuki to explicitly construct the appropriate pair of p-adic power series in
more general cases by developing the analytic aspect of supersingular Iwasawa
theory further. One goal of such an explicit construction is determining
reductions of crystalline Galois representations, shedding light on some
conjectures of Breuil which describe these reductions purely in terms of the
Frobenius trace and its Hodge-Tate weight. Another goal is to establish
asymptotic formulas for the size of the p-primary components of Tate-Shafarevich
groups as defined by Bloch and Kato, generalizing work of Lei, Loeffler, and
Zerbes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
