
* 2001040
* Moduli of Differentials
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2020,07/11/2020
* Dawei Chen,MA,Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

The concept of differentials dates back to the origin of calculus. For instance,
integration of differentials can tell us about distance, area, volume, etc, for
the physical world. Nowadays the study of differentials has broad connections to
a number of fields in and outside of mathematics. It has been proven extremely
useful that one should collect differentials with similar structures into a
parameter space (called moduli space) and study the global properties of this
space, which can in turn determine crucial information about each individual
differential. The principal investigator plans to explore new, fascinating
properties of differentials as well as their moduli spaces. Moreover, he plans
to discover hidden connections between initially unrelated subjects in which
differentials appear from different aspects. The proposed project also opens
many gates for student and postdoctoral research. The principal investigator
will continue to integrate his research with undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral training as well as conference organizations. In particular, he
plans to advise student research projects, design new courses, and organize a
series of workshops, with a focus on increasing diversity and supporting
underrepresented groups.

The moduli space of differentials on Riemann surfaces can be stratified
according to the types of zeros and poles. Each stratum is equipped with a group
action by varying the polygonal structure induced by a differential. Various
questions about surface geometry reduce to understanding the strata of
differentials and orbits under the action. The principal investigator plans to
employ his expertise in algebraic geometry, combined with mixing techniques from
analysis, dynamics and topology, to study these strata and orbits, such as their
volumes, geodesics, and boundary behavior. An ultimate goal is to establish a
correspondence between dynamical invariants of differentials and intersection
theory on moduli spaces. Moreover, the PI plans to use the obtained results to
analyze algebro-geometric properties of moduli spaces, such as birational types,
compactifications, and tautological rings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
