
* 2001077
* Summer School for Young Researchers on Representations of Finite Groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2020,04/21/2020
* Amanda Schaeffer Fry,CO,Metropolitan State University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2021
* USD 10,000.00

This project will support travel of U.S.-based graduate students to attend the
international conference "Representations in Castro: A Summer School." The
conference is aimed at early-career mathematicians (especially graduate
students) and is to be held September 7-12, 2020, at the Centro Internacional de
Encuentros Matematicos (CIEM) in Castro Urdiales, Spain. The summer school is
primarily for the purpose of training young researchers and encouraging their
mastery of the subject area. It will begin with three days of introductory
lectures, followed by three days of more advanced lectures introducing the
students to some current hot topics in the mathematical area of representation
theory. The conference has three organizers and five speakers, representing a
total of six countries. Hence, by allowing U.S.-based students to attend the
summer school, this grant will stimulate important international collaboration
and networking in the area. Women and members of other groups underrepresented
in mathematics are especially encouraged to participate, as building a network
of peers early in one's research career has been shown to be especially crucial
for staying active and visible in the field. The summer school will encourage
cross-pollination between the two related (but sometimes seemingly distant)
fields of character theory and module theory. Many of the recent advances and
open conjectures in the area of representation theory have made it clear that
there is a strong benefit to combining the techniques from both sides. The
introductory lectures are designed for graduate students and postdocs with a
good background in algebra but no prior knowledge in representation theory. They
will cover the general theory from two different points of view: one focusing on
the more numerical, character-theoretic point of view, and the other on the
homological, module-theoretic point of view. These courses will have a strong
focus on arriving at some of the key definitions and concepts in block theory.
The second part of the summer school will be aimed at showing the students some
of the current directions of representation theory and how both perspectives
play a role in some of the fundamental conjectures in the area. Throughout the
summer school, lectures will be alternated with discussion and problem sessions
led by the speakers and organizers. By providing students with an intensive
introductory series of courses and lectures on current hot topics in the area,
the summer school aims to motivate young researchers to use their talents to
advance the state of knowledge in the area and to inspire a new generation of
well-rounded representation theorists. The conference website is
https://sites.msudenver.edu/castrosummerschool/2019/09/17/hello-world/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
