
* 2001516
* Principal Bundles and Higgs Bundles in Algebraic Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2020,07/20/2020
* Roman Fedorov,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2023
* USD 180,000.00

The study of principal bundles began in the early XXth century by physicists as
a formalism to describe electromagnetism. Later, this was extended to encompass
strong and weak interactions, so that principal bundles became a basis for the
so-called standard model - a physical theory describing three out of four
fundamental interactions. In mathematics, principal bundles penetrate many
areas: geometry, number theory, mathematical physics, and others. In 1950's
Fields Medalist Jean-Pierre Serre recognized the importance of principal bundles
in algebraic geometry. In his 1958 seminal paper he gave the first modern
definition of a principal bundle and formulated a certain deep conjecture. This
conjecture, as well as some remaining questions, are among the oldest unsolved
foundational questions in mathematics. The first part of this project is aimed
at proving some of these conjectures. The remaining parts of the projects are
related to the so-called Higgs principal bundles, which can be thought of as
mathematical incarnations of the Higgs boson -- a recently found elementary
particle. These parts of the project belong to the famous Langlands program
unifying number theory, algebraic geometry, harmonic analysis, and mathematical
physics. This award will support continuing research in these areas. Advising
students and giving talks at conferences are going to be part of the proposed
activity.

In more detail, the first project originated from the Grothendieck-Serre
conjecture on principal bundles, which was settled recently for rings containing
fields by Ivan Panin and the PI. The PI plans to extend the proof to the mixed
characteristic case as well as to work on the purity conjecture for principal
bundles. The purity conjecture is, in a sense, the next logical step after the
Grothendieck-Serre conjecture. In the second project, the PI intends to
construct and prove the local Langlands duality for Hitchin systems and to
derive some cases of the global Langlands duality for Hitchin systems from the
local case. The third project is devoted to counting motivic volumes of moduli
stacks of principal Higgs bundles. The goal is to generalize the previous
results of the PI and other people from the GL(n) case to the case of arbitrary
reductive groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
