
* 2001272
* Whittaker Models and p-Adic Deformation in the Langlands Program
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2020,07/20/2020
* Gilbert Moss,UT,University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2022
* USD 95,375.00

Primes numbers are integers, or whole numbers, which cannot be factored into a
product of smaller integers. When considered as parts of larger and more
abstract number systems, for example those containing imaginary numbers, there
are several ways primes may factor. The splitting behavior of prime numbers is a
fascinating and mysterious part of nature, and number theory is concerned with
studying it systematically, especially by connecting it with the arithmetic of
polynomials and the geometry of their solution sets. Over the past several
decades, the Langlands program has revealed striking connections between these
solution sets of polynomials and sets of symmetries that naturally occur in
infinite-dimensional spaces. It has been especially fruitful in the Langlands
program to consider the way these symmetries deform within families, and this
project approaches two outstanding problems in this area by using the framework
of Whittaker models to make them more concrete, or to turn them into explicit
computational problems.

Spaces of Whittaker functions of automorphic forms are called Whittaker models.
Symmetries in Whittaker models capture what is needed to construct L-functions
in the Langlands program, in many cases. This project will study the deformation
theory of Whittaker models in order to understand the behavior of Langlands
reciprocity with respect to congruences modulo prime numbers, and with respect
to deformation in families. The first goal is to generalize Ihara?s lemma by
controlling congruences between automorphic forms in terms of their local
Whittaker models. The approach is to use a computer to test, in many examples,
the congruences that can occur in the action of the local Iwahori-Hecke algebra
on a non-Eisenstein integral eigenform. The second goal is to formulate, and
prove in the banal case, a local Langlands conjecture in families for reductive
groups other than the general linear group, especially quasi-split groups that
split over a tame extension. The approach is to construct a moduli space of
Langlands parameters, study its geometry, and use converse theorems to connect
it to the integral Bernstein center.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
