
* 2001306
* Families of L-Functions and Analytic Number Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2020,02/28/2020
* Matthew Young,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2023
* USD 181,279.00

This research project centers on L-functions, which are mathematical objects
useful for studying a broad array of questions in number theory. An L-function
is a special kind of function that packages together information about an
arithmetical object that arises from studying it modulo p for each prime p. For
instance, the Riemann zeta function is the simplest example of an L-function and
has proven to be indispensable in studying the distribution of the prime
numbers. Other types of L-functions are crucial for understanding if certain
polynomial equations have solutions, or more generally, how many solutions there
are. Often these questions are related to how large the L-function is at a
special point. Much of this project concerns the development of new tools for
studying how L-functions may fit into families and using these tools to better
understand individual L-functions. The investigator will continue to advise PhD
students and to mentor and collaborate with undergraduate students, especially
through the Texas A&M Research Experience for Undergraduates. This type of
mentorship is invaluable in preparing students for graduate studies,
particularly for undergraduate students from non-PhD granting institutions as
well as from population groups underrepresented in STEM fields.

The project will study new families of L-functions and use them as tools for
estimating L-functions on the critical line. In particular, the work aims to
develop new large sieve inequalities, which are flexible tools broadly useful in
analytic problems on L-functions. The investigator and his students will study
moments of L-functions in smaller sub-families than have previously been
considered. Another line of work concerns new variants on the quantum unique
ergodicity problem, which connects families of L-functions to properties of
automorphic forms. With his undergraduate students, the investigator will study
properties of generalized Dedekind sums. The methods employed will be techniques
from analytic number theory such as summation formulas, functional equations,
exponential sums and integrals, and the spectral theory of automorphic forms,
including the Arthur-Selberg trace formula and the relative trace formula.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
