
* 2001549
* Analytic Number Theory Motivated by Approximate Translation Invariance
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2020,05/20/2022
* Trevor Wooley,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2025
* USD 392,578.00

Exponential sums are Fourier series encoding arithmetic information. Pointwise
bounds and mean values of such sums play a fundamental role throughout analytic
number theory, and contribute the primary tool for testing equidistribution
(apparent ``randomness'') of sequences underpinning many applications of number
theory in theoretical computer science, cryptography, and so on. Until the last
decade, despite almost a century of intense effort starting with the
introduction by Hardy and Littlewood of their famous circle method, the main
conjectures concerning mean values of exponential sums over polynomials remained
unsolved in all but the very simplest cases involving linear and quadratic
polynomials. A decade of dramatic progress has culminated in the last five years
with the proof of the most ambitious conjectures concerning a central example of
such mean value conjectures, that associated with Vinogradov's mean value
theorem, on the one hand by Bourgain, Demeter and Guth via decoupling, and on
the other by the proposer by means of nested efficient congruencing. In this
project, the principal investigator will enhance, extend and exploit these very
recent methods so as to obtain similarly decisive progress in an array of mean
value conjectures having applications in quantitative arithmetic geometry and
the wider theory of the Hardy-Littlewood method. This will contribute to the
resolution of the main conjectures for translation-dilation invariant systems in
many variables in full generality, including analogues of such conjectures
involving mean values averaged over sets of small measure, beyond the reach of
current technology. A graduate student will be trained in this important
emerging area, and the proposer will work on a new text intended to provide an
introduction to efficient congruencing for translation-dilation invariant
systems as a vehicle for introducing modern developments in the circle method
over the rational integers, number fields and function fields.

Very recent advances in the understanding of mean values of exponential sums
have delivered the Main Conjecture for Vinogradov's mean value. By
orthogonality, this mean value is associated with a translation-dilation
invariant Diophantine system. Despite this success, neither the decoupling
method nor the nested efficient congruencing method currently address any but
embryonic multivariable translation-dilation invariant systems. Moreover, they
do not address corresponding mean values supported on subsets of the unit
hypercube, and thus fail to provide useful estimates for either minor arcs or
wide sets of major arcs of use in the Hardy-Littlewood method. This project will
make decisive progress on this comprehensive theory, delivering the main
conjectures concerning mean values of exponential sums associated not only with
general translation-dilation invariant Diophantine systems, but also systems
possessing only partial or approximate translation-dilation invariant structure.
This will all be done in the quite general setting of number fields and function
fields by adapting the proposer?s nested efficient congruencing methods. This
flexible set of methods permits congruence information to be passed from one set
of variables to another in multi-homogeneous settings, and this may be achieved
even when working on restricted domains of integration. Amongst applications of
these new estimates, the principal investigator will establish local-global
principles for the existence of rational curves with rational coefficients on
hypersurfaces possessing some measure of diagonal structure via the Hardy-
Littlewood method.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
