
* 2001425
* F-Crystals, Prismatization, and Shtukas
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2020,06/27/2022
* Vladimir Drinfeld,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2023
* USD 309,991.00

The project supports research in algebraic geometry. This part of mathematics
studies algebraic varieties, i.e., sets of solutions of systems of algebraic
equations. Modern algebraic geometry also studies algebraic stacks; these are
geometric objects similar to algebraic varieties, whose points are allowed to
have nontrivial symmetries. The main theme of this project is to use algebraic
stacks to study prismatic cohomology, which is a very promising cohomology
theory of p-adic algebraic varieties introduced recently by Bhatt and Scholze.
The project also provides research training opportunities for graduate students.

The principal investigator plans to introduce prismatization functors and to use
them to construct a natural theory of coefficients for prismatic cohomology in
the spirit of what Fontaine and Jannsen call F-gauges. He also plans to develop
a version of the prismatic theory in which the field of p-adic numbers is
replaced by a local field of characteristic p and to find an explicit
description of the category of crystals in this context. Another goal is to
describe in terms of formal groups the Tannakian category of convergent
F-isocrystals on a smooth variety over a perfect field of characteristic p.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
