
* 2001502
* Tropical and nonarchimedean analytic methods in algebraic geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Combinatorics, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 09/01/2020,08/01/2022
* Sam Payne,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2023
* USD 359,739.00

Algebraic geometry studies solution sets of systems of polynomial equations. For
instance, lines are solution sets of linear polynomial equations, while circles
and hyperbolas are solution sets to quadratic polynomial equations, and their
study goes back to the ancient Greeks. The solution sets of systems of many
polynomial equations in many variables often have beautiful and complicated
geometry. The PI will apply new and modern techniques to answer questions of
classical interest in the field of algebraic geometry, and to address long
standing open problems about the geometry of curves defined by polynomial
equations. This project provides research training opportunities for graduate
students.

Over a nonarchimedean field, one can split the problem of understanding such
solution sets into two parts. What are the possible valuations of solutions? And
what are the solutions with a given valuation? The set of valuations of
solutions has a rich combinatorial and polyhedral structure, and is the primary
object of study in tropical geometry; the solutions with a given valuation can
be studied via nonarchimedean analytic geometry. Recent developments in these
fields make it possible to resolve subtle questions about the geometry of the
actual solution set using new and innovative tools and techniques. This project
will refine, abstract, and generalize these new methods and explore deeper
applications to open problems in algebraic geometry.The PI will use tropical and
nonarchimedean methods to continue his work on refined curve counting, and on
unstable cohomology of moduli spaces of curves, proceeding beyond the top graded
piece of the weight filtration to examine the full weight-graded cohomology
ring. He will also initiate an analogous study of the weight graded cohomology
of the moduli space of abelian varieties, using the topology of moduli spaces of
tropical abelian varieties and the combinatorial algebra of complexes built out
of unimodular matroids and perfect quadratic forms. Additional projects will
attack the motivic, p-adic, and topological monodromy conjectures for Newton
nondegenerate singularities, using the combinatorics of relative local
h-polynomials and Stapledon?s formulas for monodromy, and attempt to resolve
outstanding (and mutually contradictory) conjectures of Kontsevich and Morita in
the homology of commutative graph complexes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
