
* 2001200
* Rational Points and Asymptotics of Distribution
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2020,07/06/2022
* Jordan Ellenberg,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 05/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

The fundamental question of contemporary number theory, which has also been the
fundamental question of number theory for the last two and a half thousand
years, is: what can we say about solutions to equations in whole numbers? The
PI?s research explores the relation of questions about solutions to equations
(in particular, how many solutions certain kinds of equations have) with
questions about geometry of certain kinds of spaces; in turn, another side of
the PI?s proposed research investigates the ways geometry of high-dimensional
spaces can be brought to bear on other problems in mathematics and data science
which might not immediately "look like" geometry. The PI?s research is closely
entwined with his work as a popularizer of mathematics in print, broadcast, and
social media; he is currently working on a book about geometry which will
involve some of the funded research.

The project covers a wide range of problems in number theory, algebraic
geometry, and data science. A central part is the work of PI and collaborators
on a theory of height for rational points on algebraic stacks. The definition
was pinned down and its properties studied during the previous granting period;
during the present period, we will state a general heuristic for asymptotically
counting points on stacks of bounded height, and work towards proving new cases.
This new conjecture will include as special cases the Malle conjectures (how
many number fields are there of discriminant at most X?) and the Batyrev-Manin
conjectures (how many solutions are there to a given equation in integers all of
which are at most X?) but applies to many new cases besides, and sheds new light
even on the classical questions. In particular, our work adds to the developing
consensus that we should go beyond heights attached to line bundles and study
the variation of heights attached to vector bundles of arbitrary rank, opening
up whole new directions of research and revealing new connections between
existing sectors of the literature. The project also includes a wide range of
problems in other areas, including group theory (an attempt to use the method of
?FI-groups? to prove property T for new families of groups, following the
breakthrough of Kaluba, Kielak, and Nowak for Out(F_n)), arithmetic statistics
(proving new results towards the Bhargava-Kane-Lenstra-Poonen-Rains conjectures
on variation of Selmer groups in the function field case), multilinear algebra
(understanding the algebraic and convex geometry of the locus of low-slice-rank
tensors), and data science (investigation of what popular machine learning
protocols do and don?t learn about symmetry from their input).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
