
* 2001257
* Higgs Bundles, Real Quasi-Maps, and Automorphic L-Functions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/15/2020,07/26/2022
* Tsao-Hsien Chen,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2023
* USD 175,703.00

This mathematics research project naturally sits at the intersection of
representation theory and geometry. Representation theory is a branch of
mathematics studying symmetries of mathematical objects and structures. Methods
from geometry have been very successful in answering questions in representation
theory. The main goal of the project is to study open questions in
representation theory using geometric methods. Specifically, the investigator
plans to use and develop geometric tools to attack several longstanding problems
in the study of representations of Lie groups, Higgs bundles and representations
of fundamental groups, and the Langlands program.

In more detail, the research centers on three projects: (1) Hitchin morphisms
for higher dimensional varieties, (2) real quasi-maps and applications, and (3)
nonlinear Fourier transforms and the Braverman-Kazhdan program. In project (1),
the investigator will develop the theory of Hitchin morphisms for higher
dimensional varieties and apply it to the study of the Simpson correspondence.
This project is closely related to deep questions in invariant theory, higher-
dimensional algebraic geometry, and representations of fundamental groups. In
project (2), the investigator will explore the geometric structure of real
quasi-maps and establish applications to the study of representation theory of
real groups, the Kostant-Sekiguchi correspondence, and Springer theory for
symmetric spaces. In project (3), the investigator will study the Braverman-
Kazhdan approach to meromorphic continuation and functional equations of
automorphic L-functions. Based on results on nonlinear Fourier transforms and
the Braverman-Kazhdan conjecture in the finite field and D-modules setting, the
project aims to construct nonlinear Fourier kernels in the local fields setting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
