
* 2001128
* Non-Commutative Spaces, Their Symmetries, and Geometric Quantum Group Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2020,07/11/2020
* Alexandru Chirvasitu,NY,SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2023
* USD 174,996.00

The project fits within the scope of the branch of mathematics known as
noncommutative geometry, originating primarily in the discovery early in the
20th century that the then-newly-discovered phenomena of quantum mechanics
require a novel mathematical formalism. The main point of departure from
classical (or non-quantum) mathematics is the fact that by the very small-scale
nature of our ambient world, certain pairs of measurable physical quantities
cannot be measured simultaneously (with the momentum and position of a particle
serving as the preeminent example). Mathematically, this manifests as the non-
commutativity of a pair of transformations on a physical system, justifying the
name "noncommutative" for the relevant field of study. The formal objects that
model the symmetries (that is, structure-preserving transformations) of a
physical system modeled according to this paradigm are known as a "quantum
groups", and they are the central theme of the present research proposal. The
training of graduate students is an important part of this project.

A number of broader themes inform the problems under consideration. As one
example, discrete quantum groups, like their classical counterparts, fall into a
constellation of taxonomic classes based on the approximation properties enjoyed
by their group algebras. The quantum versions of the classical results are
typically more technically demanding, only partially settled, and good test beds
for the strengths of the geometric-group-theoretic and operator-algebraic
techniques that jointly make classical discrete groups such rich geometric and
analytical objects. In another direction, much light can be shed on the
structure and above-mentioned approximation properties of quantum groups
(discrete or more generally, locally compact) by category and representation-
theoretic means. For that reason, results to the effect that group-theoretic
data (e.g. the center of a locally compact quantum group) can be reconstructed
from categories of unitary representations with their underlying structure are
of some interest in the field and the project. As a third example, randomness
features heavily in the study of groups and other discrete objects
(probabilistic methods are very important in graph theory, for instance); the
general phenomenon whereby a "generic" object, constructed randomly (with the
technical meaning of that phrase depending on the specifics of the problem)
tends to be highly asymmetric appears to replicate in the quantum setting, with
"most" finite graphs, finite metric spaces, etc. admitting no quantum
symmetries. Such generic rigidity results always recover their classical
counterparts (given that quantum symmetries always encompass ordinary ones), but
usually require more involved and often more enlightening proof techniques. It
is hoped the requisite eclectic mix of approaches to the problems
(combinatorial, representation-theoretic, probabilistic, operator-algebraic,
etc.) will offer insight not only into the nature of the quantum-mathematical
objects ostensibly being studied, but also into the classical versions thereof.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
