
* 2001319
* Categorical Kahler Geometry and Applications
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/01/2020,06/27/2022
* Ludmil Katzarkov,FL,University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 04/30/2023
* USD 225,000.00

Birational geometry is a classical mathematical discipline whose roots go back
to ancient Greece. Nevertheless, it still offers many difficult unsolved
questions. The core part of this project is to tackle these questions with
cutting-edge modern methods coming from the homological mirror symmetry program.
Homological mirror symmetry is a deep geometric duality that originates in
quantum field theory and has been used in studying novel phenomena and proving
unexpected results in symplectic geometry suggested by algebraic geometry. This
project aims to use homological mirror symmetry to introduce new applications of
symplectic topology to algebraic geometry and to answer classical open questions
in birational geometry. A postdoctoral fellow will be involved in various
aspects of this research project.

This project will use an approach based on categorical Kähler geometry. The most
notable application of this approach is toward proving the non-rationality of
generic, four-dimensional cubics, which is arguably the central problem in
algebraic geometry. More specifically, a detailed study of the singularities of
quantum D-modules produces a completely new type of birational invariant. This
new invariant is a canonical decomposition of the cohomology of a four-
dimensional cubic based on simultaneous use of both (algebraic and symplectic)
sides of homological mirror symmetry. The example of four-dimensional cubics is
only the tip of the iceberg. There are many other potential applications of this
approach, for example to uniformization problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
