
* 2001368
* Local Algebra and Local Representation Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2020,06/01/2022
* Srikanth Iyengar,UT,University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2025
* USD 330,876.00

One of the myriad functions of Mathematics is that it provides language to
formulate, and tools to solve, equations that describe the physical world. Often
the equations that one encounters are algebraic in nature, like those describing
lines, circles, parabolas and the like, in contrast with, say, equations
involving the trigonometric functions, or logarithms, or derivatives. Typically,
the equations have infinitely many solutions---think about the equation defining
a circle---and it is usually not possible to write down a complete list of
solutions. Rather, the objective is to find ways to study the structure of the
collection of the solution set, which is called a variety. A fruitful approach
has been to consider the (algebraic) functions on the variety. These functions
form a mathematical structure called a commutative ring, and my research has
been dedicated to understanding these structures; not in the abstract, but in
their various manifestations, which are galore, they arise in quite diverse
contexts across mathematics and physics. Mathematics has also been remarkably
successful in describing and studying phenomenon related to symmetry. This leads
to another mathematical structure called a group. Intriguingly, in certain
contexts, there is a way to attach a commutative ring---and a variety---to a
group and in the past few years various researchers, including the PI, have been
able to solve problems related to groups using tools that had been developed to
study varieties. A part of the current project deals with these aspects.

Two major themes weave through this project. One is the study of invariants of
finite free complexes over commutative noetherian local rings; the second is the
modular representation theory of finite groups and group schemes. The former too
is connected to groups via certain conjectures in the theory of transformation
groups. These conjectures---due to Adem, Avramov, Browder, Buchweitz, Carlsson,
Swan, Halperin and others---postulated lower bounds on the length of the
homology modules, and on the total rank, of such complexes, when the homology
has nonzero finite length. Recently the PI and Mark Walker found counterexamples
for many of these conjectures. One set of problems outlined in this project are
aimed at discovering and establishing the ``correct" bounds for these
invariants. Another set of projects seek to probe the structure of the stable
module category of representations of a finite group, or finite group scheme,
over a field of positive characteristic. The focus is on ``local strata" and
various finiteness conditions for modules in this strata; in particular, on
dualizability and cohomological finiteness. The multiplicative structure of
Hochschild cohomology of commutative algebras is a third main topic of this
proposal. The goal here is to characterize locally complete intersection
algebras in terms of their Hochschild cohomology. This award will support the
training of students in a very relevant area of mathematics that has
applications to several fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
