
* 2002579
* Relative Aspects of the Langlands Program, L-Functions, and Beyond Endoscopy
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/01/2020,02/27/2020
* Ju-Lee Kim,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 04/30/2022
* USD 10,000.00

This award supports participation of US-based researchers in the workshop
"Relative Aspects of the Langlands Program, L-Functions, and Beyond Endoscopy"
taking place May 25-29, 2020 at the Centre International de Rencontres
Mathematiques in Marseille, France. The Langlands program in modern mathematics
has been evolving with deeper ideas since its inception. This workshop will
provide an overview of recent rapid progress in the relative Langlands program
and foster further development by encouraging interactions between senior and
junior researchers. Given the recent exciting developments, a workshop on the
subject is timely and will encourage young people to enter this very active
field.

Langlands's principle of functoriality and the automorphic L-functions are two
central themes of the Langlands program and the theory of automorphic forms.
Despite more than forty years of progress and numerous breakthroughs, many
questions in this program are still open and even deeper questions have arisen.
The theory of endoscopy, a special but very important case of functoriality,
attracted immense efforts in the past thirty years, leading to breakthroughs
such as the proof of the Fundamental Lemma and the endoscopic classification of
automorphic representations of classical groups. Going beyond these remarkable
achievements requires new techniques and ideas. In recent years, exciting new
ideas have emerged, which have the potential to renew our vision of the whole
subject. The conference will focus on three main topics: (1) the relative
Langlands program, (2) relations between special values of (higher) derivatives
of L-functions, and (3) beyond endoscopy and possible new cases of
functoriality. Details of the workshop are posted at https://conferences.cirm-
math.fr/2154.html.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
