
* 2015305
* Applications of Number Theory to the Quantum Gates Model
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/19/2019,01/06/2020
* Naser Talebizadeh Sardari,CA,American Institute of Mathematics
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2022
* USD 74,288.00

Both the research and broader activities in this award include current
developments in number theory and their applications in quantum computing and
quantum chaos. In terms of practical applications of the project, the PI expects
that his refined version of Ross and Selinger algorithm will be used if a
physical quantum computer is built. The hope is that quantum computers will
eventually be able to efficiently simulate quantum physics and study many
(important) computationally difficult problems inaccessible to modern-day
computers. There are models such as the Quantum Gates Model that give
theoretical constructions of efficient circuits to be used in quantum computers.
This model is connected to the study of integral solutions to Diophantine
equations, an ancient subject of interest to mathematicians. A question of
interest to both quantum computer scientists as well as mathematicians is the
optimal approximation of real solutions of special Diophantine equations by
integral solutions. The PI has proved new (optimal) results in this direction.
Furthermore, he has proved that this task is computationally hard (NP-complete)
for generic inputs.

On a more technical level, one of the central problems in the Quantum Gates
Model is the approximation of an arbitrary qubit using a fixed set of generators
called universal quantum gates. In the single-qubit case, this amounts to
navigating the unitary group SU(2) by a specific set of topological generators
(e.g. V-gates or the Lubotzky-Phillips-Sarnak generators) that are carefully
chosen such that the associated transition matrix has the optimal spectral gap
(e.g. the eigenvalues of the Hecke operators satisfy the Ramanujan bound). The
PI proposes a refinement of the Ross and Selinger algorithm for approximating an
arbitrary single-qubit that removes all heuristic assumptions from their
algorithm. Among the new tools in this approach are the delta method, Sieve
theory, and the spectral theory of modular forms and bounds on their Fourier
coefficients. An objective of this project is to generalize the results of the
PI to higher rank arithmetic groups which brings in the theory of the oscillator
representation and the theory of automorphic representations. Motivated by
Berry's conjecture in Quantum Chaos, the PI studies the statistical properties
and the multiplicity of the eigenvalues of the transition matrix of the quantum
gates (the Hecke operators). So far, the PI has proved power saving upper bounds
as well as absolute upper bound on the multiplicity of the eigenvalues of the
Hecke operators. Furthermore, the PI has proved lower bounds on the discrepancy
of the spectral measure with respect to the Plancherel measure. The project
brings together the deformation theory of Galois representations, Iwasawa
theory, the Taylor-Wiles method, trace formulae, and other tools from the
algebraic and analytic number theorists' toolbox in order to answer questions of
interest to computer scientists as well as mathematicians.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
