
* 2034516
* Categorical Diagonalization, Representation Theory, and Link Homology
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/31/2019,07/08/2020
* Matthew Hogancamp,MA,Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 11/30/2020
* USD 21,699.00

The subject of representation theory forms the mathematical basis for discussing
symmetry. As an example, there are eight symmetries of a square, consisting of
transformations like "rotate by 90 degrees," or "reflect across a diagonal
line," and combinations of these. Each of these symmetries represents a
transformation of the plane that leaves the square unchanged, and we say that
the transformations of the plane form a representation of the symmetry group of
the square. The symmetries of the square and other polygons are special examples
of a family of groups called Coxeter groups, which capture and generalize the
intuitive notion of a reflection group. In recent decades, mathematicians have
discovered a rich theory of representations in which the object being acted on
is not a plane (or some higher dimensional analogue), but rather a more
structured sort of object, called a category. This project is concerned with the
categorical representation theory of Coxeter groups and some closely related
objects, called Hecke algebras, and connections to other areas of mathematics,
such as the study of knots and links in topology.

In more detail, three interrelated objects will be studied: (a) categories of
Soergel bimodules, (b) Hilbert schemes of points in the plane, and (c) Khovanov-
Rozansky link homology. First, the investogator will continue to develop the
theory of categorical diagonalization and apply the results to the categorified
representation theory of Hecke algebras and quantum groups. This includes work
on the categorified Casimir operator. As an application of categorical
diagonalization, the full-twist Rouquier complex acting on categories of Soergel
bimodules will be diagonalized, extending work already accomplished in type A.
The resulting eigendecompositions present a method for approaching recent
conjectures of Gorsky, Negut, and Rasmussen regarding a deep correspondence
between Soergel bimodules and Hilbert schemes. The investigator will utilize
categorical diagonalization, as well as recent computational breakthroughs, to
work toward a proof of this correspondence. Finally, the Gorsky-Negut-Rasmussen
correspondence makes several predictions regarding the structure of the triply
graded Khovanov-Rozansky homology, which the investigator will explore using
insights from the connection with Hilbert schemes.
