
* 2044557
* CAREER: Higher Algebra and Symplectic Geometry
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 08/01/2021,06/27/2022
* Hiro Tanaka,TX,Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 07/31/2027
* USD 166,815.00

Symplectic geometry is a geometry that efficiently encodes laws of motion
dictating classical problems in physics. The last few decades have seen a burst
of activity in the field thanks to the emergence of powerful algebraic tools
called Fukaya categories. At the same time, the development of a new language
for ?spectral algebra??an algebra that mixes traditional notions of adding and
multiplying with more contemporary tools for studying shapes of arbitrarily high
dimensions?has allowed us to organize sophisticated structures using algebraic
intuitions. These two storylines have been highly fruitful, but have yet to
cross-pollinate. This project aims to construct a long-sought-after bridge, to
not only produce spectral methods for studying symplectic geometry, but to
establish symplectic tools for studying spectral algebra. The project will also
support numerous educational initiatives aimed at enriching and diversifying the
mathematics community. These include the creation of a math podcast for and by
students, a workshop for students to learn contemporary mathematical techniques
of interest, and various co-curricular activities aimed at fostering communities
of emerging mathematicians. The technical and collaborative heart of the project
is the formalization of factorizable structures on moduli stacks of broken
holomorphic objects. By showing that the usual moduli of holomorphic objects
appearing in the Floer theory of Liouville sectors give rise to deformation
problems encoded in factorizable sheaves on the moduli stacks, the project aims
to construct spectral wrapped Fukaya categories for Liouville sectors as
solutions to these deformation problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
