
* 2046915
* CAREER: Statistical mechanics and knot theory in algebraic combinatorics
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/01/2021,06/27/2022
* Pavel Galashin,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 66,710.00

A mathematical knot is obtained by taking a piece of rope, tangling it in some
way, and then joining the ends. A classical question in knot theory asks whether
two knots can be obtained from each other by continuously transforming the rope.
One way to distinguish two knots is to compute their knot invariants. Some of
the most powerful knot invariants include the HOMFLY polynomial and its recent
generalization known as Khovanov?Rozansky homology. For instance, the HOMFLY
polynomial is used in molecular biology to study how DNA molecules are folded in
space. In this project, we relate these knot invariants to objects arising
naturally in algebraic combinatorics, a field which applies algebraic methods to
study discrete objects such as binomial coefficients or triangulations of a
polygon. The number of possible triangulations of a polygon is counted by the
famous Catalan number sequence. One of the main results of the project gives a
natural geometric interpretation of Catalan numbers, by means of relating them
to Khovanov?Rozansky knot homology and the HOMFLY polynomial. The objects that
appear along the way are interpreted from the point of view of statistical
mechanics, which deals with macroscopic observations of a physical system
consisting of a large number of particles. For example, the geometric spaces in
question are directly linked to the Ising model at critical temperature, which
describes ferromagnetic properties of a flat metal plate at the Curie point. The
award also provides funding for the involvement of undergraduate students,
graduate students and postdocs in the PI's research.

The Grassmannian is stratified by spaces known as positroid varieties. In a
joint project with Thomas Lam, the Principal Investigator (PI) studies the mixed
Hodge structure on the cohomology of positroid varieties. The main result states
that the bigraded Poincar√© polynomial of the top-dimensional positroid variety
is given by the (rational) q,t-Catalan number, introduced in the works of
Garsia?Haiman and Loehr?Warrington. The proof proceeds by associating a link to
each positroid variety, and relating its cohomology to the Khovanov?Rozansky
homology of the associated link. The point count of the positroid variety is
therefore given by a coefficient of the HOMFLY polynomial of the link. The PI
has recently shown that the point count is given by certain observables in the
stochastic six-vertex model. Separately, positroid varieties were connected to
the Ising model in the joint work of the PI with Pavlo Pylyavskyy. In this
project, the PI uses this relation to give a direct formula for boundary
correlations of Baxter's critical Z-invariant Ising model. This formula is
applied to questions of universality and conformal invariance of the model,
studied by Smirnov et al.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
