
* 2050037
* Complex Dynamics and Diophantine Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2020,10/14/2020
* Laura DeMarco,MA,Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2023
* USD 253,554.00

The primary goal of this project is to explore connections between the dynamical
theory of polynomials and rational functions of one variable and the theory of
Diophantine geometry which studies arithmetic features of solutions to
polynomial equations. Specifically, the principal investigator studies
bifurcations and stability within algebraic families of these dynamical systems
defined over the field of complex numbers and uses the results to address
questions about height functions and rational points on arithmetic varieties,
focused on intersection theory and counting problems. Even the simplest families
of examples, such as the well-studied family of quadratic polynomials, exhibit
complicated dynamical features that we have yet to understand. Similarly, there
remain deep unanswered questions about the seemingly simple structure of torsion
points on elliptic curves. This research combines methods from both complex
analysis and arithmetic geometry.

The principal investigator with her collaborators has developed new methods of
proof incorporating tools from complex dynamics and non-archimedean analysis.
The main objective of this project is to exploit these combined methods to
address problems about height functions and some new problems about the dynamics
of maps on the Riemann sphere, inspired by the arithmetic questions. The
principal investigator is working towards: (1) uniform versions of Unlikely
Intersection problems about algebraic dynamical systems; (2) a study of torsion
points within a family of abelian varieties, to characterize which curves can
intersect many points of ''small'' canonical height; (3) the Critical Orbit
Conjecture, about the geometry of postcritically finite maps within the moduli
space of rational maps; (4) the conjectured rationality of canonical heights for
dynamical systems over function fields in characteristic zero, and connections
to transcendence problems; and (5) equidistribution statements for families of
maps and for families of elliptic curves. This research should have impact on
multiple areas of mathematics, including number theory, geometry, and dynamics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
