
* 2054527
* Dualities in Enumerative Geometry and Representation Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2021,05/21/2021
* Andrey Smirnov,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2024
* USD 199,989.00

Enumerative geometry is a branch of mathematics which seeks to determine the
number of geometric objects that satisfy certain conditions, for instance, the
number of ways in which one space can be embedded into another. Representation
theory is a part of linear algebra studying symmetries. This project is focused
on deep interaction of these areas known as 3-dimensional mirror symmetry. This
interaction leads to powerful identities between various objects in these fields
and to discovery of new formulas which find applications in quantum field
theory, algebraic geometry and combinatorics. This project includes
opportunities for student research.

More precisely, this is a project to investigate properties of the vertex
functions and the stable envelope classes in equivariant K-theory and elliptic
cohomology of symplectic varieties. Explicit formulas connecting these objects
for pairs of varieties related by 3-dimensional mirror symmetry will be
established. The main technical tools for this investigation include the
abelianization of stable envelopes and the quantum difference equations. The
resulting identities between the stable envelope classes lead naturally to new
dualities in representation theory of quantum groups. The PI will also
investigate important special cases, including Hilbert schemes of points on
surfaces and instanton moduli spaces, in order to develop applications in
combinatorics and theoretical physics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
