
* 2054875
* NSF-BSF: The Global Geometry of Graphs
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 09/01/2021,09/12/2022
* Assaf Naor,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,464.00

A graph consists of a collection of nodes, some pairs of which are deemed to be
related to each other, in which case they are said to form an edge. The notion
of a graph is extremely general and expressive, as it can model arbitrarily
complicated pairwise interactions among any collection of objects. This makes
graphs important for essentially all aspects of human interests (ranging from,
for example, social interactions, to science, internet search, engineering, and
pure mathematics). This also makes the world of graphs immensely rich and
complicated. It is therefore highly desirable to develop methodologies that
could enhance one?s ability to understand and utilize graphs. This joint
research project is devoted to further elucidate the geometric perspective of
graphs, which provides deep and often unexpected insights on their structure. A
graph induces a geometry on its nodes by defining its associated notion of
distance to be the minimum number of hops along edges of the graph that is
required to reach one node to another. One of the main questions that will be
investigated is how the local structure of a graph, namely how it looks near
each of its nodes, imposes restrictions on the behavior of its global
properties. For example, if the graph does not contain short cycles (a
phenomenon that is common in many cases of interest), then near each node one
sees a tree. However if the graph is finite, then these local trees cannot
maintain their tree-like growth indefinitely, that is, they must somehow
eventually merge. It is remarkable how little is presently known about how
having a local tree-like structure influences the global structure of a graph.
This joint research project will tackle the abundance of longstanding mysteries
about the global ramifications of being locally a tree. There is a wealth of
further local-global geometric mysteries about graphs, such as fundamental
questions about codes (existence and limitations thereof), which are subsets of
a high-dimensional graph called the discrete cube in which all nonzero pairwise
distances are large. Other issues that will be studied in this joint research
project include finding algorithms to efficiently partition graphs, low-
dimensional representations, representation of the graph distance as a
superposition of much simpler distance functions, etc. This joint NSF-BSF
project will provide an opportunity to enhance the interaction between U.S. and
Israeli researchers who have been attacking such questions separately from
different angles. It will address specific questions in these directions, and
will also develop overarching methodologies to understand graphs through the
lens of the global geometry that they induce. The idea that geometry may provide
deep and often unexpected insights in discrete mathematics has been immensely
fruitful. Suffices it to mention how isoperimetric inequalities have evolved
into sophisticated concepts such as expander graphs which play a fundamental
role in areas ranging from group theory to theoretical computer science and many
other topics in between. More specifically, this joint research project will
investigate the global geometry of graphs. One of the main questions that will
be investigated is to what extent a finite graph can look locally like an
infinite regular tree. Such a finite graph clearly has no short cycles, i.e., it
has a large girth. Also its diameter should be small. How large can the girth
be? How small can the diameter be? Can a graph simultaneously have a large girth
and a small diameter? To what extent can the metric on a large girth graph be
approximated by a superposition of cut metrics or by a Euclidean metric?
Arguably, the most important metric space for combinatorics is the discrete cube
and its powers. Understanding the independence number of these graphs is a
classical open question: The rate versus distance problem for binary codes. The
best bounds that are presently available are nearly a half a century old. The
most important codes both in theory in practice are linear codes. Strangely
enough, no tighter upper bounds are known for linear codes. This joint research
project will study a strengthening of Delsarte?s classical linear program that
distinguishes linear from general codes. Major open questions on algorithmic
graph partitioning will also be investigated in this joint research project, as
well as fundamental issues in dimension reduction, spectral graph theory, and
the search for a meaningful model of random metric spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
