
* 2054503
* Discrete Random and Pseudorandom Structures
* DMS,PROBABILITY, Combinatorics
* 06/01/2021,06/22/2021
* Wesley Pegden,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2024
* USD 210,000.00

This project aims to better understand random and pseudorandom processes, and
the interplay between them. In particular, the project studies models from
statistical physics of aggregation processes built on both random and
pseudorandom walks. For example, in the former case, diffusion limited
aggregation processes produce intricate fractals through processes analogous to
those that drive the formation of corals, but the propensity of these processes
to give rise to long, spiny, structures is still not rigorously understood. In
the latter case, the Abelian sandpile process builds a cluster of particles
through a pseudorandom distribution of particles that ends up giving rise to
intricate fractal patterns, as well as statistical laws which reappear
throughout nature (e.g., as the frequency distributions of earthquakes,
avalanches, etc).

Among other goals, this project aims to better understand the dependence of the
behavior of the Abelian sandpile on the underlying lattice. One particularly
interesting case is that where a periodic lattice is subjected to random edge-
deletions; in this case the Abelian sandpile is a pseudorandom aggregation
process on a random environment, which we expect to behave like a random
aggregation process on a periodic environment. Other topics include work on
Euclidean functionals; in particular, refining our understanding of asymptotic
relationships between structures like Traveling Salesperson Tours through
typical (i.e. random) point sets, and their algorithmic approximations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
