
* 2054423
* Combinatorics, Cohomology, and Matrix Spaces
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 06/01/2021,05/21/2021
* Zachary Hamaker,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,810.00

Combinatorics is the field of mathematics most concerned with concrete, finite
objects. Over the past half century, it has grown from humble origins into a
rich field with deep connections to and applications in disparate fields across
mathematics and the sciences. A central mathematical framework that has spurred
combinatorics' development from its inception is the challenge of understanding
geometric spaces by their decomposition into constituent pieces. Recent
breakthroughs of this type have led to deeper understanding of fundamental
problems in theoretical physics, probability theory, algebraic geometry and many
other fields. Since the 19th century, mathematicians have applied this framework
to better understand collections of two-dimensional arrays of data called matrix
spaces. This project will use combinatorial tools to determine properties of
matrix spaces broken down into pieces determined by imposing redundancy
conditions on the underlying data. In addition, funds will support undergraduate
research, training graduate students and outreach efforts including work with a
prison education program.

To a mathematician, the spaces this project studies are quite simple: matrices,
idempotent matrices, symmetric and skew-symmetric matrices. The pieces of matrix
spaces considered in this project, called matrix Schubert varieties, are
comprised of matrices satisfying rank restrictions on specified submatrices.
Matrix Schubert varieties are invariant under certain row/column operations --
this extends to a natural group action. By taking this group action into
account, geometric and topological properties of matrix Schubert varieties solve
central questions in enumerative algebraic geometry and intersection theory.
Using a collection of tools from combinatorics and commutative algebra known
collectively as 'Grobner geometry', this project will describe polynomial
representatives that encode the geometric properties of matrix Schubert
varieties. A potential application is the first combinatorial description of
structure constants in the Lagrangian Grassmannian.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
