
* 2054536
* RUI: Point Configurations in Euclidean Spaces, Spheres, and Discrete Spaces
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 08/01/2021,06/08/2021
* Alexey Glazyrin,TX,The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 118,893.00

This project focuses on the problems of extremal discrete point configurations
in Euclidean space and spheres. These have persisted since the classical Kepler
conjecture and the kissing number problem, both of which originated in the 17th
century. The Kepler conjecture on densest sphere packings in three dimensions
goes back to Walter Raleigh who asked to determine the best way to stack
cannonballs on the decks of his ships. The kissing number problem was the
subject of a famous discussion between Isaac Newton and David Gregory. Such
questions later led to a variety of topics in combinatorics and other areas.
Nowadays, point configurations is an interdisciplinary topic with applications
in many areas such as mathematical optimization, approximation theory, coding
theory, information theory, materials science, and crystallography. The goal of
the project is to study configurations that are optimal under certain
conditions. By this project, the investigator also plans to reach a wide
audience of undergraduate students via the collaboration with the Center of
Excellence in STEM Education of the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley. The
goals of the Center are focused on strengthening STEM academic programs and
increasing the number of STEM graduates, particularly those from
underrepresented groups.

The unifying theme for all the topics and problems considered in the project is
the optimality of point sets. For one set of questions, the main approach relies
on the fact that under some conditions optimal point configurations are
constrained by space symmetries via linear or semidefinite conditions. The
method of finding upper bounds on few-distance sets in two-point homogeneous
spaces, established by the principal investigator, will provide new tools to
address classical combinatorial problems. It is expected that the generalized
version of this approach may lead to new bounds in sphere packings and can be
applicable in many different contexts. For the other set of questions,
symmetries of combinatorial and number-theoretic objects (graphs, lattices,
etc.) imply certain geometric optimality of corresponding point sets. The
approach suggested for this project is to use analytic methods and the
hypothetical optimality of unknown configurations to construct them or prove
their existence/non-existence. The PI will also use soft packings to obtain new
bounds for a variety of packing and covering problems and investigate the
general problem of finding maximal densities of soft packings in various
settings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
