
* 2054436
* Higher-Order Pattern Containment
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 07/01/2021,06/27/2022
* Bridget Tenner,IL,DePaul University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 174,780.00

Permutations are orderings of a set of objects, typically positive integers.
They can model aspects of many different problems and scenarios, and they are
used throughout mathematics. A permutation pattern is a subset of a permutation
that appears in a particular order. For example, it might have an increasing
subsequence of some length, or it might avoid having a large number followed by
two smaller numbers. The presence or absence of particular patterns can be
critical to features of the data that the permutation is modeling, which has led
to great interest in the analysis of permutation patterns for the past several
decades. The goal of this project is to establish a broader context to the
traditional study of permutation patterns. Historically, research in this area
has been almost entirely in terms of a binary question: does a permutation
contain a given pattern or does the permutation avoid it? Recent evidence has
shown that the specific number of times that a pattern appears is of great
importance, and consequently a more granular notion of pattern containment
should be studied. Specifically, the question should instead be: how many times
does the permutation contain the pattern? This project will address that higher-
order question in several ways, with implications for combinatorics and its
connections to algebra, topology, and computer science.

The first part of the project will extend what is already known about higher-
order containment in a special but important case. A relationship was recently
established between individual occurrences of two patterns and repeated letters
in reduced decompositions. This is a critical step enabling the study of how
pattern occurrences can impact objects like the Bruhat order, the connection
between length and reflection length, and the frequency of letters in a reduced
decomposition. It also gives a new avenue for enumerating permutations that
contain fixed numbers of pattern occurrences. The second phase of the project
will bring the perspective of higher-order pattern containment to other pattern
sets. Several sets seem especially amenable to this pursuit, and their analysis
will pave the way for studying higher-order pattern containment more generally.
The main tools throughout this project will be a dictionary translating between
permutation patterns and reduced decompositions, and a technique for
manipulating reduced decompositions to reveal properties of the permutations
that they describe.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
