
* 2054255
* Cluster Algebras and Categorification
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 08/15/2021,08/06/2021
* Khrystyna Serhiyenko,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 193,218.00

Cluster algebras, introduced by Fomin and Zelevinsky in 2001, have an intricate
structure that can appear in many other, seemingly unrelated, areas of
mathematics and theoretical physics. In particular, they provide a rigid
framework that captures various patterns formed by a given system of elements.
Using cluster algebras, this system can then be translated into a different
setting, which allows us to use new tools and techniques for its study. Using
this approach, the theory of cluster algebras has led to the establishment of
many influential results in mathematics. This project is in a highly active
research area aimed at answering fundamental questions about the structure of
cluster algebras, as well as investigating new connections to other fields of
mathematics. This project will focus both on obtaining explicit computational
results and developing general properties. Throughout this award, the PI will
contribute to the advancement of education and research in the mathematical
community by working with undergraduates, developing new courses, recruiting
graduate students, and fostering international collaborations among women.

The project will explore new connections between cluster algebras and their
various categorifications to further their understanding and build parallels
between the different areas. Its goal is to develop novel combinatorial models
for certain important classes of cluster algebras in order to get an explicit
description of its generators and relations that are built recursively. The main
ingredient behind solving these questions is the powerful machinery coming from
the representation theory of associative algebras, which encode the structure of
cluster algebras and constitute an invaluable tool in their study. In
particular, the PI will study the recently-found cluster structures coming from
positroid and Richardson varieties in the Grassmannian. Moreover, the PI
proposes a new combinatorial description of Cohen-Macauley subcategories in the
module category of certain Jacobian algebras which offers applications to
various topics in cluster algebras and representation theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
