
* 2055118
* Harmonic Maass Forms, "Moonshine," and Arithmetic Statistics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2021,06/23/2021
* Ken Ono,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2024
* USD 275,975.00

Einstein's general relativity was formulated just over a hundred years ago. This
theory now underpins the Global Positioning System, an almost ubiquitous feature
of modern life. Almost concurrently, the mathematical genius Ramanujan arrived
in England to work with Cambridge mathematician G. H. Hardy. The observations
and insights he shared then continue to fascinate the mathematical world, and
his personal story has captured the public imagination. In recent years evidence
has emerged that the work of Einstein and the work of Ramanujan are related.
This research project aims to develop the theory underlying this connection and
lay important groundwork for future applications to mathematics, signal
processing, and physics. The PI will continue to train graduate students in
mathematics as part of this award.

This project is dedicated to arithmetic statistics and the development of the
theory of harmonic Maass forms. These tools will be applied to various open
problems in number theory, representation theory, and mathematical physics.
Harmonic Maass forms generalize modular forms, and are now recognized as
furnishing a theoretical framework for Ramanujan's mock theta functions, as well
as the currently-developing umbral moonshine theory. Building on the PI?s
earlier work in these areas, the goal of this project is to develop algebraic,
analytic, and combinatorial tools for harmonic Maass forms that will shed light
upon statistical problems such as ranks of elliptic curves, torsion in class
groups of number fields, distribution of Fourier coefficients of modular forms,
the relationship between monstrous and umbral moonshine, and the consequences of
this relationship for physics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
