
* 2100962
* Tropical Methods for the Tautological Intersection Theory of the Moduli Spaces of Curves
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Combinatorics
* 08/01/2021,07/28/2021
* Renzo Cavalieri,CO,Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2024
* USD 165,000.00

Algebraic geometry is a broad and active area of research in mathematics. Moduli
spaces, geometric objects whose points parameterize other geometric objects, are
of fundamental importance both in algebraic geometry, and in connecting
algebraic geometry to other areas of science. For example, the connection with
physics arises from the fact that the evolution of strings in space-time may be
interpreted as an appropriate measurement on a moduli space of stable maps to
space-time. The geometry of moduli space is extremely sophisticated, but it
often comes with a rich recursive structure: in simple terms, more complicated
moduli spaces contain within themselves a skeleton built of simpler moduli
spaces. Over the last few decades this phenomenon has led to the development of
several combinatorial approaches to the study of intersection theory of moduli
spaces. The main goal of this project is to develop a thorough understanding of
the intersection theory of a particular class of moduli spaces, called
admissible cover spaces. Admissible cover spaces provide a rich and interesting
connection between algebraic geometry and representation theory of finite
groups, and have significant applications to mathematical physics and mirror
symmetry. The goal will be achieved through a combination of several techniques
and perspectives, including methods coming from tropical geometry, logarithmic
geometry and mathematical physics. The PI, together with collaborators, will
work in parallel both to further develop and to apply these techniques to the
study of the structure of moduli spaces of admissible covers. This project
provides research training opportunities for students.

Specific projects contributing to achieving the main goal are organized in three
groups. The first group of projects explores the structure of classes of
hyperelliptic curves with marked Weierstrass points and pairs of conjugate
points. The aim is to generalize the notion of Cohomological Field Theory, and
to exploit this structure to obtain graph formulas for these classes. A better
understanding of the structure of admissible cover loci is a tool to recover
enumerative information hidden in Gromov-Witten invariants of curves. The second
group of projects aims to give a solid combinatorial framework for the
tautological intersection theory of a directed system of birational models of
the moduli space of curves, obtained by blowing up all boundary strata (and
proper transforms thereof). Besides being of independent interest, we expect
this calculus to be an important tool in understanding families of classes of
admissible covers, whose intersection with the boundary is transversalized in
these birational transforms. These techniques allow new perspectives on the
computation of double Hurwitz numbers, and the generalization to similar
enumerative geometric problems on moduli spaces of twisted log-canonical
divisors. Tropical geometry plays a fundamental role in organizing the
birational modifications of the moduli space of curves that we expect to use in
the study of cycles of admissible covers. The last group of projects builds on
foundational work in tropical geometry that the PI conducted in collaboration
with Gross and Markwig. Having defined a theory of tropical psi classes, the
goal is now to establish a rigorous tropicalization statement relating algebraic
and tropical classes, with the expectation that these will play a significant
role in connecting algebraic and tropical intersection theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
