
* 2100933
* Topics in Number Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2021,08/08/2022
* Kannan Soundararajan,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2026
* USD 244,043.00

This award is concerned with problems in number theory, specifically the theory
of L-functions. One central theme in number theory is to understand the
properties and distribution of prime numbers. Often such problems are understood
by packaging the relevant information into analytic objects known as
L-functions. The study of these L-functions is a classical topic in number
theory beginning with the work of Riemann and Dirichlet in the nineteenth
century, but yet continues to be a central focus of modern mathematics, with
problems like the Riemann Hypothesis and the Birch & Swinnerton-Dyer conjectures
lying at the heart of the subject. Progress in this area has sometimes found
applications in cryptography and theoretical computer science.

The investigator will continue his work on topics at the interface of analysis,
number theory, and combinatorics. In particular he will continue research in
multiplicative number theory (for example in the distribution of random
multiplicative functions, averages of Weyl sums, and averages of singular
series), and in understanding the moments and value distribution of central
values of L-functions. The grant will also be used to help train graduate
students in the area.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
