
* 2100389
* Singularities and Duality with Applications to Moduli Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2021,05/20/2022
* Sandor Kovacs,WA,University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2026
* USD 194,728.00

This project is in the field of algebraic geometry, one of the oldest fields in
modern mathematics, and one that blossomed to the point where it has solved
centuries-old problems. In its simplest form it treats figures defined in space
by polynomials, such as a sphere or an (infinite) cone. Today, the field uses
methods not only from algebra, but also from analysis and topology, and
conversely it is extensively used in those fields. Moreover, it has proved
applicable in fields as diverse as physics, theoretical computer science,
cryptography, coding theory, and robotics. A central problem in algebraic
geometry is the classification of all geometric objects. In turn, an important
part of classification theory is the theory of moduli. The latter's core idea is
that one not only wants to understand these objects, but also understand the way
they can be deformed. Moduli spaces play an important role in theoretical
physics: studying curves on moduli spaces provides information on how an object
is moving in space-time. The investigator is also involved in mentoring the next
generation of researchers. This project supports several graduate students, who
are working toward their doctoral degree on related projects under the direction
of the investigator.

The project concerns several topics in higher dimensional algebraic geometry,
especially singularities and their applications to moduli theory. At the center
is the study of singularities and their interconnections, especially rational,
Du Bois, and other singularities related to the minimal model program and moduli
theory of higher dimensional algebraic varieties, which in turn are the two main
pillars of classification theory of higher dimensional varieties. One of the
main goals of the project is to further develop the theory of rational
singularities in arbitrary characteristic. In particular, the investigator is
working toward obtaining criteria which are easier to check than the current
definition as well as toward establishing the existence of partial resolutions
with rational singularities. Another of the main goals is to extend the
definition of Du Bois singularities to arbitrary characteristics and study their
deformation theoretic properties and their connections to rational
singularities. Yet another goal of the project is to better understand the
relatively new notion of 'liftable local cohomology' and its relations to
deformations. The results obtained with regard to singularities and liftable
local cohomology will be used in applications to moduli theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
