
* 2100912
* RUI: Galois Automorphisms and Local-Global Properties of Representations of Finite Groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2021,08/27/2021
* Amanda Schaeffer Fry,CO,Metropolitan State University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2024
* USD 154,444.00

This project is in the area of group theory and the representation theory of
finite groups. Groups may be understood as collections of symmetries and the
study of group theory was motivated by the desire to understand the symmetry of
an object, whether it be in nature, art, communication networks, or any other
place that symmetry might play a role. Group theory has applications in physics,
chemistry, and other natural sciences. In recent years, research in group theory
has had a significant impact on technological advances, such as in cryptography
and coding theory. Representation theory is a tool used to better understand the
structure of a group and the symmetries it represents. Representations provide a
way to view an abstract group as a group of matrices, whose structure is often
easier to understand. This project focuses on a number of problems which seek to
relate the representation theory of a finite group to the structure and
representations of certain so-called local subgroups, which reflect numerical
information encoded by the group. Several problems to be studied in the project
involve computations and other components that are well-suited for involving
undergraduate students and introducing them to group theory and mathematical
research. A key part of the investigator's activities under the project will be
to recruit, encourage, and mentor students to pursue undergraduate research
projects.

More specifically, the problems under consideration in this project require
understanding the irreducible characters of finite groups of Lie type, and
involve relating the character theory of a group to the characters of its local
subgroups, through a collection of conjectures known as local-global
conjectures. The local-global philosophy centers around the idea that critical
information about the representation theory of a finite group can be deduced
from knowledge of the representation theory of its local subgroups. One of the
first of these local-global conjectures, and currently one of the main
motivations for problems in the area, is known as the McKay conjecture. Although
heavily studied, this conjecture is still somewhat of a mystery to group
theorists. In pursuit of a better understanding of why local subgroups seem to
provide so much information about the character theory of the group itself,
several stronger forms of the McKay conjecture have been proposed, and this
project considers those involving the role of Galois automorphisms (the McKay-
Navarro conjecture), block theory (the Alperin-McKay conjecture), and the
combination of the two (the Alperin-McKay-Navarro conjecture). Hence, several of
the questions in the project aim to further the study of the blocks of groups of
Lie type and their local subgroups, as well as the action of Galois
automorphisms on these objects. Since the effect of various group actions on
parametrizations of these characters is an especially problematic component in a
number of local-global conjectures and other important problems regarding
representations of groups of Lie type, the research in this project will have
applications to other problems in the area.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
