
* 2101844
* Higher Depth in Representation Theory, Number Theory, and Quantum Topology
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2021,08/22/2022
* Antun Milas,NY,SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2024
* USD 358,968.00

Representation theory is the study of symmetries of algebraic objects by means
of linear algebra. Modular forms are important special functions defined on the
upper half-plane that obey certain transformation properties. They are
extensively used in number theory to derive interesting arithmetic relations.
Quantum topology is a branch of mathematics that connects ideas of quantum field
theory with low-dimensional topology. This research project lies at the
interface of these areas and is concerned with properties of several types of
partition or counting functions. A primary aim of the project is to develop new
tools for studying their arithmetic properties and analytic behaviors and use
them to solve concrete problems. The techniques in play are of interest to a
broad range of mathematicians and theoretical physicists. In addition to
research, this project will also support training of graduate students.

In more technical terms, this project will deepen our understanding of
characters of representation of vertex algebras, specifically those exhibiting
"higher depth" phenomena. For this purpose the PI will introduce and study
higher depth false modular forms and higher depth quantum modular forms. These
are generalizations of quantum modular forms (after Zagier) and closely related
higher depth mock modular forms. The PI will investigate coefficients of
meromorphic Jacobi forms in several variables and their Fourier coefficients,
generalizing the existing results for a single variable. In quantum topology,
the PI will further investigate properties of "homological blocks" (or Z-hat
invariants) of Gukov, Pei, Putrov and Vafa. In particular, the PI will study
Gukov's conjecture on higher depth quantum modularity of Z-hat invariants of
plumbed 3-manifolds. In a different direction, also motivated by physics, the PI
will prove rigorous formulas for Schur's indices of certain 4d N=2 SCFTs
inspired by counting formulas for BPS particles on the Coulomb branch. Related
methods will be applied to problems in algebraic geometry pertaining to Hilbert-
Poincare series of certain arc spaces. Other directions include W-algebras for
Argyres-Douglas theories, principal subspaces, parafermionic vertex algebras,
and permutation orbifolds.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
