
* 2101636
* Higher Codimension Cycles on Shimura Varieties
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/15/2021,07/01/2021
* Benjamin Howard,MA,Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2024
* USD 313,999.00

The main focus of this project is on the theory of Shimura varieties. These are
particular kinds of higher-dimensional surfaces whose rich geometry and
arithmetic puts them among the central objects of study in modern mathematics.
In addition to their importance in pure mathematics, they play an essential role
in the Langlands program, which is of increasing interest in theoretical
physics, and are important tools for understanding elliptic curves and abelian
varieties, which now play a major role in cryptography. More broadly, the
project concerns the theory of numbers and arithmetic geometry. This is an area
of research which has applications to cyber security, through cryptography, and
to some aspects of coding theory. Graduate students supported by the award will
receive training to contribute towards these projects.

The primary goal of the Principal Investigator's project is to prove new
relations between special cycles and automorphic forms. For example, the
Principal Investigator will use recent advances in the theory of Borcherds
products and integral models to prove the modularity of generating series formed
from special cycles of arbitrary codimension on integral models of orthogonal
Shimura varieties. The Principal Investigator will also prove new examples of
generalized Gross-Zagier formulas, by expressing the intersection multiplicities
of cycles on unitary Shimura varieties in terms of coefficients of integral
kernels for automorphic L-functions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
