
* 2101898
* Analyzing algebraic varieties from the point of view of motivic homotopy theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/01/2021,05/21/2021
* Aravind Asok,CA,University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 04/30/2024
* USD 195,000.00

Algebraic geometry, one of the oldest branches of mathematics, is at its core
concerned with the study of systems of polynomial equations in many variables.
The solutions to such systems give rise to algebraic varieties, which are
fundamental objects of study in algebraic geometry. Algebraic topology is the
study of systematically attaching algebraic invariants (e.g., numbers or
abstract algebraic structures) to spaces; these invariants should not depend on
the way a space is pulled or twisted without tearing it. When algebraic
varieties have a spatial structure, it is natural to try to analyze them using
the tools of algebraic topology. However, when algebraic varieties do not have
an obvious spatial structure, e.g., if they arise in arithmetic settings, then a
new approach is required. The focus of this project is to analyze algebraic
invariants of algebraic varieties using the framework of the Morel-Voevodsky
A^1-homotopy theory. This theory allows one to apply the full power of
techniques of algebraic topology to objects of interest in algebraic geometry ?
one may treat spaces having complicated arithmetic structure, but a priori
limited geometric structure, in essentially the same way as more classical
spaces. The current project seeks to analyze certain classical algebraic and
arithmetic questions using these new techniques and to provide a better
understanding of specific systems of algebraic equations, which is fundamental
to many areas of mathematics. More specifically, the PI will study problems in
linear algebra over commutative unital rings, for example, the theory of
projective modules and decompositions of matrices. These structures lie in the
domain of algebraic K-theory and are related to topological and arithmetic
questions by means of Morel-Voeovdsky A^1-homotopy theory. Among others, the PI
will investigate the following concrete (and classical) question: given a
complex algebraic variety, which topological vector bundles admit algebraic
structures? By their very nature, such problems draw together several branches
of mathematics and thus illustrate the fundamental unity of the subject.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
