
* 2101761
* Noncommutative Algebras and Their Interactions With Algebraic and Arithmetic Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2021,06/27/2021
* Rajesh Kulkarni,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2024
* USD 314,000.00

The fruitful interactions between mathematics and theoretical physics have
resulted in increased interest in noncommutative algebras. Noncommutative
algebras have similarities with more familiar constructs, like polynomials, but
a key difference is that the order of multiplication matters. There is a
symbiotic relationship between noncommutative algebras and algebraic geometry,
which is the study of shapes of solutions to polynomial equations.
Noncommutative algebras can be studied using sophisticated methods of algebraic
geometry and, conversely, have been used to answer questions in algebraic
geometry. In addition, the interactions between the two areas have potential
applications in physics and in error correcting codes. The subject of
noncommutative algebraic geometry has been progressing rapidly, and this project
further develops some deep algebraic and arithmetic aspects of specific classes
of noncommutative algebras and related algebraic geometry. The project also
involves training of graduate students, providing them with ample opportunities
for research in the coming years.

The unifying theme of the research projects is noncommutative algebras and their
interactions with algebraic and arithmetic geometry. The motivating questions
arise primarily from noncommutative algebras and the techniques utilized in
their exploration range from algebra to algebraic and arithmetic geometry. The
first project investigates noncommutative algebras called maximal orders. These
are coherent sheaves of algebras whose generic stalk is a central simple
algebra. The project involves studying birational classification of maximal
orders on algebraic varieties in arbitrary dimensions using the pluri-canonical
map and the Kodaira dimension, the derived categories of certain orders called
the del Pezzo orders, and the ramification of maximal orders in characteristic
p. The second project focuses on investigating moduli stack of genus 1 curves
using Brauer groups of their Jacobian curves, studying unramified Brauer classes
on projective varieties and their representation by Azumaya algebras, and
further developing the construction of abelian varieties associated to Clifford
algebras. The third project concerns Ulrich bundles on smooth projective
varieties and representations of Clifford algebras. The project uses
representations of Clifford algebras in exploration of existence of Ulrich
bundles on smooth projective varieties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
