
* 2101491
* Analytic Number Theory over Function Fields
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2021,05/10/2022
* Will Sawin,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2024
* USD 155,373.00

Number theory is an area of mathematics that centers on the ordinary counting
numbers and their behavior when we add and multiply them. While problems in this
area are often simple to state, they can be fiendishly difficult to solve. The
subfield of function field number theory aims to obtain insight on these
problems by considering a kind of model or parallel universe where numbers
behave differently. We consider what happens when we add or multiply numbers as
normal but, except, instead of carrying digits, we simply drop the excess.
Certainly arithmetic is a little easier with this modified rule, but more
surprisingly, some of the most important problems in number theory become easier
as well, with even some of the most difficult ones becoming solvable.
(Technically, we should work in binary, or any prime base, rather than our usual
base 10, for this.) Alternately, we can describe this variant arithmetic as the
addition or multiplication of polynomial functions in a single variable. In this
setting, we can connect number-theoretic questions to geometry, by viewing the
graph of the polynomial as a geometric object. In this award the PI's research
uses geometric tools to solve new problems in this area.

The PI's research has resolved function field analogues of classical problems in
number theory, including the twin primes conjecture and Chowla's conjecture
(both joint with Shusterman), cases of the Ramanujan conjecture (joint with
Templier), and conjectures about moments of L-functions. In this award the PI
will continue along these lines, proving additional results about the
distribution of prime numbers, L-function moments, and automorphic forms, and
work in further directions such as non-abelian Cohen-Lenstra heuristics. These
works are all based on etale cohomology theory, where the foundational result,
Deligne's Riemann Hypothesis, allows many different analytic problems (problems
about proving some inequality) to be reduced to cohomology problems (problems
about calculating some of the cohomology groups of a variety or sheaf). The
relevant varieties are high-dimensional, and calculating the necessary
cohomology groups requires techniques like vanishing cycles theory and the
characteristic cycle.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
