
* 2101836
* Functoriality in the Mod-p Langlands Program
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/15/2021,06/04/2021
* Karol Koziol,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 01/31/2023
* USD 124,050.00

Number theory is the branch of mathematics that deals with properties of whole
numbers and whole number solutions to polynomial equations, and stands as one of
the oldest mathematical disciplines. Representation theory, another equally
influential branch of mathematics, quantifies symmetries of geometric objects
(such as a square or a hydrogen atom), and has important uses in physics. Though
seemingly unrelated, these two areas are intimately linked by the Langlands
Program, a vast set of conjectures that allows for the transfer of results and
theorems between number theory and representation theory. It is of paramount
importance to understand these conjectures, since tools from one discipline can
be imported to tackle previously intractable problems in another (the proof of
Fermat's Last Theorem being a prime example). This has pushed the Langlands
Program to the forefront of current research. The present project seeks to
establish instances of a local version of the Langlands Program with mod p
coefficients, so that information from representation theory can be transferred
into arithmetic data.

The setting of the current project lies within the representation theory of
p-adic reductive groups (such as GL_2(Q_p)) on mod p vector spaces. Such
representations are exceedingly intricate, and one of the main goals is to use
derived categories in order to more precisely relate such representations to
modules over differential graded Hecke algebras. This will allow for the use of
new tools to understand the relationships between Langlands correspondences for
varying groups. In addition to this, the PI and his collaborators plan to use
known instances of automorphic base change and the global theory of automorphic
forms to develop a mod p Langlands correspondence for p-adic unitary groups.
This would enrich the known instances of mod p Langlands correspondences by
showing that they are compatible with functorial constructions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
