
* 2101075
* Commutative Algebra: Extremal Singularities in Prime Characteristic
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2021,08/03/2022
* Karen Smith,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2024
* USD 242,342.00

The project is in algebraic geometry, the science of understanding geometric
shapes that can be described by polynomial equations. Polynomials are ubiquitous
in mathematics because they can be easily manipulated by hand or by machine, yet
they exhibit a large range of behavior which can model nearly any shape, from
simple circles and lines to complicated images which could appear in medical
imaging or an animated movie. The project seeks to understand the singularities
of algebraic varieties---places where the shape is pinched or folded over on
itself. We will devise tools to measure how "bad" these singularities are, and
attempt to classify the "worst" ones. The project will be carried out by the PI
with a team of trainees, including undergraduate students, graduate students,
post-docs, and other collaborators.

The project investigates lower bounds on the F-pure threshold of polynomials
over an algebraically closed field of characteristic p. The goal is to find
sharp lower bounds, classify the singularities achieving that lower bound, and
apply these results to open problems in the field. More specifically, a first
direction is to prove general lower bounds on F-pure threshold in terms of other
invariants, such as multiplicity, and then identify the varieties??extremal
singularities?? achieving those bounds. Next, the aim is to classify Frobenius
forms, which are the ?extremal singularities? for a certain lower bound on
F-pure threshold in the homogeneous case. A third direction is to advance
progress on a conjecture of Kleiman and Piene characterizing hypersurfaces whose
Gauss maps are extremal in certain ways, using properties of Frobenius forms.
The final direction is an investigation into whether Frobenius forms may define
hypersurfaces admitting non-commutative resolutions of singularities, contrary
to previous speculations about mildness of singularities for varieties with non-
commutative resolutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
