
* 2101935
* Rational Curves on Fano Varieties
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/15/2021,07/12/2021
* Roya Beheshti Zavareh,MO,Washington University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2024
* USD 203,917.00

Algebraic varieties are common zeros of collections of polynomial equations.
Rational curves are the simplest algebraic varieties, and an important approach
to study the geometry of algebraic varieties is to study parameter spaces of
rational curves contained in them. These parameter spaces are themselves
varieties with rich geometry, and their study has broad applications in higher
dimensional algebraic geometry, enumerative geometry, arithmetic geometry, and
questions inspired by mathematical physics. In this project, several open
questions on various aspects of the geometry of spaces of rational curves on
algebraic varieties are investigated. The project provides training
opportunities for graduate students.

The focus of the first part of the project is the study of spaces of rational
curves (as well as rational surfaces and linear subvarieties) contained in
hypersurfaces. Hypersurfaces of low degree in projective space form an important
testing ground for the study of rationally connected and Fano varieties as well
as several other questions in birational geometry. Despite some progress over
the past few years, some of the basic properties of these spaces are still
unknown. A major guiding question for the study of rational curves on
hypersurfaces is which Fano hypersurfaces are rational or unirational. The
second part of the project is on the study of rational curves on varieties from
the perspective of Geometric Maninís conjecture which predicts the growth rate
of a counting function associated to the irreducible components of moduli spaces
of rational curves on a variety. In this part, several questions on the geometry
of spaces of rational curves on Fano threefolds in characteristic zero and on
del Pezzo surfaces over fields of finite characteristic are investigated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
