
* 2101225
* Symbolic Powers and Lefschetz Properties: Geometric and Homological Aspects
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/15/2021,06/07/2021
* Alexandra Seceleanu,NE,University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2024
* USD 220,507.00

This research concerns problems in commutative algebra motivated by algebraic
geometry. At the heart of a wide array of scientific endeavors is the ubiquitous
need to solve polynomial equations. A complementary goal is to find polynomial
equations, for example, an equation whose graph passes through a given set of
data points. This procedure, termed polynomial interpolation, is a fundamental
challenge at the interface of data science, numerical analysis, and algebraic
geometry. The investigator will bring methods from commutative and computational
algebra to bear on aspects of a higher order version of polynomial
interpolation. For example, the situation when the data points exhibit intrinsic
symmetry will be elucidated. Additionally, a deeper understanding of the
interactions between this topic and emerging techniques in homological algebra
will be pursued. The broader impact of this fundamental research lies in the
engagement and training of graduate students, software development, and the
recruitment, retention, and professional development of junior mathematicians.

The research project focuses on two topics which generate current excitement:
polynomial interpolation and the algebraic Lefschetz properties. The former
theme will be analyzed through the lens of symbolic power ideals, which can be
thought of as sets of polynomials that vanish to a certain order on a given
algebraic variety. The latter theme constitutes an algebraic abstraction of the
Hard Lefschetz Theorem with spectacular applications to several areas of
mathematics. The interrelations between these two topics will be thoroughly
explored and exploited. One particular direction of investigation is on
applications of the algebraic Lefschetz properties to homological algebra,
specifically to graded free resolutions. Other directions include applications
to the containment problem relating the ordinary and symbolic topologies defined
by an ideal. Aspects of this work exhibit relationships to the theory of
reflection groups, hyperplane arrangements, convex geometry, and differential
graded algebras.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
