
* 2101843
* Collaborative Research: Toric Geometry, Tropical Geometry, and Combinatorial Buildings
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Combinatorics
* 09/01/2021,08/03/2021
* Kiumars Kaveh,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

This project involves research at the intersection of algebraic geometry and
combinatorics. Algebraic geometry is the study of solution sets of polynomial
equations called algebraic varieties. It has applications in many fields as
diverse as high energy physics, coding, cryptography, and mathematical biology.
Understanding how the shape of the solution set changes as the coefficients are
varied is one of the oldest and central questions in the field. Such continuous
deformations, which appear in all branches of algebraic geometry and its
applications, are called algebraic families. An important example is the
geometric Langlands program, which is concerned with understanding principal
bundles on curves, a very special class of families. Bundles are also main
players in gauge theory in high energy physics. Algebraic families are the
central focus of this project. The research aims to introduce new methods to
classify and compute with algebraic families. The project will provide research
training opportunities for graduate students.

Toric varieties are a large class of varieties whose geometry is intimately
connected with combinatorics of convex lattice polytopes. They play a central
role in contemporary algebraic geometry. Tropical geometry, a relatively recent
area of research, concerns study of piecewise linear geometry and has roots in
convex optimization. Tropical geometry translates numerous questions in algebra
and geometry into combinatorial and convex geometric questions that are often
more tractable. The theory of buildings is an area of combinatorial geometry
that has deep connections with topology and differential geometry. It aims to
unravel hidden combinatorial geometric structures in matrix groups and related
spaces. The topics of this research revolve around the common theme of studying
families of algebraic varieties over a toric variety, or a toric family for
short. The main insight is that the combinatorics needed to understand toric
families comes from both tropical geometry and the theory of buildings. The
approach followed in this project will lead to the development of new techniques
in algebraic geometry and related fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
