
* 2101507
* Sheaves, Representations, and Dualities
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2021,06/15/2022
* Roman Bezrukavnikov,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2026
* USD 264,369.00

A duality in mathematics or theoretical physics is a correspondence between two
theories which allows one to relate key phenomena in one theory to those in the
other, despite their somewhat different, in a sense opposite, nature. A rough
analogy is to the relation between a visual image and its reflection in a
mirror. This project is in representation theory, that is, the study of
algebraic structure of symmetries. Fundamental dualities have been playing an
increasingly central role in the subject. One such duality is geometric
Langlands duality, an outgrowth of reciprocity laws in number theory. Another is
mirror symmetry, a phenomenon in algebraic geometry with origins in physics. The
present project will derive further consequences of these fundamental ideas to
representation theory. An additional goal is to study the common features of
different dualities that appear in representation theory in order to find a
unified approach resulting in a better understanding of the nature of the
observed phenomena. The Principal Investigator will involve graduate and
undergraduate students in projects thus promoting mathematical education and
research at various levels. The project has several aims. One is to advance
rapidly developing topological methods in the theory of modular representations.
Another is to further develop etale sheaf methods in harmonic analysis on p-adic
groups and finite groups of Lie type. Here we plan to work on uncovering the
geometric phenomena underlying the theory of endoscopy in harmonic analysis on
p-adic groups. Finally, the PI will continue to work on the theory of quantized
symplectic resolutions, an exciting recent chapter in representation theory with
surprising connections to physics and algebraic geometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
