
* 2103720
* Multiplicities and Period Integrals for Spherical Varieties
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2020,04/18/2022
* Chen Wan,NJ,Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2023
* USD 123,341.00

Representation theory and automorphic forms are two important branches of
mathematics that has connections to many other subjects, including physics and
computer science. Reductive group is a special kind of topological groups with
abundant symmetries. These symmetries are the guidelines to understanding the
intrinsic structures of objects in our universe. The study of reductive groups
dates back to the late 19th century. Two of the most important areas are the
representation theory of reductive groups and automorphic forms (which is a
special kind of functions with extra symmetry) on reductive groups. This project
aims to understand the restriction of representations of reductive groups to a
spherical subgroup, and to understand the period integrals of automorphic forms.

This project is to study the local multiplicities and global period integrals of
spherical varieties, as well as their connections to L-functions and arithmetic
geometry. Locally the goal is to prove the multiplicity formula and local trace
formula for general spherical varieties. Another goal is to prove comparisons
between orbital integrals of some relative trace formulas, as well as
comparisons between the derivative of some orbital integrals and some height
pairings. The main method used in the local theory is harmonic analysis on
reductive groups. Globally the goal is to study various relations between period
integrals and automorphic L-functions. Another goal is to understand the
nontempered terms in the space of square-integrable automorphic forms for the
general linear groups in terms of orbital integrals. The methods used in the
global theory are the residue method, the relative trace formula, and some ideas
from the theory of beyond endoscopy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
