
* 2120325
* CAREER: Galois Representations: Deformation Theory and Motivic Origins
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 05/15/2021,05/10/2022
* Stefan Patrikis,OH,Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2024
* USD 253,967.00

For centuries, symmetry has played a central organizing role in the study of our
mathematical and physical world. What may have begun as simple curiosity--for
instance, the impulse to construct and classify the regular polyhedra nearly two
and a half thousand years ago--has turned out time and again to be the most
effective way to study some of the most fundamental objects of mathematics and
physics, whether through the more concrete symmetries of geometrical objects or
the more abstract (but essential to our digital world) symmetries of quantum
mechanics. Perhaps the most surprising role of symmetry in the sciences is in
the study of the prime numbers, the fundamental objects of arithmetic, where
there are no manifest "symmetries" such as one encounters in geometry.
Nevertheless, much of our deepest knowledge of prime numbers comes from their
connections with the "symmetries" of polynomial equations, a subject known as
Galois theory. This research project will study Galois representations, which
are natural packages for algebraically encoding information about prime numbers.
One of the central programs of modern number theory, proposes new ways to
"unpack" Galois representations by relating them to remarkably different
mathematical objects arising in geometry. The PI will continue his research in
this direction to describe these mysterious but absolutely fundamental
relationships. As part of the educational component of this CAREER project, the
PI will undertake a series of educational projects serving a variety of
audiences. He will continue to run an intensive summer number theory program for
Utah high school students, introducing them to mathematics as an object of
experimentation and discovery, and thereby encouraging them to develop the
habits of mind essential to creative intellectual work. This program involves
both graduate students and local high school teachers as co-teachers, who can
then carry its distinctive pedagogical model with them to other educational
settings. With a view toward exciting a broader mathematical public, the PI will
also, in conjunction with teaching a history of mathematics course at The
University of Utah, develop curricular materials, particularly videos, to be
disseminated online, in the history of mathematics. Finally, he will continue
his work training PhD students. In more detail, the Langlands program is a
series of conjectures that guide much contemporary work in number theory, and in
particular provide the deepest conjectural answers to problems relating Galois
theory and prime numbers. In doing so, they reach out from number theory to
algebraic geometry, representation theory, and beyond. The PI complete two main
projects within the very broad purview of the Langlands program. The first
concerns the deformation theory of Galois representations, one of the two
pillars on which the proof of Fermat's Last Theorem was built, and ever since
one of the central research areas within algebraic number theory. Here the PI
will study the deformation theory of Galois representations valued in general
reductive groups; broadly, this work aims at generalizations of Serre's famous
modularity conjecture. The second main project concerns the relationship between
Galois representations and motives, the latter being in some sense the best
linear approximation to the category of algebraic varieties, of fundamental
interest in its own right, but also conjecturally the algebro-geometric
counterpart of Galois representations. Here the PI will study a variety of
problems concerned with establishing the motivic origin of Galois
representations. These include instances of the Fontaine-Mazur conjecture
related to the PI's generalized Kuga-Satake theory; study of anabelian
properties of moduli spaces; and motivic constructions underlying fundamental
objects of geometric representation theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
