
* 2130627
* Algebraic Combinatorics Virtual Expedition, Online Conference, 2021
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 06/15/2021,06/03/2021
* Maria Gillespie,CO,Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2022
* USD 5,394.00

The Algebraic Combinatorics Virtual Expedition (AlCoVE) is a two-day conference
for mathematicians studying the interplay between algebra and combinatorics and
their applications to other areas of mathematics and science. At the start of
the COVID-19 pandemic, AlCoVE was launched as a way to bring together the
algebra and combinatorics communities in a virtual setting. We aimed to re-
create as many of the beneficial aspects of in-person conferences as possible,
including the mentoring and networking benefits that conferences usually
provide. The 2020 conference drew hundreds of participants from all around the
world, and we are now continuing to run AlCoVE as an annual online conference,
improving our virtual social events through technology funded by the NSF. AlCoVE
strives to be an inclusive, global conference that promotes collaboration and
progress in this field, while simultaneously increasing accessibility and
helping to reduce the carbon footprint of mathematics research.

AlCoVE 2021, to be held on June 14-15, will feature presentations on a wide
array of topics in algebraic combinatorics and its applications. These topics
include enumeration, lattices and posets, generating functions and q-series,
symmetric function theory, computational algebraic geometry, polytopes and
Ehrhart theory, combinatorial optimization, and topological combinatorics. There
will be a poster session for younger researchers to share their work as well,
and dynamic social events to foster networking, collaboration, and social
events. The website for the conference is
http://www.math.uwaterloo.ca/~opecheni/alcove.htm

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
