
* 2131243
* Noncommutative Algebras and Related Categorical Structures
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 04/15/2021,06/08/2021
* Milen Yakimov,MA,Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2023
* USD 154,901.00

Many models in the sciences and engineering lead to mathematical problems about
solutions of equations in commuting variables. However, starting with quantum
mechanics, a great number of models emerged that led to mathematical problems
involving variables that no longer commute. Noncommutative Algebra is one of the
areas of mathematics that studies those structures. The research projects that
are funded by this award investigate the interrelations between the commutative
and noncommutative settings, using a branch of geometry called Poisson geometry.
Three other approaches are used to study the noncommutative setting: a
combinatorial approach based on intricate internal transformations of the
objects, called cluster mutations; an algebraic approach that investigates
intrinsically defined structures called Calabi-Yau categories; and a
noncommutative geometric approach using quantum versions of symmetric spaces.
The four approaches are simultaneously used to carry out a detailed study of the
properties and symmetries of noncommutative objects. Further, the noncommutative
objects are shown to exhibit various forms of rigidity. This is used to settle
problems in algebra, geometry, combinators, and dynamical systems that were
previously posed without any reference to the noncommutative setting. These
research activities will be used as the foundation for the training of graduate
and undergraduate students and for mentoring mathematics postdocs.

The research projects funded under this awaard investigate problems in
noncommutative algebra, quantum symmetric spaces, and noncommutative projective
algebraic geometry and the relations of these problems to Poisson geometry,
combinatorics, triangulated categories, and integrable systems. On the one hand,
the program aims at using methods from the latter areas to describe the
structure and representations of quantum cluster algebras at roots of unity, the
Drinfeld doubles of Nichols algebras, the algebras that appear in the theory of
quantum symmetric pairs, and the algebras that describe noncommutative
projective spaces. In the opposite direction, previously posed problems in the
latter areas are converted to problems for noncommutative algebras and their
representation categories, and are then resolved within that setting. One of the
directions of this program is the construction of universal K-matrices on the
symmetric subalgebras of the Drinfeld doubles of Nichols algebras, and using
this to study the ring theoretic properties of Nichols algebras. Another
direction aims at the classification of irreducible representations of Nichols
algebras of diagonal type using Poisson orders and noncommutative discriminants.
A third direction develops a general setting for the study of finite dimensional
representations of quantum cluster algebras at root of unity using Poisson
geometry and Cayley-Hamilton algebras. Three additional directions investigate
the geometry of noncommutative projective spaces modeled by higher dimensional
elliptic algebras, the structure of 2-Calabi-Yau categories via categorical
C-vectors and dynamical systems, and the construction of integral quantum
cluster algebra structures on the canonical forms of quantized coordinate rings
of varieties in theory of Lie groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
