
* 2143922
* CAREER: Cluster Algebras in Representation Theory, Geometry, and Physics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 03/15/2022,03/14/2022
* Harold Williams,CA,University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 02/28/2027
* USD 93,550.00

This project pursues fundamental advances connecting a range of mathematical
disciplines, specifically representation theory (the study of symmetry),
algebraic geometry (the study of polynomial equations), and symplectic geometry
(the geometry of classical mechanics). The projects are connected by their use
cluster algebras to enrich these subjects and develop new connections among
them. The research will contribute to the fundamental goal of developing the
mathematical foundations of quantum field theory by providing new,
mathematically rigorous definitions of certain notions studied in modern
theoretical physics. This project provides research training opportunities for
graduate students.

In more detail, the PI will develop the theory of a class of coherent sheaves
inaugurated in his prior work. Key conjectures to be proved include that
categories of such Kp-sheaves are monoidal cluster categorifications in wide
generality, that in the adjoint case they obey a coherent variant of the
geometric Satake equivalence, and that in the context of quiver gauge theories
they admit a type of Schur-Weyl duality with affine Khovanov-Lauda-Rouquier
algebras. The PI will continue his work using cluster combinatorics to develop
new ideas in symplectic geometry. Finally, the PI will establish new cases of a
conjecture describing acyclic cluster algebras in terms of the representation
theory of Kac-Moody Lie groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
