
* 2152488
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Extremal Combinatorics and Flag Algebras
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 08/01/2022,06/22/2022
* Jozsef Balog,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 508,595.00

In extremal combinatorics one aims to find and characterize optimal members of a
given class of mathematical objects. Those extremal objects often have unique
properties and structures, giving insights in many mathematical fields. Over the
last twenty years, several new techniques, many using the assistance of
computers, have been extraordinarily successful in studying extremal objects.
One of the recent powerful methods is based on the theory of flag algebras. This
method enables researchers to translate extremal combinatorics questions into
instances of semidefinite programs, which can then be explored with the help of
a computer and academic as well as commercial software. This translation has led
to recent breakthroughs on longstanding open questions. The method is versatile
and can be applied in various settings such as graphs, hypergraphs,
permutations, oriented graphs, point sets, embedded graphs, and phylogenetic
trees. The aim of this focused research group is to resolve three prominent
types of open questions by Erd?s, Turán, and Zarankiewicz using these
techniques.

The three types of questions to be studied share the general flavor of
generalized Turán problems, and solving them would have far reaching
consequences. The first type are extremal hypergraph questions, the second type
concerns finding maximum cuts in graphs with certain properties, and the third
type are questions related to the crossing number of graphs. For all three, the
use of flag algebras has recently led to significant progress but not to full
solutions. This project will combine the expertise of the investigators with a
concentrated effort and further method development to resolve these open
questions. It is planned to find connections to more traditional methods such as
the stability method and linear algebraic methods. A substantial number of
students and early-career researchers will be trained and supported at the three
institutions, and several focused workshops are planned.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
