
* 2154896
* 2022 Union College Mathematics Conference
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, TOPOLOGY
* 02/01/2022,02/03/2022
* Phanuel Mariano,NY,Union College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 01/31/2023
* USD 21,050.00

The Union College Mathematics Conference will take place June 3-5, 2022, on the
Union College campus in Schenectady, NY. This conference has been held in
various forms since the 1970s, approximately every 2-3 years. The conference has
made a significant impact on the research productivity of the Hudson Valley
region and beyond. The conference will create a unique opportunity for cross-
disciplinary research among the various fields represented at the conference.
The award will support the participation of mathematicians who are in the early
stages of their careers and/or are members of historically underrepresented
groups in the mathematical sciences. The conference will feature five parallel
sessions in Algebraic Topology, Applied Topology and Geometry, Differential
Geometry and Geometric Analysis, Rings and Algebras, and Stochastic Analysis and
Applications. In addition, there will be five featured talks (including four
plenary) on recent work in these fields, a networking opportunity for those who
have been involved with or are interested in the Association for Women in
Mathematics' research communities, and many opportunities for interaction among
participants. The parallel sessions will provide researchers with the chance to
learn of recent developments in their fields and to share their own work with an
audience of specialists, while the plenary talks have the potential to foster
the creation of entirely new fields by exposing participants to groundbreaking
work outside of their own areas of expertise. The conference website is
maintained at:
http://www.math.union.edu/~marianop/UnionConference2022/UCMC2022index.html

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
