
* 2154347
* RUI: Optimization on Geometric Spanner Networks from a Combinatorial Perspective
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 09/01/2022,08/23/2022
* Csaba Toth,CA,The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 124,304.00

Producing, processing, and making sense of large data is part of our everyday
life. Graph theory is often called upon for modeling relations between data
items. However, for large and dense graphs, maintaining pairwise distances
between all pairs of vertices would be computationally prohibitive. A spanner is
a sparse substructure that approximates distances in the original network?the
approximation ratio is called the stretch factor. Spanners have increasingly
been used for the efficient representation of distances between vertices in both
practice and theory. Their performance is particularly impressive in geometric
settings, where the stretch factor can be arbitrarily close to one. Recent
results in computing have made significant progress in developing efficient
algorithms over the last few years and raised new combinatorial questions about
the asymptotic behavior of the minimum weight, size, and diameter of a geometric
spanner in terms of its stretch factor. This project will study optimization on
geometric spanners from a combinatorial standpoint. The involvement of
undergraduate and graduate students in the project will contribute to training a
highly skilled workforce familiar with the asymptotic behavior of large graphs
and prepared to tackle new challenges in our data-driven society.

This project studies several closely related questions concerning geometric
spanner networks from the perspective of extremal combinatorics. One group of
questions involves the asymptotic behavior of spanners as the stretch factor
tends to one. It aims to determine the dependence of the minimum weight of a
t-spanner on the stretch factor t for n points in geometric scenarios: in a
d-dimensional unit cube, in spaces with doubling dimension d, or in a section of
the integer lattice. It will explore tradeoffs between the graph-diameter of a
spanner and its minimum lightness, sparsity, or weight. When Steiner points are
allowed, tradeoffs between the number of Steiner points and other optimization
criteria are also of great interest. Another group of questions involves
spanners for intersection graphs of geometric objects, which are relevant in
applications in wireless network design. The project aims to derive upper and
lower bounds on the minimum size of t-spanners, for small values of t, for the
intersection graphs of balls, hyperrectangles, and other geometric objects in
d-space. New insights into the behavior of near-optimal spanners and the
limitations of feasible spanners under various parameter settings will guide the
development of efficient approximation algorithms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
