
* 2154242
* Bijective Combinatorics for Geometrical Structures
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 06/01/2022,03/28/2022
* Olivier Bernardi,MA,Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2025
* USD 210,000.00

This project is in the field of combinatorics, which is a branch of mathematics
concerned with the description and analysis of discrete data structures.
Combinatorial analysis is a central tool to solve many problems in mathematics,
and in related fields such as computer science and mathematical physics. This
project includes several problems in which some seemingly complex structures
seem to display some unexplained simple patterns. This suggest that these
structures may have an alternative simpler description, a "bijection",
explaining these patterns. Finding such a bijection can greatly simplify the
mathematical analysis of the objects under consideration. Graduate students will
be trained as part of this project.

This projects aims at solving several important problems in mathematics using
bijective techniques. The first problem is about unifying and extending a class
of bijections between planar maps and lattice paths, in view of analyzing some
statistical mechanics models on random lattices and relating them to Liouville
quantum gravity and SLE curves. The second problem, motivated by graph theory,
aims at finding the combinatorial structures underlying a mysterious enumerative
identity for properly colored planar triangulations. The third project aims at
using a generalization of Schnyder woods for planar graphs in order to design
some graph-drawing algorithms. Other projects are about the combinatorics of
hypergraphs, the encoding of faces in Coxeter hyperplane arrangements, and the
enumeration of simplicial trees.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
