
* 2154281
* Collaborative Research: Special Functions for Diagonal Harmonics and Schubert Calculus
* DMS,Combinatorics
* 08/15/2022,08/04/2022
* Jennifer Morse,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2027
* USD 160,000.00

Combinatorics is an area of mathematics concerned with analyzing, organizing,
and optimizing over discrete data. It is a fundamental tool in many scientific
areas such as genomics, computer science, statistics, and physics. This project
will develop combinatorial methods in symmetric function theory, an area with
applications to probability, statistical mechanics, and quantum information
theory. The project includes further development of the SAGE open-source
mathematics software, a crucial tool for this investigation. Graduate students
will be trained as part of this project.

This project addresses combinatorial questions tied to representation theory,
algebraic geometry, and physics, with a focus on Macdonald polynomials and
Schubert calculus. Macdonald polynomials are a remarkable family of orthogonal
polynomials that form a basis for the ring of symmetric functions. Macdonald
polynomials also have connections with many other areas, including double affine
Hecke algebras, the Calogero-Sutherland model in particle physics, and knot
invariants. Studies of Macdonald polynomials also led to the space of diagonal
harmonics, a graded representation of the symmetric group whose character is
closely tied to Macdonald polynomials. Over the last two decades a beautiful
picture has emerged connecting this story to the Hall algebra of an elliptic
curve. This project ties Macdonald theory to Catalan functions, graded Euler
characteristics of certain vector bundles on the flag variety. The investigators
aim to apply tools from previous study of Catalan functions, particularly
connections with Schubert calculus and crystals of quantum groups, to enrich the
elliptic Hall algebra and its ties to diagonal harmonics with a new
combinatorial framework.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
