
* 2154408
* Arithmetic Questions in the Theory of Linear Algebraic Groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2022,04/05/2022
* Igor Rapinchuk,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2025
* USD 241,311.00

Linear algebraic groups are groups of matrices that are described by polynomial
equations. Such groups arise as groups of symmetries of various objects and are
ubiquitous across many areas of mathematics, including algebraic geometry,
number theory, and mathematical physics. In the arithmetic context, work done
over the last six decades has resulted in a well-developed theory of linear
algebraic groups over the rational numbers and other similar fields. While
activity in this area is still ongoing, over the last ten years various problems
in Lie group theory, arithmetic geometry, and other subjects have led to
significant interest in the properties of algebraic groups over fields of
geometric origin. Building on previous work, the research program will
investigate the arithmetic, geometric, and structural aspects of algebraic
groups over such higher-dimensional fields, with a particular focus on various
finiteness properties. Mentoring graduate students and developing courses at the
undergraduate and graduate levels will be an integral part of this work. In
addition, a book project will be undertaken to open up recent developments in
the emerging arithmetic theory of algebraic groups over higher-dimensional
fields to a broader audience.

The project is a multi-faceted research program in the study of algebraic groups
over higher-dimensional fields. The work will focus on the following three
directions: the analysis of algebraic groups with good reduction and
applications to local-global principles, the study of finiteness properties of
unramified cohomology, and the investigation of rigidity phenomena for abstract
homomorphisms of algebraic groups. A major goal in the study of groups with good
reduction will be to make progress on a finiteness conjecture for forms of
reductive algebraic groups over finitely generated fields having good reduction
with respect to divisorial sets of discrete valuations. This work will
significantly expand the scope of previous results, which dealt mainly with
groups over fraction fields of Dedekind rings, and will also have important
consequences for the properness of the global-to-local map in the Galois
cohomology of algebraic groups. It turns out that, for certain types of groups,
this finiteness conjecture is closely related to finiteness properties of
unramified cohomology. As a result, one of the objectives will be to establish
the expected finiteness of unramified cohomology in degree three for surfaces
and certain higher-dimensional varieties over global fields. Concerning abstract
homomorphisms, the goal will be to develop a substantial generalization of
methods introduced in previous work to resolve a longstanding conjecture of
Borel and Tits for all absolutely almost simple groups over infinite fields of
relative rank at least two.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
