
* 2200850
* Representations of Finite Groups and Applications
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2022,04/05/2022
* Pham Tiep,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2027
* USD 71,691.00

The main area of research in this proposal is the representation theory of
finite groups. The concept of a group in mathematics grew out of the notion of
symmetry. The symmetries of an object in nature or science are encoded by a
group, which carries a lot of important information about the structure of the
object itself. Group representation theory allows one to study groups via their
actions on vector spaces which model the ways they arise in the real world. It
has fascinated mathematicians for more than a century, and has had many
important applications in quantum mechanics, the theory of elementary particles,
coding theory, and cryptography, and is expected to continue to play an
important role in the modern world of computers and digital communications. This
research will contribute to advances in the understanding and applications of
representation theory of finite groups. Student involvement will be a
scientifically important component of the project.

This project focuses on several problems in the representation theory of finite
groups and its applications. Many of these problems come up naturally in the
group representation theory. Others are motivated by various applications. The
PI will study several global-local problems, including the conjectures of McKay,
Alperin, and Brauer, and some other conjectures which generalize classical
results in representation theory of finite groups. The PI will also continue his
long-term project to develop a theory of character level and to establish strong
bounds on character values of finite groups of Lie type, and to classify modular
representations of finite quasisimple groups of low dimension or with special
properties. He will then apply the results to achieve significant progress on a
number of applications, including local systems and their monodromy groups,
Aschbacher's conjecture on subgroup lattices, random walks on Cayley and McKay
graphs and representation varieties of Fuchsian groups, word map distributions
and Thompson's conjecture for simple groups, Miyamoto's problem with
applications to vertex operator algebras, and bounds on cohomology groups and
presentations of finite quasisimple groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
