
* 2200655
* Geometry and Arithmetic of Brill--Noether Loci and Brill--Noether curves
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2022,04/11/2022
* Isabel Vogt,RI,Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2025
* USD 210,000.00

Polynomial equations are ubiquitous in mathematics, physics, and other sciences.
One can study a system of polynomial equations geometrically, by thinking about
the shape formed by these solutions, as well as arithmetically, by considering
what types of numbers arise in solutions. This project studies the relationship
between the geometry and arithmetic in the one-dimensional case of algebraic
curves. Broadly, this project will investigate the possible explicit
realizations of an abstract algebraic curve by polynomial equations (so-called
Brill-Noether theory), which informs both the geometry of the curve, as well as
its arithmetic of solutions over bounded extensions of the rational numbers. The
project includes the training of undergraduate and graduate students and work
with members of underrepresented groups.

Specifically, the PI will initiate the arithmetic Brill-Noether theory program
to elucidate the structure of the rational points on Brill-Noether loci in the
Picard variety of a curve. This has applications to determining the low degree
points on curves defined over number fields. The PI will also investigate
analogues of the classic Brill-Noether theorem when the curve is special in
moduli due to a low degree realization in projective space. In particular, when
the curve has a low degree map to the projective line, the PI will study the
relationship with affine permutations and the affine Grassmannian.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
