
* 2200798
* Knot Homology and Moduli of Sheaves
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 09/01/2022,07/26/2022
* Alexei Oblomkov,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2025
* USD 66,582.00

A knot is an embedding of a circle in three dimensional space. Knot invariants
are quantities that are assigned to an embedded circle that do not change under
continuous change of the embedding. Tools from quantum field theory yield
conjectural constructions for new, algebraic, knot invariants known as knot
homologies. In this project, the PI will give rigorous mathematical
constructions of knot homologies, as well as efficient algorithms for computing
these knot invariants. In particular, the PI will interpret knot homology in
terms of the geometry of moduli spaces that are defined by polynomial equations
and use methods in analytic geometry to study these moduli spaces, thus
uncovering new properties of knot homology. In connection with this research,
the PI will undertake research-training activities aimed at both undergraduate
and doctoral students.

More precisely, in this project the PI will study relations between moduli of
sheaves and knot homology. In particular, the PI will study a conjecture that
relates the HOMFLYPT homology of a link of a plane curve singularity with the
homology of the Hilbert scheme of points on the curve. To compute the HOMFLYPT
homology of a knot, the PI will to develop further a theory that interprets the
HOMFLYPT homology of a link as a space of global sections a naturally defined
coherent sheaf on the Hilbert scheme of points on the plane. The PI will also
study Virasoro constraints for the descendant invariants of Pandharipande-Thomas
moduli spaces for a general threefold, and the Gromov-Witten/Pandharipande-
Thomas correspondence for invariants with descendants will be developed further,
so that Virasoro constraints can be transported from Gromov-Witten theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
