
* 2200469
* Multigraded commutative algebra
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2022,04/08/2022
* Daniel Erman,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2025
* USD 85,547.00

Polynomial equations are some of the most fundamental objects in mathematics and
science, and they arise in a huge array of examples: Fermat?s Last Theorem,
physical models of motion, the ideal gas law, and much more. Understanding the
solutions of polynomial equations is thus a fundamental challenge that cuts
across all quantitative fields. The PI?s work aims to develop techniques?both
theoretical and algorithmic?for better understanding the solutions of polynomial
equations that are endowed with extra symmetries. As such equations often arise
in mathematical or scientific applications, the work has the potential for wide
impact.

The PI aims to expand the literature on multigraded polynomials, building on his
prior work of using virtual resolutions as a foundation for geometric
applications of multigraded syzygies. One project would provide novel
multigraded analogues of the Hilbert Syzygy Theorem and of Beilinson's
resolution of the diagonal, thus establishing two foundational results. A second
project on a multigraded version of Green's Linear Syzygy Theorem would have
more direct geometric applications. And a third project would have computational
applications, yielding a new and potentially much faster algorithm for computing
sheaf cohomology on a toric variety. The project will also have broader impacts
through the PI?s mentoring of PhD students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
