
* 2200940
* Geometric and Arithmetic Langlands Program
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/2022,06/08/2022
* Xinwen Zhu,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 07/31/2027
* USD 106,021.00

The Langlands program is a mathematical framework that unifies questions in many
different areas of mathematics, especially number theory and linear algebra. The
traditional arithmetic Langlands program has been studied for more than fifty
years, and this research has resulted in significant applications to solving
classical Diophantine equations, for example, the proof of Fermat's last
theorem. The geometric Langlands program, which is relatively new, is under
rapid development thanks to powerful tools from algebraic geometry. In this
project, the investigator will explore connections between these two different
facets of the Langlands program by applying geometric methods to study
arithmetic topics. This award supports research training for graduate students.

In more detail, this is a project to study various geometric and arithmetic
aspects of the Langlands program. The investigator will attack his recent own
conjectures related to the local and global Langlands correspondences. Along the
way, he will develop necessary ingredients in both geometric Langlands and in
number theory, such as the tame version of local geometric Langlands
correspondence and the construction/study of moduli spaces of global Galois
representations. The investigator will also apply the newly developed methods
and tools to the study of concrete questions in representation theory and
arithmetic geometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
