
* 2200890
* Automorphic Representations and L-Functions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/15/2022,07/14/2022
* Dihua Jiang,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2025
* USD 238,000.00

Symmetries can be found in various basic structures of the universe and provide
indispensable guidelines for human beings to understand intrinsic structures of
fundamental objects. In mathematics, those symmetries provide a common ground
for many different theories such as Geometry, Number Theory, Mathematical
Physics, Algebra, and Analysis, especially through functions known as
Automorphic Forms. Hence, the modern theory of automorphic forms provides the
organizing principle for further research in these areas. This project will
establish basic structures and yield substantial contributions to the modern
theory of automorphic forms, and the related Langlands program. For broader
impacts, the PI will continue to train graduate students and postdocs, give
lectures on his research to a broader community, including public lectures,
primary lectures and research talks in various settings, and organize research
programs and zoom-seminars for the international mathematics community.

The PI will continue his research on the discrete spectrum of square-integrable
automorphic forms, L-functions, and the Langlands functoriality conjectures. The
basic problems that the PI will investigate are refined structures of the
discrete spectrum of automorphic forms on classical groups, analytic and
arithmetic properties of automorphic L-functions, and explicit Langlands
functorial transfers for square-integrable automorphic forms via automorphic
integral transforms, in particular, using twisted automorphic descents. On the
one hand, the PI intends to study refined structure based on the existence of
endoscopy. On the other hand, the PI intends to construct explicit modules for
the cuspidal automorphic forms via integral transform with automorphic kernel
functions, so that the endoscopic transfers can be realized via automorphic
integral transforms. Meanwhile, the PI will also develop the local theory,
relating basic problems in harmonic analysis of groups over a local field to the
arithmetic data that are given by the local Langlands conjecture. The long-term
research goal of this project is to understand the general local-global-
automorphic principles in the theory of automorphic forms, which reflects one of
the basic principles in arithmetic and number theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
