
* 2200492
* The Topology and Hodge Theory of Algebraic Maps
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/15/2022,08/03/2022
* Mark Andrea de Cataldo,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2025
* USD 101,290.00

The award supports research in the field of algebraic geometry, the discipline
devoted to the study of polynomial or algebraic equations. Algebraic equations
are both beautiful and ubiquitous, as they describe many natural phenomena, from
the motion of planets or the shape of leaves and flowers, to the behavior of
microscopic particles. The goal of this research project is to study the deeper
properties of the solutions to more complicated algebraic equations, called
algebraic maps. The investigator plans to continue the long-term investigation
of the topology, Hodge theory, and cycle theory of algebraic maps. The close
connection between the two main threads of the research, namely the discovery of
new and deep aspects of the general theory and the study of fundamental
examples, is the motivating principle behind the work. It is anticipated that
the results will be of use to mathematicians in algebraic geometry,
combinatorics, and representation theory and to mathematical physicists in the
study of string theory.

The investigator will explore the fundamental aspects of the general theory as
well as important examples through three projects: to develop a more flexible
theory of constructible sheaves in the contexts of Morse theory and of algebraic
geometry over arbitrary fields of definition; to seek new evidence to the P=W
Conjecture--one of the leading open questions in the geometry of Higgs bundles
and flat connections on algebraic curves--by importing new geometric results
from algebraic geometry over fields of positive characteristic; and to study the
structure of moduli spaces of Higgs bundles and flat connections over fields of
positive characteristic as critical loci, with applications to the structure and
cohomology of these moduli spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
