
* 2200845
* The Algebra and Arithmetic of Splitting Fields
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 08/01/2022,07/18/2022
* Asher Auel,NH,Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 07/31/2025
* USD 359,997.00

This project will explore algebraic and geometric objects that have played an
important role in the development of many areas of mathematics and physics,
known as central simple algebras and their splitting fields. The theory of
quaternion algebras, examples of these structures, was utilized throughout the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries in classical mechanics, quantum mechanics,
and the theory of relativity, with current applications in fields such as
aerospace modeling, computer graphics, robotics, and wireless communication. In
mathematics, central simple algebras and the associated Brauer group have
provided a bridge for techniques to be exchanged between diverse areas of
research, from number theory and arithmetic geometry, to topology and algebraic
geometry. This project aims to broaden a relatively new frontier between the
splitting fields of central simple algebras and the arithmetic of elliptic
curves, which are themselves important mathematical objects. The project will
also support new pedagogical tools, opportunities for public outreach and
engagement, early career mentoring and training opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students, and cross-disciplinary collaboration.

More precisely, this project centers around three main problems: the period-
index problem for the Brauer group, the problem of splitting central simple
algebras by genus one curves, and explicit presentations of moduli spaces of
elliptic curves. The techniques utilized---toroidal geometry, deformation
theory, and Hilbert schemes---are widely employed in algebraic geometry, but
less systematically so in pure algebra. While much recent progress in the
period-index problem for the Brauer group has been through leveraging tools from
algebraic geometry to control ramification splitting, this project adopts novel
tools such as reciprocity sequences to achieve improved results as well as
indicate long-term conjectural targets. The problem of whether any Brauer class
is split by the function field of a genus one curve, while having only gained
attention in the past decade, turns out to have surprising and deep connections
to other important problems in algebra, number theory, and algebraic geometry.
The project initiates a wide-ranging program exploiting connections between this
problem, the classical open problem of cyclicity of central simple algebras in
prime degree, the period-index problem for abelian variety torsors, the
arithmetic of modular curves, and the problem of explicit constructions of
moduli spaces of elliptic curves.

This project is jointly funded by the Algebra and Number Theory Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
