
* 2200565
* Topics in Analytic Number Theory and Additive Combinatorics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, Combinatorics, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 07/01/2022,05/26/2022
* Xuancheng Shao,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2025
* USD 168,513.00

This is an interdisciplinary project connecting number theory and combinatorics.
One central theme in analytic number theory is to understand the distribution of
primes numbers, a topic that has important applications in cryptography, coding
theory, and financial security. It is a field that is currently experiencing
intensive progress, in sometimes unexpected directions. In recent years, many
important classical questions have seen spectacular advances based on new
techniques; conversely, methods developed in analytic number theory have led to
the solution of striking problems in other fields. The main goal of this
research project is to make progress on the distributional properties of primes
and other related arithmetic objects, by developing further the classical
analytic tools and the more modern additive combinatorial tools, and by
understanding how to effectively combine these two different tools together. It
is hoped that the need for stronger results to cater for applications in
analytic number theory will drive the development of additive combinatorics, and
vice versa. The grant will also be used to help train graduate students in the
area.

More specifically, the PI will continue his work surrounding additive problems
with primes. These works will involve developing both analytic tools and
combinatorial tools. On the analytic side, the PI will continue to investigate
the theory of Gowers norms for multiplicative functions and for the von-Mangoldt
function, which are higher-order extensions to classical exponential sum
estimates involving these functions. On the combinatorial side, the PI expects
to develop tools from additive combinatorics for locating arithmetic structures
within dense sets of integers and discover new mechanisms for using them to
exhibit such structures in the primes. The additive combinatorial ideas behind
these tools, such as pseudorandomness and Gowers uniformity norms, have a strong
link with topics in theoretical computer science such as extractors and
expanders, property testing, and error-correcting codes. The PI plans to explore
these links in this project.

This project is jointly funded by the Algebra and Number Theory program, the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the
Combinatorics program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
