
* 2200716
* Singularities in Positive and Mixed Characteristic Commutative Algebra
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/15/2022,06/14/2022
* Kevin Tucker,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Commutative algebra studies Noetherian commutative rings, examples of which are
sets of polynomials and the ordinary integers. It is used in a wide variety of
applied settings, ranging from error-correcting codes in computer science and
genomics to control theory and modeling in engineering. Other fields of
mathematics that use commutative algebra, and commutative rings in particular,
are algebraic and arithmetic geometry, as well as complex analysis, topology,
and representation theory. Execution of the projects in this grant will both
advance theoretical understanding in commutative algebra and shed light on
important problems from some of these related fields. In addition, the principal
investigator is dedicated to promoting mathematics education, developing future
generations of researchers, and assisting in building a strong STEM workforce in
the US. Towards these goals, the PI will supervise, train, and mentor doctoral
students and postdoctoral fellows throughout the course of the grant. The PI
will also facilitate a number of seminars, workshops, and reading courses for
undergraduate and graduate students.

The PI specializes in the study of singularities in positive and mixed
characteristic commutative algebra, and will address a number of questions
arising naturally from recent developments in the theory of Frobenius
splittings, tight closure, the homological conjectures, and absolute integral
closure. The PI aims to exploit the connection between singularities defined via
the Frobenius map in positive characteristic and those arising in complex
algebraic geometry in order to carry out research projects in three new
directions. First, the PI will investigate properties of the dual F-signature
limit in characteristic p > 0, showing its existence and deriving new properties
with applications to F-rationality. Second, also in positive characteristic, the
PI will further the understanding of F-singularities outside of the F-finite
setting by exploring quotients of excellent regular rings and generalizing
adjunction statements. Lastly, leveraging breakthrough results on the absolute
integral closure in mixed characteristic, the PI will attack open questions
regarding the splinter condition and exhibit new geometric applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
