
* 2200875
* Mirror Symmetry, Birational Geometry, and Moduli.
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2022,04/04/2022
* Paul Hacking,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2025
* USD 239,752.00

String theory posits that interactions of fundamental particles at small scales
are explained by hidden dimensions of our universe which are wrapped up to form
a tiny geometric space called a Calabi--Yau manifold at each point. The mirror
symmetry phenomenon asserts that Calabi--Yau manifolds come in mirror pairs X
and Y which determine the same physics, implying surprising relations between
geometric properties of X and Y. Birational geometry is the study of surgeries
of spaces obtained by cutting out a subspace of lower dimension and gluing
another in its place. The moduli space of a space Y parametrizes all possible
spaces obtained by deforming Y. If X and Y are a mirror pair, then the
birational geometry of X determines the structure of the moduli space of Y near
a certain limit point. Based on this heuristic, Morrison conjectured that a
Calabi--Yau manifold X admits only finitely many possible surgeries up to
symmetries of X. The PI aims to show the conjecture is false in general, but a
weaker statement sufficient for applications to moduli holds, as suggested by
recent work of the PI with graduate students on unbounded Calabi--Yau manifolds.
The PI will also study positively curved spaces called Fano manifolds and
singularities that arise at limit points of the moduli space of Calabi--Yau
manifolds via mirror symmetry. These projects will be pursued together with
graduate students supported by the grant. The PI will also organize seminars and
a conference focused on training of graduate students.

The PI will study Morrison's cone conjecture and applications to birational
geometry and moduli, joint with a collaborator. Morrison conjectured that the
automorphism group of a Calabi--Yau manifold acts on its nef cone with rational
polyhedral fundamental domain, so that a neighborhood of a cusp of the moduli
space of the mirror manifold admits a compactification determined by this data
via a construction of Looijenga. Recent work of the PI with graduate students on
log Calabi--Yau manifolds and mirror deformations of singularities suggests that
the conjecture does not hold in general, but a weaker version sufficient for
applications to moduli should hold. The PI will study mirror symmetry for Q-Fano
3-folds and applications to classification and non-arithmetic curves on moduli
of K3 surfaces, joint with a graduate student. Q-Fano 3-folds arise as end
products of the minimal model program and so are basic to our understanding of
3-folds. Mirror symmetry heuristics suggest that the mirror of a Q-Fano 3-fold
is a K3 fibration over the affine line with monodromy at infinity that is
maximally unipotent after a finite base change. The mirror corresponds to a
rigid rational curve on a moduli space of polarized K3 surfaces. Computations
suggest that these curves are not Shimura curves but are uniformized by non-
arithmetic groups. The PI will study mirror symmetry for Milnor fibers of
surface singularities and applications to symplectomorphism groups and moduli of
surfaces, a project that joint with others.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
