
* 2200732
* The Non-Commutative Hodge Conjecture and Multiplicities of Modules and Complexes
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/2022,03/25/2022
* Mark Walker,NE,University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2025
* USD 282,638.00

This research project concerns topics in commutative and homological algebra and
related fields. In commutative algebra, one studies formal systems in which the
rules for manipulating equations are the same as in high school algebra but done
in more general settings. The field is related to many other areas of pure
mathematics, such as number theory, the study of properties of the integers, and
algebraic geometry, the study of geometric properties of solutions to systems of
polynomial equations. Homological algebra is a branch of algebra related to the
field of algebraic topology and is the study of topological spaces, that is,
"shapes." A central object of study in homological algebra is that of a complex
of modules, which can be thought of an abstraction of the notion of a
topological space. This project aims to settle various open conjectures,
including one on the possible values of Euler characteristics of certain types
of complexes. Here, the Euler characteristic of a complex is a generalization of
the integer invariant for polyhedra. The grant will also support graduate
students working on affiliated topics.

The project involves four main topics: (1) lengths of modules of finite
projective dimension and Dutta multiplicities of "tiny complexes," (2) Ulrich
modules and lim Ulrich sequences of modules, (3) cones of Betti tables and
cohomology tables, (4) the nc-Hodge-conjecture for matrix factorizations. The
central goal of (1) is to prove the conjecture that a module of finite
projective dimension over a local ring must have length at least as large as the
multiplicity of the module. This conjecture admits a generalization involving
Euler and Dutta multiplicities of "tiny complexes". Part (2) concerns a primary
tool used in tackling these conjectures: Ulrich modules, which are maximal
Cohen-Macaulay modules whose multiplicities equal their minimal numbers of
generates, and lim Ulrich sequences of modules?sequences of modules that
asymptotically approximate the former. The central goal is to construct such
things for a larger class of rings than previously known. Part (3) concerns the
cones of Betti tables of modules over local rings and cones of cohomology tables
of coherent sheaves on projective varieties. Ulrich sheaves and lim Ulrich
sequences of sheaves?sheaf theoretic analogues of the module versions of these
notions?play an essential role here. The central aim of Part (4) is to prove the
non-commutative analogue of the classical Hodge conjecture for the category of
matrix factorizations of a hypersurface with an isolated singularity. Each part
will be pursued in collaboration with other researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
