
* 2201242
* Arithmetic Aspects of the Langlands Program
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2022,04/06/2022
* Matthew Emerton,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2025
* USD 138,909.00

Number theory is the branch of mathematics that studies phenomena related to
properties of whole numbers. A typical number theoretic question is to find all
the whole number solutions of some equation of interest. By synthesizing the
topological and algebraic properties of the graphs of these equations, one
obtains a mathematical object (a collection of mathematical data) called a
Galois representation which encodes many of the properties of the originating
equation. The mathematician Robert Langlands has developed a series of
conjectures (or mathematical predictions) which anticipate a very close
relationship between these Galois representations and some very different kinds
of group representations, known as automorphic representations, which arise out
of mathematical analysis. The goal of this project is to make progress on
Langlands's conjectures by placing them in various more structural geometric
frameworks, and then to use geometric methods and perspectives to establish
relationships between these two different kinds of representations (Galois and
automorphic). The project provides training opportunities for graduate students.

The goal of the research project is to investigate both local and global aspects
of the arithmetic Langlands program. The principal investigator, Dr. Matthew
Emerton, will construct moduli stacks of global Galois representations, and
study their geometric properties, as well as the properties of the global-to-
local restriction maps which map them to (products of) moduli stacks of local
Galois representations. These investigations are closely related to the problem
of extending the Taylor--Wiles--Kisin patching method to the residually
reducible case, and to the study of the Eisenstein part of cohomology, and Dr.
Emerton will pursue these relationships, especially in the context of odd two-
dimensional representations, which are connected to the cohomology of modular
curves. Dr. Emerton will also develop a new approach to the mod p deformation
theory of crystalline local-at-p Galois representations, via their relationship
to prismatic F-crystals and gauges. The resulting improved understanding of this
deformation theory should lead to new global results, such as new cases of the
weight part of Serre's conjecture and new cases of the Breuil--Mezard
conjecture.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
