
* 2205730
* Canada-Mexico-USA Conference in Representation Theory, Noncommutative Algebra, and Categorification
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, TOPOLOGY
* 04/01/2022,02/17/2022
* Aaron Lauda,CA,University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 12/31/2023
* USD 30,000.00

The award will fund the Canada-Mexico-USA Conference in Representation Theory,
Noncommutative Algebra, and Categorification that will take place in
Northeastern University, Boston in June 2022. Representation theory is a branch
of mathematics that studies symmetries of physical theories and of mathematical
objects. Often the main objects in representation theory are only the shadow of
richer structures that are recovered through deeper study. Noncommutative
algebra is a related branch of mathematics that studies deformations of
commutative objects found in quantum theories, representation theory, and
geometry. The foci of the conference will be on recent advances at the interface
of representation theory and noncommutative algebra; on fostering an environment
for the establishment of international collaborations between Canada, Mexico,
and the USA in these research areas; and on exposing graduate students, post-
docs, and early-career faculty in the three countries to current developments in
the field. A poster session will run through the full meeting where earlier-
career attendees will present their research.

The main scientific topics for the fourth meeting in this series of Canada-
Mexico-USA conferences will be geometric, algebraic, and homological methods in
representation theory, representation theoretic and homological properties of
noncommutative algebras, and the investigation of those problems using
categorical methods. The talks will cover some of the most recent trends
including: cluster algebras, monoidal and additive categorifications, quantum
symmetries, finite tensor categories, representations of quantized affine Kac-
Moody algebras, Calabi-Yau algebras and triangulated categories, Hopfological
algebra, web approaches to modular representation theory, and representation
theoretic aspects of Heegaard-Floer homology. For more information on the
conference, see https://yakimov.sites.northeastern.edu/can-mex-us-conf-2022/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
