
* 2228511
* Integers Conference 2020
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 04/01/2022,05/11/2022
* Bruce Landman,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2023
* USD 21,482.00

This award will provide funding for the ?Integers Conference 2020,? which will
be held in Augusta, Georgia, October 1-4, 2020. The conference is being hosted
by the Department of Mathematics at Augusta University. The Integers
conferences, of which this will be the ninth, serve to bring together
mathematicians and students interested in the fields of combinatorics and number
theory. It will promote interaction among research mathematicians at all career
stages from the talented undergraduate to the internationally distinguished
researcher. A large portion of the funding will support students, early-career
faculty, and mathematicians belonging to underrepresented groups.

The conference will serve as a catalyst for major collaborative projects among
mathematicians representing the areas of additive number theory, multiplicative
number theory, combinatorial game theory, probabilistic number theory,
enumerative combinatorics, combinatorial optimization, Ramsey theory, the theory
of partitions, and other areas of combinatorics and number theory. It will
feature four plenary talks and around sixty additional talks. The conference
organizers plan to support ten student research talks, including talks presented
by students who have recently participated in an NSF ?Research Experiences for
Undergraduates? program. The proceedings of the conference will be published as
a special volume of the journal Integers. The following website has been created
for the conference: https://sites.google.com/view/IntegersConference2020

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
