
* 2306854
* The Minimal Model Program in Positive and Mixed Characteristics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 10/01/2022,11/18/2022
* Jakub Witaszek,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2024
* USD 95,606.00

Algebraic geometry is an active and influential field of mathematics. Its goal
is to understand algebraic varieties, which are geometric shapes described by
algebraic equations. Not only are such objects essential in many fields of
mathematics, but they also come up naturally in other disciplines such as
engineering, computer science, or biology. The principal investigator's research
centers around the ultimate goal of classifying all algebraic varieties. The PI
plans to capitalize on recent breakthroughs in other fundamental fields of
mathematics, namely number theory and commutative algebra, to significantly
extend the scope of this classification.

The principal investigator intends to apply new techniques, related to
F-regularity, +-regularity, and mixed characteristic perfections, in order to
provide a better understanding of the geometry and commutative algebra of
schemes in positive and mixed characteristics. A second aspect of the project is
to further the Minimal Model Program in positive and mixed characteristics by
focusing on dimensions three and four. The PI plans to apply these results to
obtain insight into the liftability of singularities and projective varieties
from positive characteristic to characteristic zero, as well as the existence of
rational points on varieties over finite fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
