
* 2309958
* CAREER:Phase Transitions in Algorithms, Complexity, and Geometry
* DMS,PROBABILITY, Combinatorics
* 12/01/2022,12/09/2022
* William Perkins,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 115,163.00

Gibbs measures (or Boltzmann distributions) originated in statistical mechanics
to model the phases of matter, but have since found numerous practical
applications in statistics, machine learning, coding theory, and mathematical
physics due to their simple encoding of complex dependencies. Two algorithmic
tasks associated to Gibbs measures are essential in applications: sampling from
a given model and efficiently approximating its normalizing constant, the
partition function. This project aims to elucidate the connection between phase
transitions in the underlying statistical physics model and the computational
complexity of these two problems. The project features an integrated research
and education plan, with the complementary goals of advancing fundamental
knowledge of Gibbs measures and improving interdisciplinary mathematical
education. The educational plan has activities aimed at three levels: outreach
workshops to introduce high school students to mathematical research; the
creation of tools for undergraduate instructors to implement effective
pedagogical techniques; and the development of new graduate courses in
applications of statistical physics across disciplines.

More specifically, the research has three main goals. First, to develop
efficient sampling algorithms for Gibbs measures in the low temperature, phase
coexistence regime for models with a bounded number of ground states. Second, to
make the powerful but non-rigorous cavity method from statistical physics into a
rigorous mathematical tool for understanding the algorithmic tractability of
random computational problems. Third, to understand fundamental geometric
objects in high dimensions -- sphere packings, sphere coverings, and spherical
codes -- by utilizing tools and insights from statistical physics. The pursuit
of these three goals will introduce new probabilistic methods in computer
science, statistics, and combinatorics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
