
* 8902390
* Mathematical Sciences: Studies in Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/15/1989,03/11/1993
* Melvin Hochster,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ann K. Boyle
* 05/31/1995
* USD 450,510.00

This award supports the research in commutative algebra and algebraic geometry
of Professors Melvin Hochster, Igor Dolgachev, and Kevin Coombes of the
University of Michigan at Ann Arbor. Dr. Hochster has introduced the fruitful
notion of tight closure of rings, and will continue his study of this concept,
as well as several problems in local algebra. Dr. Dolgachev will be working on
the classification of Enriques surfaces with finitely many automorphisms over
fields of arbitrary characteristic, and will investigate a number of other
questions in the theory of surfaces. Dr. Coombes will be studying more number-
theoretic questions, namely the geometry of arithmetic surfaces, especially the
theory of branched covers of arithmetic surfaces and of curves defined over
fields of arithmetic interest. This is research in the field of Algebraic
Geometry, one of the oldest parts of modern mathematics, but one which has had a
revolutionary flowering in the past quarter-century. In its origin, it treated
figures that could be defined in the plane by the simplest equations, namely
polynomials. Nowadays the field makes use of methods not only from Algebra, but
from Analysis and Topology, and conversely is finding application in those
fields as well as in theoretical Computer Science and in Robotics.
