
* 9003109
* Mathematical Sciences: Eisenstein Series, Theta Functions and Special Values of L-Functions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/1990,03/10/1992
* Stephen Kudla,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 11/30/1993
* USD 80,350.00

This award supports the research in automorphic forms of Professor Steven Kudla
of the University of Maryland at College Park. Dr. Kudla's project is to work on
two problems involving theta functions, L-functions, and arithmetic. The first
of these problems concerns a conjecture about the identification of the first
two terms in the Laurent expansion of the Siegel Eisenstein series at certain
special points. The second is concerned with an analogue for the triple
L-function of the result of Gross and Zagier that relates the derivative of the
standard L-function of a holomorphic cusp form on GL(2) to the height pairing of
Heegner points on the Jacobian of the modular curve. Non-Euclidean plane
geometry began in the early nineteenth century as a mathematical curiosity, but
by the end of that century, mathematicians had realized that many objects of
fundamental importance are non-Euclidean in their basic nature. The detailed
study of non-Euclidean plane geometries has given rise to several branches of
modern mathematics, of which the study of modular and automorphic forms is one
of the most active. This field is principally concerned with questions about the
whole numbers, but in its use of geometry and analysis, it retains connection to
its historical roots.
