
* 9304423
* Mathematical Sciences: Regular Graded Noetherian Rings
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/1993,04/21/1999
* J. Tobias Stafford,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph P. Brennan
* 05/31/2000
* USD 416,400.00

This award is concerned with the theory of noncommutative Noetherian rings,
particularly with that of connected graded algebras satisfying the Artin-
Schelter (AS) regularity condition. The AS regular rings have been a subject of
considerable research recently, since they provide genuinely new, geometric
techniques for the study of noncommutative rings and are related to other areas
of current interest, notably quantum groups. The principal investigator will
study specific, important examples of these algebras to develop the abstract
theory of AS regular algebras and the related theory of "noncommutative
projective geometry". The principal investigator will also work on extending
existing results on connected graded, Noetherian PI rings of finite global
dimension. This research is in the general area of ring theory. A ring is an
algebraic object having both an addition and a multiplication defined on it.
Although the additive operation satisfies the commutative law, the
multiplicative operation is not required to do so. An example of a ring for
which multiplication is not commutative is the collection of nxn matrices over
the integers. The study of noncommutative rings has become an important part of
algebra because of its increasing significance to other branches of mathematics
and physics.
