
* 9500755
* Lie Superalgebra Representations: Algebraic and Geometric Methods
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/1995,04/26/1995
* Ivan Penkov,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Lance W. Small
* 06/30/1997
* USD 46,500.00

Recently there have been several essential developments in the representation
theory of Lie superalgebras. One of them is Serganova's reduction of the Kac
problem on characters of atypical finite-dimensional gl(m+ne)-modules to the
semi-simplicity conjecture for a functor analogous to the Vogan functor. Another
one is Kac and Wakimoto's discovery of a striking relationship between number
theory and integrable representations of affine Lie superalgebras. Finally,
there is the theory of triangular decomposition of arbitrary finite-dimensional
Lie superalgebras and the related theory of generic irreducible highest weight
modules developed by Serganova and the principal investigator. The research
supported by this award is on five different topics related naturally to those
developments: geometry of finite-dimensional generic modules over arbitrary
finite-dimensional Lie superalgebras; arbitrary generic modules over finite-
dimensional Lie superalgebras; special (both non-generic and atypical) modules
over classical Lie superalgebras; generic integrable modules over Kac-Moody
superalgebras; and quantum superalgebras. In most of the cases, it is planned to
use a combination of algebraic and geometric methods. This research is concerned
with a mathematical object called a Lie algebra. Lie algebras arise from another
object called a Lie group. An example of a Lie group is the rotations of a
sphere where one rotation is followed by another. Lie groups and Lie algebras
are important in areas involving analysis of sperical motion.
