
* 9501129
* Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic Methods in Optimization
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, THEORY OF COMPUTING
* 07/01/1995,07/10/1995
* Alexander Barvinok,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrew G. Earnest
* 06/30/1999
* USD 60,000.00

This award supports the research of Professor Alexandre Barvinok on the
construction of algorithms for computational problems in combinatorics and
algebra. The main goal is to find non-trivial upper bounds for the computational
complexity of these problems by exploring the underlying algebraic structure.
Three specific topics are being investigated. The first topic includes the
applications of exponential sums to a wide range of computational problems. The
second deals with applications of the representation theory of the symmetric
group to hard problems in combinatorial optimization. The third topic involves
quantifier elimination in integer programming, a specific unresolved question
concerning integral points in polyhedra. The algorithms developed have potential
practical applications to real world problems that reduce to hard enumeration.
This research is in the general area of Combinatorics. Combinatorics attempts to
find efficient methods to study how discrete collections of objects can be
arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely important to modern
communications. For example, the design of large networks, such as those
occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in computer science
deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of combinatorial
research.
