
* 9532049
* Mathematical Sciences: Representation Theoretical Methods in the Theory of Special Functions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/15/1996,06/09/1997
* Adriano Garsia,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 06/30/1999
* USD 106,548.00

9532049 Garsia This award supports an investigation that straddles the boundary
between Representation Theory and the Theory of Special Functions. The bridge
between Representation Theory and Special Functions is provided by the Theory of
Symmetric Functions. In 1988, Macdonald introduced a symmetric function basis
containing two free parameters q and t. This basis promises to be a central
element in the connnection between Representation Theory and the Theory of
Special Functions. The investigation is a continuation of a project that the
investigator and his collaborators have pursued for more than four years. The
main object is to understand the Representation Theoretical and Special Function
Theoretical properties of this new basis. Earlier joint work with M. Haiman has
lead to the construction of some natural bigraded modules whose bivariate
Frobenius characteristic appear to be very closely related to Macdonald
polynomials. An extensive computer calculation carried out by the investigator
and his collaborators produced a variety of conjectures. Some of these
conjectures have been proved in full generality; others only in special cases.
The central one, the n-factorial conjecture, has lead to mathematical problems
of the first magnitude in various areas of Mathematics that range from
Combinatorics to Algebraic Geometry. The primary object of this investigation is
to explore the various Representation Theoretical, Special Function Theoretical,
and Combinatorial implications of the recent discoveries with a view to
resolving some of the open Garsia- Haiman and Macdonald conjectures. This
research is in the general area of Combinatorics. One of the goals of
Combinatorics is to find efficient methods of studying how discrete collections
of objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely
important to modern communications. For example, the design of large networks,
such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in
computer science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of
combinatorial research.
