
* 9622773
* Analytic Methods For Diophantine Problems
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/1996,02/25/1998
* Trevor Wooley,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 05/31/1999
* USD 115,074.00

This award provides funding for a project concerned with the theory and
application of the Hardy-Littlewood circle method. The investigator is pursuing
an improved, detailed understanding of the circle method both from the analytic
viewpoint, through estimates for mean values of exponential sums, and from an
arithmetic viewpoint, through an understanding of the role played by the trivial
solutions of diophantine systems lying on special subvarieties. The analytic
viewpoint will be considered in through further investigation and development of
the proposer's new method for estimating fractional moments of smooth Weyl sums
and through detailed investigations of low moments of exponential sums. The
arithmetic viewpoint will be considered by continuing the investigator's
research on the number of non-diagonal solutions of systems of symmetric
diagonal equations using slicing methods and also perhaps by sieve methods. The
latter viewpoint will also be pursued through the testing of the "Quasi- Hardy-
Littlewood" model suggested recently by Vaughan and Wooley. This research falls
into the general mathematical field of Number Theory. Number theory has its
historical roots in the study of the whole numbers, addressing such questions as
those dealing with the divisibility of one whole number by another. It is among
the oldest branches of mathematics and was pursued for many centuries for purely
aesthetic reasons. However, within the last half century it has become an
indispensable tool in diverse applications in areas such as data transmission
and processing, and communication systems.
