
* 9622928
* Mathematical Sciences: Homogeneous Space Properties of Moduli Spaces: With Applications to Theta Functions and Finite Fields
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/1996,04/30/1998
* Michael Fried,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 06/30/1999
* USD 84,000.00

Modular curves are moduli spaces for structures on elliptic curves. Modular
functions come from the homogeneous space structure-through SL(2,R) action- on
an affine subset of the modular curve. This award provides funds for an
investigation that applies modular curve thinking to moduli spaces that have no
homogeneous space structure. The key definition is a Modular Tower attached to
the data coming from any finite group G and a prime p dividing the order of G.
The investigation will cover applications to the following topics. (a)
Invariants attached to theta functions of specific types of curves. (b) Curves
over finite fields with special relations among their zeta function zeros. (c)
Structured conclusions on the inverse Galois problem. (d) A program for
analyzing properties of the Grothendieck- Teichmuller group using projective
systems of real points on a modular tower. The objective is to show that modular
towers produce solutions to classical problems not previously benefiting from
analogs of modular functions. This award also supports an investigation by
postdoctoral student Y. Kopeliovich. Kopeliovich will continue using theta
functions with characteristic for giving detailed degree bounds on maps from
modular curves to the sphere. This research falls into the general mathematical
field of Number Theory. Number theory has its historical roots in the study of
the whole numbers, addressing such questions as those dealing with the
divisibility of one whole number by another. It is among the oldest branches of
mathematics and was pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic reasons.
However, within the last half century it has become an indispensable tool in
diverse applications in areas such as data transmission and processing, and
communication systems. This particular proposal has applications to
cryptography, through the classification and production of polynomial functions,
called exceptional, specifically suited for encoding data.
