
* 9622590
* Mathematical Sciences: Group Theory Methods in Number Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/15/1996,03/24/1998
* Nigel Boston,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 04/30/1999
* USD 78,000.00

9622590 Boston This award is for a project connecting Group Theory and Number
Theory. Many links between these two areas have already been forged, in
particular, the use of Galois representations, whose study, by group-theoretic
means or otherwise, has consequences to the theory of elliptic curves and
consequently to Fermat's Last Theorem. In a prior supported project, the PI
exploited this link to prove theorems on the deformations of Galois
representations and the structure of Galois groups, particularly of unramified
extensions. This project will exploit these ideas further with an eye towards
proving further cases of the Fontaine-Mazur conjecture and towards elucidating
the structure of deformation spaces of Galois representations. The investigator
also plans to continue his exploration of the function field case. Finally, the
investigator will study Dirichlet series attached to profinite groups. This part
of the project provides plenty of opportunity to transfer information on groups
(much obtained computationally) to information in number theory, and vice versa.
This research falls into the general mathematical fields of Number Theory and
Group Theory. Group Theory is the study of groups, which are algebraic
structures with a single operation. It appears in many areas of mathematics, as
well as physics and chemistry. Number theory has its historical roots in the
study of the whole numbers, addressing such questions as those dealing with the
divisibility of one whole number by another. It is among the oldest branches of
mathematics and was pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic reasons.
However, within the last half century it has become an indispensable tool in
diverse applications in areas such as data transmission, data processing, and
communication systems.
