
* 9625308
* Mathematical Sciences: Interactions of Commutative Algebras with Analysis, Geometry and Computer Science
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/1996,03/25/1996
* Karen Smith,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 06/30/2001
* USD 200,000.00

9625308 Smith The Career Development Plan combines a research program in
commutative algebra with an educational program for graduate and undergraduate
students at the University of Michigan. Most of the proposed research is part of
a broader program to illuminate the connections between analytic ideas such as
differential operators and $L^2$-estimates with characteristic $p$ techniques in
commutative algebra such as tight closure. The goals of the proposed research
are: (1) to apply characteristic $p$ techniques towards a solution of Fujita's
Conjecture in algebraic geometry; (2) to understand vanishing theorems for
cohomology of line bundles on complex varieties in terms of tight closure; (3)
to study the ring theoretic properties of differential operators on non-smooth
varieties by using reduction to characteristic $p$ methods; and (4) to study a
particular instance where there appears to be a direct link between $D$-modules
and modules with an action of Frobenius. Parts (I) and (II) of the Career
Development Plan outline specific methods by which the research will be
conducted. The main tools are closure operations on ideals, such as the tight
closure and the integral closure, and the Frobenius action on local cohomology.
A computer project suitable for a graduate student is proposed as a method for
understanding the module structure of a ring over its ring of differential
operators. Part (III) proposes a four year plan to teach both graduate and
undergraduate students projective algebraic geometry and computer algebra while
engaging them in state of the art research. The proposed project is a greatly
expanded version of research already in progress on sparse systems of parameters
and Noether Complexity. This long term research and educational project includes
plans for a new graduate course at the University of Michigan stressing the use
of computers in algebraic geometry, and for a junior level seminar for majors in
mathematics and computer scien ce in which teams of undergraduate students led
by a graduate student learn projective geometry through self-discovery. The
research begun in this seminar will be expanded to a full scale research project
on computer algebra. This project will culminate in a conference in which
students present their findings to a broader audience. Part (IV) addresses the
educational and human resources aspects of thePIs career goals. A program to
bring real-life practitioners of mathematics in business and industry to the
undergraduate classroom is proposed. The objectives are to simultaneously
motivate the curriculum and introduce students to people like themselves who
have used mathematics to create a successful career.
