
* 9701218
* Combinatorics and Algebraic Geometry -- Macdonald Polynomials, Hilbert Schemes, and Related Topics
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/1997,04/22/1997
* Mark Haiman,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* B. Brent Gordon
* 06/30/2001
* USD 140,367.00

Haiman 9701218 Haiman has been working on a project of several years duration to
prove conjectures of Garsia and Haiman giving a combinatorial model for
Macdonald polynomials, along with a series of conjectures of Haiman on diagonal
harmonics, using sheaf-cohomological methods applied to the Hilbert scheme of
points in the plane and related algebraic varieties. Once that is done, it will
be possible to apply the resulting tools to seek unified geometric explanations
of the Macdonald polynomials' many remarkable properties. This constitutes the
first part mf the planned research. Haiman and his student W. Brockman, seeking
to apply recent work of Broer to certain aspects of the above study, have
discovered new connections linking other algebraic varieties to the one- and
two-parameter Kostka polynomials. These discoveries have led to a geometric
explanation of Lascoux's atoms and to tantalizing conjectures whose further
study will form the second part of the planned research. As a third and final
part of the planned research, Haiman will resume his earlier work on Hecke
algebras and Kazhdan-Lusztig polynomials, motivated by his still unsolved
conjectures on Hecke algebra characters, and the related problem of finding a
satisfactory combinatorial interpretation of Kazhdan-Lusztig polynomials. This
research concerns the interplay between combinatorics and algebraic geometry.
One of the goals of combinatorics is to find efficient methods of studying how
discrete collections of objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete
systems is extremely important to modern communications. For example, the design
of large networks, such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the design
of algorithms in computer science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this
makes use of combinatorial research. Algebraic geometry is one of the oldest
parts of modern mathematics, but one which has had a revolutionary flowering in
the past quarter-century. In its origin, it treated figures that could be
defined in the plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials. Nowadays the
field makes use of methods not only from algebra, but from analysis, topology,
and combinatorics, and conversely is finding application in those fields as well
as in physics, theoretical computer science, and robotics.
