
* 9800859
* Diophantine Inequalities
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/15/1998,06/24/1998
* Jeffrey Thunder,IL,Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* B. Brent Gordon
* 06/30/2002
* USD 60,846.00

9800859 Thunder The objectives of this project are twofold. First, the PI hopes
to complete work in progress on estimating the number of solutions for non-
degenerate quartic norm form inequalities in three variables. The results would
be similar to those obtained recently by the PI for cubic Thue inequalities.
This will use recent advances in Diophantine approximation, in particular new
estimates for a quantitative version of Schmidt's subspace theorem, and
estimates for volumes associated to decomposable forms proved by the PI and M.
Bean. More substantially, the PI hopes to extend his work on cubic Thue
inequalities to forms of higher degree. This will entail a deeper investigation
into rational approximations of algebraic numbers and possibly a reformulation
of a quantitative version of Roth's theorem. Ultimately, it is hoped that the
methods thus developed will yield fairly sharp estimates for the number of
solutions of general non-degenerate norm form inequalities. Second, the PI will
attempt to prove an "effective" version of the absolute Siegel's lemma. He also
hopes to find improved bounds for the absolute Hermite constant and investigate
possible connections to sphere packings, finite groups, and error-correcting
codes. The methods to be employed include standard Euclidean and adelic geometry
of numbers. This research falls into the general mathematical field of number
theory. Number theory has its historical roots in the study of the whole
numbers, addressing such questions as those dealing with the divisibility of one
whole number by another. It is among the oldest branches of mathematics and was
pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic reasons. However, within the
last half century it has become an indispensable tool in diverse applications in
areas such as data transmission and processing, and communication systems.
