
* 9800701
* Arithematic Manifolds: Geodesics, Spectra and L-Functions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/1998,06/25/1998
* Scott Wolpert,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2002
* USD 82,158.00

Professor Wolpert will investigate questions about negatively curved space,
especially shortest paths and high-energy oscillations. The goal is to make new
applications to problems in analytic number theory. Geodesics on hyperbolic
manifolds have special properties. Professor Wolpert will continue his work with
A. Basmajian on describing geodesics in hyperbolic surfaces and three-manifolds.
The spectrum of the modular group serves as a model case for the study of
automorphic forms and even questions in Quantum Chaos. The spectrum is a major
subject of study in modern analytic number theory. Several open questions
including "uniqueness of quantum limits," "the spectral decomposition of
nonarithmetic groups," and the Ramanujan-Peterson conjecture' are actually
questions about the magnitude of certain expansion coefficients. Professor will
use discoveries made under a previous grant to establish new and better
estimates of these coefficients.

This is research in the general area of number theory. The historical roots of
number theory are in the study of the whole numbers, considering questions of
divisibility of one whole number by another. Number theory is one of the oldest
fields in mathematics and has at times guided the direction of the development
of the entire field. In current times it has served as an indispensable tool in
computer science, communications, and electronic security.
