
* 9800653
* Multiplicative Number Theory and Irregularities of Distribution
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/15/1998,07/30/1998
* Roger Baker,UT,Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 07/31/2000
* USD 43,558.00

9800653 Baker This award provides funds for an investigation into the following
six problems. (i) Lagrange's four squares theorem with almost prime variables;
the PI aims to sharpen the results of Brudern and Fouvry by using numbers with
far fewer prime factors. (ii) Kloosterman sums and Fourier coefficients of cusp
forms; the PI shall reexamine this classic work of J. M. Deshouillers and H.
Iwaniec with a view to sharpening the applicable bounds on sums of Kloosterman
sums. (iii) Lower bounds for sums of Bartan-Davenport-Halberstam type. A
'variance' of differences between the number of primes in arithmetic
progressions and the expected value is known to be at least of the expected
order of magnitude in certain ranges. The PI aims to extend these ranges. (iv)
Almost primes in short intervals: a sieve problem on which many scholars have
worked, where a number with at most two prime factors must be shown to exist in
a short interval. (v) Discrepancy of a set of points with respect to a convex
body. Here the difference is taken between the 'expected' number and the actual
number of members of an N-point set in a dilated translation of a convex set
with smooth boundary; Drmota has sharp lower bounds and the PI aims to weaken
his smoothness conditions. (vi) Discrepancy of point sets with respect to balls:
the difference is taken between expected number and actual number of points of a
set as above in a ball. The PI seeks to sharpen Holt's version of the Erdos-
Turan theorem, which relates the largest difference that occurs to a weighted
average of exponential sums. (Work on some of these problems will be joint with
Glyn Harman.) This research falls into the general mathematical field of number
theory. Number theory has its historical roots in the study of the whole
numbers, addressing such questions as those dealing with prime numbers, sums of
perfect squares, and so on. It is among the oldest branches of mathematics,
enjoying a surge of creativity at the hands of Fermat in the 17th century and
having grown and developed continuously since then. Within the last half century
it has become applicable to important problems in data transmission and
processing, and communications systems.
