
* 9801262
* Representation Theory of Reductive P-Adic Groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/15/1998,06/18/1998
* Gopal Prasad,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lynne Walling
* 05/31/2001
* USD 86,604.00

ABSTRACT Gopal Prasad Michigan 98 01262 Gopal Prasad will continue his work on
the classification of admissible representations of reductive p-adic groups in
terms of their restrictions to compact-open subgroups. He hopes to be able to
refine the theory of ("unrefined")minimal K-types developed by him and A. Moy,
and also find a suitable extension of the Kirillov theory for this purpose. In
another direction, he proposes to find a proof of the centrality of the
congruence subgroup kernel for simply connected anisotropic groups of type A-n
and determine the normal subgroups of the group of rational points of these
groups. A reductive p-adic group is the special collection of symmetries of an
arithmetic or geometric object. This study is expected to unravel intricate and
fundamental properties of the objects and patterns which are of interest in
arithmetic and geometry through the study of these symmetries. One way to
understand a group of symmetries is through a representation of its elements as
matrices. Representation theory does this in a systematic way. Ultimately the
goal is to be able to construct and classify all representations of the
reductive p-adic groups, and from this settle important questions about the
underlying geometric object. This is important because so many interesting
arithmetic and geometric objects have interesting symmetries that form a
reductive p-adic group.
