
* 9801151
* Enveloping Algebras, Differential Operators and Quantum Groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/1998,05/22/1998
* Ian Musson,WI,University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Joseph P. Brennan
* 06/30/2001
* USD 75,000.00

Musson, 98-01151 Abstract This proposal will deal specifically with several
problems concerning primitive ideals in the enveloping algebra of a classical
simple Lie superalgebra. The methods to be used include those developed by the
PI and results from representation theory. In addition geometric methods will be
used to study the center of the enveloping algebra, and the associated variety
of a primitive ideal. Differential operators on invariant rings of tori are
studied in a forthcoming joint memoir with Michel van den Bergh, and we hope to
extend some of this work to actions of other reductive groups. The PI also plans
to study Hopf algebra duality and cliques in quantum function algebras. He also
plans to study nonstandard quantum groups such as the Cremmer-Gervais examples.
There is motivation from Physics for this line of research since differential
operators which are invariant under various groups of symmetries are important
in quantum mechanics. Finally, quantum groups have become extremely important in
recent years in both Mathematics and Physics. Numerous connections have been
found with such diverse areas as group theory, low dimensional topology,
combinatorics, number theory, conformal field theory and statistical mechanics.
