
* 9801267
* Stark--type Conjectures "over Z" and their Refined Versions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/1998,04/08/1998
* Cristian Popescu,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lynne Walling
* 07/31/2001
* USD 67,138.00

ABSTRACT Cristian Popescu University of Texas at Austin 98 01267 Professor
Popescu will study connections between Stark's conjecture for L-functions and
the construction of Euler systems. The investigator will study the functorial
behavior of the conjectures concerning higher order of vanishing, looking for
refined versions of these conjectures, and consider their connections with Euler
systems. One of the most important mathematical ideas of the second half of the
century, is that analytic formula often encodes discrete information. For
example, one might want to count the number of solutions of a particular
equation, but discover that the solutions are very hard to find. On the other
hand, you might want to count the number of solutions to a sequence of equations
and have the answers as a sequence. Mathematicians call these kind of problems
'discrete'. The functions that appear in calculus, and for which calculus works
so well, are not 'discrete', but 'analytic.' Amazingly, the right kind of
analytic function can contain the answer or answers to the discrete examples
about. This project involves L-functions which were among the first examples of
this kind of analytic function. In the past thirty years, a number of people
including H. Stark have found new ways L-functions encode discrete information.
Because many of these connections are still only conjecture, L-functions are
very important in current mathematics.
