
* 9802390
* Enumeration of Perfect Matching of Graphs with Applications
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/1998,07/08/1998
* Mihai Ciucu,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* B. Brent Gordon
* 06/30/2001
* USD 77,118.00

Ciucu 9802390 This project is concerned with the enumeration of perfect
matchings of certain special graphs that turn out to be closely related to
several important problems in combinatorics (enumeration of spanning trees,
plane partitions, alternating sign matrices), and also have strong connections
with interesting questions in probability (rapidly mixing Markov chains) and
statistical physics (dimer models and vertex models). Specifically, based on the
solution the PI found for an open spanning tree enumeration problem posed by
Stanley, the PI intends to extend the ideas in his previous work on the
factorization theorem for perfect matchings of symmetric graphs to obtain
similar factorizations for characteristic polynomials of graphs and, as a
consequence, for spanning trees. Furthemore, the PI intends to use ideas from
his work on the complementation theorem for perfect matchings to classify
periodic weightings of the Aztec diamond that lead to nice enumeration formulas.
This would give a unified perspective on several results of Elkies, Kuperberg,
Larsen and Propp, B. Y. Yang, Stanley and the PI. In addition to the core
research program outlined above, the PI intends to pursue three additional
problems. First, the PI will pursue extending comparison results of Diaconis and
Saloff-Coste to non-reversible Markov chains. This would allow one to deduce the
rapid mixing of the elementary move Markov chain on certain three dimensional
``lozenge'' tilings, considered by the PI as an analog of the two dimensional
situation studied by Luby, Randall and Sinclair. Second, the PI will continue
his investigations of the three dimensional dimer problem by considering,
besides the simple cubic lattice, other lattices of comparable interest (e.g.,
the body-centered cubic lattice or the face-centered cubic lattice), as well as
some other problems likely to be suitable for such an analysis (e.g., three-
colorings of the cubic lattice). And third, the PI intends to extend his joint
work w ith C. Krattenthaler on enumeration of lozenge tilings of certain regions
of the triangular lattice to more general (possibly weighted) regions relevant
to plane partition enumeration. This research is in the general area of
Combinatorics. One of the goals of Combinatorics is to find efficient methods of
studying how discrete collections of objects can be arranged. The behavior of
discrete systems is extremely important to modern communications. For example,
the design of large networks, such as those occurring in telephone systems, and
the design of algorithms in computer science deal with discrete sets of objects,
and this makes use of combinatorial research.
