
* 9877048
* Double Hecke Algebras and Applications
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/15/1999,01/31/2003
* Ivan Cherednik,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2003
* USD 72,561.00

The aim of this project is to study the double affine Hecke algebra introduced
by Dr. Cherednik which promises important application to many other branches of
mathematics. Specific objectives include the study of Macdonald polynomials of
double affine Hecke algebras at roots of unity, as well as induced and spherical
representations of the algebras. Dr. Cherednik also intends to explore the
analytic theory of q-spherical functions, and the difference Fourier
transformation including q-deformations of the Gauss integrals, Zeta functions,
and L- functions. Finally applications of double affine Hecke algebra to Harish-
Chandra theory and the harmonic analysis on Kac-Moody groups will be considered.

This is a project in the area of mathematics known as Algebra. In the 20-th
century, algebra has become the language of all of mathematics. Mathematicians
studying geometry, number theory, analysis, mathematical physics, statistics, or
just about anything have noticed that there are underlying structures in their
studies that transcend their origins. In Algebra these underlying structures are
studied in their pure form. As the fundamental properties of these structures
are uncovered, the implications reverberate back to all the original settings in
which these structures occur. In earlier research Dr. Cherednik introduced a new
structure to algebra known as a double affine Hecke algebra which appears in
representation theory, special functions, harmonic analysis, combinatorics, and
conformal field theory. In this project he will continue his study of this new
algebraic object.
