
* 9970270
* Algebraic and Geometric Representations of Combinatorial Structures
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/1999,05/18/2000
* Zoltan Furedi,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* B. Brent Gordon
* 03/31/2002
* USD 82,350.00

9970270

Representations of graphs employing algebraic or geometric ideas is one of he
central topics of combinatorial research. Their importance is highlighted by
their applications in Theoretical Computer Science. The PIs continue their work
on this subject and investigate three different aspects of representations. One
of the goals of the PIs is to discover dense graphs not containg some fixed
graph G as a subgraph. This problem is wide open once G is bipartite. The PIs
search for algebraic or geometric representation of the appropriate graphs
(e.g., Ramanujan graphs, norm graphs, polarity graphs). In another aspect of
graph representations the type of representation is given and one tries to find
the most efficient one for a class of graphs. The PI and the coPI investigate
``worst-case'' and ``average-case'' efficiencies of important representations.
The methods here also include probability theory. Finally, the PIs apply
appropriately chosen representations as tools in the determination of some other
parameter or property of a combinatorial structure of interest.

Graphs are made up of "vertices" and "edges" connecting some pairs of vertices.
Behind the transparent definition hidden is a vast amount of complexity. One of
the reasons the study of graphs is of paramount interest is their wide
applicability in Computer Science. The "thinking" of today's computers is
modeled by graphs. Algorithms often use specific exmples of graphs having a
certain appropriately chosen structure. The speed of an algorithm could depend
on the attributes of the graphs employed. The problems arising are part of a
broader research area within Combinatorics, which aims at obtaining information
about global properties of graphs under some local restrictions. The PIs tackle
specific problems of this type. They apply ideas from algebra and geometry to
obtain representations of graphs with excellent global properties. Another
aspect of graph representations is the following. Expensive computer (disk)
space can be saved by communicating the structure of a graph to the computer
efficiently. In these problems the type of the representation, that is the the
way of communication is fixed, and one tries to determine how well different
graphs can be represented. The PI and the coPI investigate "economic" ways to
represent graphs using representations from algebra and geomtry.
