
* 9970926
* Moduli Problems in Algebraic Geometry
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/1999,05/16/2003
* Jun Li,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynne Walling
* 06/30/2003
* USD 134,082.00

Abstract Jun Li Stanford University DMS 9970926

Professor Li will investigate problems concerning moduli spaces in algebraic
geometry arising from theoretical physics. The project involves the mathematical
foundation of the notion of virtual topological numbers as used in mathematical
physics. The work will follow up recent progress on the virtual enumeration of
curves in projective manifolds. In related work, Prof. Li will study Gromov-
Witten invariants via degeneration. Methods similar to these should yeild
computational tools to help study mirror symmetries. Finally Prof. Li will also
try to generalize Gromov-Witten invariants to varieties over fields of positive
characteristic.

This project is in the important mathematical field known as Algebraic Geometry.
This modern view of curves and surfaces, generalizes these important concrete
geometric objects into very abstract algebraic constructs. The counter-intuitive
notion that things become easier to deal with when they become more abstract and
complicated has been part of mathematics for centuries. In the 20-th century,
this idea led to the development of algebraic geometry and has produced
important new results in geometry, number theory, and analysis. Our increased
understanding of the tools of algebraic geometry has had practical application
in areas from security and communication to robotics and manufacturing. In
recent years, theoretical physicists and mathematicians realized that the
physicists had been developing their own form of algebraic geometry for several
years. Professor Li's project is to help reconcile the two views and to make the
techniques and discoveries of both sides available to the other.
