
* 9970676
* Modular Towers of Noncongruence Curves
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/1999,06/09/1999
* Michael Fried,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2003
* USD 84,597.00

Professor Fried will continue research on modular towers. A Modular tower is a
sequence of moduli spaces canonically attached to a set of data coming from a
finite group. Modular towers are designed to allow analogies of the ideas of
modular curves in many applications not previously associated with such
techniques. This project will concentrate on modular curve towers. Among the
goals of the project is to establish that high levels of a modular tower of
curves will have no rational points, an important issue for many of the
applications of the towers. Also to make the techniques of modular towers more
easily applicable in new situations, Professor Fried will try to establish
criteria which allow arbitrary towers of non-congruence curves to be given the
structure of a modular tower.

In this project, Professor Fried will continue his work on issues related to the
Inverse Galois Problem. This is a long-standing unanswered question with its
origins in the 19 century. Over a hundred years ago mathematicians found that
one could classify properties of the solutions to an equation by studying the
symmetries of those solutions. The solutions themselves and the symmetries of
the solutions were connected in a direct but very surprising way. Easy
properties of symmetries were often connected to difficult properties of the
solutions and vice versa. This allows the easy things to be transferred back and
forth to the hard things through the connection. The result is very powerful
method for discovery. In earlier work, Professor Fried introduced a new object
into this connection called modular towers, and he hopes to use this object
strengthen our understanding of the connection in the direction from the
symmetries to the solutions.
