
* 9970709
* Representation Theoretical Methods in the Theory of Special Functions
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 08/01/1999,06/29/2001
* Adriano Garsia,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* B. Brent Gordon
* 07/31/2002
* USD 92,001.00

9970709

The investigator and his associates study the connections between Representation
Theory and the Theory of Special functions. He bridge for this connection is
provided by the Frobenius map which relates group characters to symmetric
functions. In the ten years since its discovery, the Macdonald symmetric
function basis has progressively emerged has a central element in this
connection. Efforts at proving a variety of conjectures surrounding the
Macdonald basis, have led to some truly remarkable discoveries in the Theory of
Symmetric functions as well as in Representation Theory. In particular this led
the principal investigator and his associates to the discovery of new and
efficient tools to carry out calculations (both at the theoretical as well as
practical levels) within the theory of symmetric functions. The surprising
development is that there is a family of plethystic operators which play a
remarkable role within the theory of symmetric functions and unravel the
complexity of the Macdonald basis. Investigations, made possible by these
discoveries reveal that this basis encodes some truly surprising properties of
the diagonal action of the symmetric group Sn on polynomials on two sets of
variables x1,...,xn and y1,...,yn. The implications of these developments in
several areas which range from Algebraic Combinatorics to Algebraic Geometry and
Theoretical Physics are presently under intensive investigation.

To this date very few researchers and educators in the pure as well as the
applied sciences truly appreciate the vastness of new horizons offered by the
combination of symbolic manipulation software and processing power of present
day computers. Several areas of mathematics have truly become experimental
sciences. In computer explorations, investigators that have mastered this art,
are being daily amazed to see conjectures and theorems literately jump out of
the screen. In the early days of the computer era, in the late sixties and early
seventies involvement with the space exploration efforts carried out at the Jet
Propulsion Laboratories, the principal investigator was made keenly aware of the
needs to develop tools that enabled the translation of theoretical discoveries
into practical computational methods. This led to a frantic effort towards the
replacement of pure "existence" proofs by "algorithmic" arguments. Nevertheless,
the ability to carry extensive computations by hand for days without committing
a single mistake is a quality that has been reserved to only a handful of humans
over the ages. It has become clear that the power of such giants as Gauss and
Euler was substantially based on this rare ability. However, it is not
irreverent to say that, nowadays, any talented mathematics graduate student in
possession of a 400MHz PC with MAPLE or MATHEMATICA can easily computationally
outdo weeks of both Gauss and Euler ombined in a matter of minutes. Yet a great
deal remains to be done. The few utilities that are added constantly to these
symbolic manipulation packages, nowhere near exhaust the possibilities that have
become available. Surprisingly, very few investigators realize the power of the
theory of symmetric functions as a symbolic manipulation tool. The latter stems
from the fact that non linear problems may be linearized by the introduction of
an infinite number of variables. It develops that the change of bases matrices
of symmetric function theory may be used to "mock" the presence of infinities
within a finite device, thereby permitting the linearization of many a
computational problem. This given it is easily seen how important it is to
pursue investigations in the theory of symmetric functions that extend and
deepen the computational power of the theory. This is the foremost goal of the
present project.


