
* 9970454
* Hecke Algebras, Buldings and Harmonic Analysis on p-adic Groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/1999,06/03/1999
* Ju-Lee Kim,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lynne Walling
* 10/31/2001
* USD 75,213.00

9970454

This project concerns problems in representation theory. Recent progress in the
theory of "Types" suggests that the Harmonic analysis on p-adic groups can be
completely understood via harmonic analysis on the associated Hecke algebras.
Moreover these Hecke algebras are expected to be generalized affine Hecke
algebras and so should be easier to analyze. Dr. Kim will try to establish the
fact that many of the classical groups defined over p-adic fields give rise to
algebras that are generalized affine Hecke algebras. Further she intends to
study the relation between buildings of the classical groups and buildings of
the general linear group. Finally she intends to consider how base changes
relate to the representations of Hecke algebras.

Representation theory is a major mathematical technique for exploiting the
presence of symmetry. For example, the structure of the hydrogen atom, one of
the fundamental computations in quantum mechanics, is controlled by
representation theory. Another way of thinking about representation theory is as
a generalization of the theory of eigenvalues and matrices that many people see
in a college course on basic linear algebra. This project addresses two
important questions in representation theory. One potentially has important
applications to number theory. The other concerns a generalization of the theory
of angular momentum in quantum mechanics. It will help describe how pair of
interacting quantum mechanical systems of a rather general type breaks up into
simpler systems.


