
* 9970375
* Modules Over Commutative Rings and Cohomology Operations
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 06/01/1999,05/25/2001
* Luchezar Avramov,IN,Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Helen G. Grundman
* 07/31/2002
* USD 105,000.00

ABSTRACT, AVRAMOV

In recent work Avramov has successfully used multiplicative structures to study
problems on free resolutions over commutative local rings. With the help of
graded Lie algebras he exhibited many modules with minimal free and injective
resolutions of maximal possible asymptotic size. Using homotopy theory he proved
a long standing conjecture of Quillen on the rigidity of the cotangent complex
and applied it to problems on locally complete intersection homomorphisms. He
produced algebraic varieties that describe the action on cohomology of
operations defined by Gulliksen and Eisenbud, and with Buchweitz used them to
find unexpected growth and vanishing properties of Ext and Tor. Avramov proposes
to develop systematic products and other higher order (co)homological structures
for use in ring theory and module theory, and to apply it to specific problems,
that usually involve only homological invariants.

Commutative algebra and algebraic geometry may be thought of as studying
solutions of many equations in many unknowns when, typically, the solution is
not unique. The set of solutions can then be viewed geometrically, but one can
use instead encode all the pertinent information about the equations in abstract
algebraic objects called commutative rings. The two points of view interact in
beautiful and productive ways.
