
* 9974303
* New Developments in Algebraic K-Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 05/15/1999,07/22/1999
* J. Brian Conrey,CA,American Institute of Mathematics
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 10/31/1999
* USD 5,000.00

Project Abstract for "New Developments in Algebraic K-Theory"

This project concerns the algebraic K-theory of fields. In the last two years,
V. Voevodsky has revolutionized algebraic K-theory with the methods he uses in
his proof of the Milnor conjecture. The methods he has developed suggest a
program which will be developed over the next few years to understand algebraic
K-theory through a so-called stable homotopy category of algebraic varieties.
Using his methods, it has been possible to verify the Quillen Lichtenbaum
conjecture in some cases, notably for number fields at the prime two. Part of
this project is to continue this work, some joint with M. Rost, to prove this
conjecture in a larger number of cases. G. Carlsson has developed a revised
version of the Quillen Lichtenbaum conjecture, which should explicitly identify
all homotopy groups of the algebraic K-theory spectra, not only the high
dimensional ones as in the original conjecture. This version involves the
representation theory of the absolute Galois group, rather than just the Galoios
cohomology. The second goal of this project is to understand the relationship
between The two constructions, in the hopes that Voevodsky's method might prove
the revised conjecture, or that Carlsson's method will shed light on the general
relationship between Voevodsky's work and the Quilen Lichtenbaum conjecture.

Algebraic K-theory is a relatively new subject in mathematics, which promises to
relate two seemingly very disparate areas, namely topology (the study of curves
and surfaces and their deformations), and the very classical area of number
theory, which studies the properties of the integers and equations over the
integers. Algebraic K-theory, which is defined topologically, appears to carry
with it a great deal of arithmetic information. Two important conjectures
concerning this relationship are the Quillen Lichtenbaum conjecture and the
Bloch-Kato conjecture. V. Voevodsky has revolutionized this area over the last
two or three years with his breakthrough work on both conjectures. This project
will be devoted to developing this work further, by having Voevodsky and Rost
continue their work on the Bloch-Kato conjecture, and by connecting Voevodsky's
methods with a revised, stronger version of the Quillen Lichtenbaum conjecture
proposed by Carlsson. In the long run, solutions to these problems have the
potential to help us study the sets of solutions in the integers of algebraic
equations, such as the famous Fermat equation.
