
* 9988710
* A Study of Conjectures in Modular Representation Theory
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2000,03/23/2006
* Jonathan Alperin,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2007
* USD 287,500.00

ABSTRACT for Alperin's Proposal 9988710

There are many deep conjectures in the representation theory of finite groups
but one of them, Broue's conjecture, has now garnered a great deal of attention,
for a number of reasons. First, it implies new results about characters, the
main question is about structure of algebras and derived categories and there
are many connections with the representation theory of groups of Lie type and
other parts of mathematics. The principal investigator is studying this
conjecture and related questions from six different points of view, including
proofs of special but significant case, and possible generalizations which would
shed light on the ideas needed for a complete solution. He is also working on a
few other questions in modular representation theory, one motivated by some work
in algebraic topology.

Group theory is an old subject in mathematics, its roots in algebra but with
applications all over mathematics and science. One of the central topics is the
representation theory of groups which studies the most common way the subject
arises in other areas. The investigator is working on some of the key open
problems. The particular topics are ones that do have points of contact in
cryptography for example, in so-called group codes, even though the work is
seeking general new results rather than current applications.
