
* 9988533
* Monomialization, Ramification and Regularity
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
* 07/01/2000,04/01/2002
* Steven Cutkosky,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2004
* USD 110,400.00

The investigator will continue his work on monomializing algebraic mappings. The
investigator has previously shown that generically finite mappings of smooth
varieties can be made to be locally monomial mappings of smooth varieties by
performing sequences of mappings which are locally blowups of smooth
subvarieties of the domain and image. These mappings may however fail to be
separated. The investigator has more recently proven that mappings from a 3 fold
to a surface can be made locally monomial by performing sequences of blowups of
smooth subvarieties of the domain and target. The resulting varieties are
separated and proper. In this project the investigator seeks to extend this
result to general algebraic mappings between smooth varieties, and to extend the
previous results, which are valid in characteristic zero, to positive
characteristic.

The purpose of the investigator's project is to find computible methods of
solving systems of polynomial or analytic equations. Many important problems in
pure and applied mathematics are of this form. If the system can be reduced to a
system of monomial equations, explicit solutions can be given very easily. The
investigator has found a method of reducing any nondegenerate system to a
monomial system locally, by performing very simple and computible operations,
from which a complete solution to the system can easily be read off. The
investigator has extended this method to give a computable and global solution
in the case of 2 equations in 3 unknowns. The investigator seeks to extend this
method to work for systems of general size.


