* 2200334
* Collaborative Research: RI: Small: Unsupervised Islamicate Manuscript Transcription via Lacunae Reconstruction
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Matthew Miller, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2025
* USD 297,845.00

This award tackles handwritten text recognition (HTR, the task of automatically
transcribing images of handwritten manuscripts into symbolic text) for
Islamicate manuscripts, a domain that encompasses Persian and Arabic written
traditions originating in the premodern Islamic world (7th-19th centuries). HTR
for modern text is itself a challenging problem that has received substantial
attention from the fields of machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence
(AI). However, the predominance of modern text in HTR research is, to some
extent, waning: current techniques are relatively robust on modern data, and
contemporary written media production is already almost entirely digital. In
contrast, historical manuscripts have received comparatively less attention from
ML and AI, and at the same time represent both an exceptional opportunity for
impact and a set of unique challenges for ML techniques. Specifically, the
written traditions of the Islamicate world together form one of the largest --
if not the largest -- archives of human cultural production of the premodern
world. Scanning and digitization efforts over the last decade have made images
of Islamicate manuscripts in a large number of collections available to the
public. However, this data remains ‘locked’ for most scholarly uses because it
has not been transcribed into symbolic text which is required for many types of
analysis. In fact, the script styles used in Islamicate manuscripts -- 'scribal
hands' -- vary so widely and differ so substantially from modern forms that even
manual close reading of these texts requires expert training and is thus limited
to a small subset of researchers. The primary outcome of this project will be
new techniques that 'unlock' the Islamicate written tradition by accurately
transcribing it. As a result, this project has the potential to be
transformative for humanities disciplines such as Islamic and Near Eastern
Studies by enabling libraries to accurately transcribe entire collections and,
further, by allowing individual researchers to accurately transcribe manuscripts
outside the western canon. Finally, this research will also support
interdisciplinary training of a diverse set of graduate students at the
University of California San Diego and the University of
Maryland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current techniques for HTR require large amounts
of in-domain supervised training data in order to produce highly accurate
transcriptions. The neural architectures behind these modern methods are capable
of generalizing, to some degree, across modern handwriting styles when trained
on larger and more diverse collections of transcribed data. However, their
limitations make these techniques impractical for large-scale transcription of
Islamicate texts for two reasons: (1) scribal hand variation across Islamicate
manuscripts is much more pronounced than stylistic variation in modern
handwriting; and (2) transcriptions of Islamicate manuscripts that can be used
as supervised training data are extremely scarce because accurate manual
transcription requires expert training. This project will develop a new
unsupervised learning framework for Islamicate HTR centered around a novel
pretraining task: lacuna reconstruction. The new approach trains a neural
encoder for images of manuscript text lines by learning to reconstruct masked
regions -- i.e. lacaunae -- of unlabeled manuscript images. This completely
unsupervised training criterion implicitly incentivizes the model to discover
and encode discrete&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.