* 2200327
* Student Travel Support for the 2022 International Ornithological Congress
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Eli Bridge, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 09/30/2024
* USD 24,000.00

The International Ornithological Congress (IOC) is arguably the world’s most
important gathering of avian scientists. This conference occurs every four
years, and it serves as a milestone within the discipline of ornithology. The
next IOC will take place August 14-20, 2022 in Durban, South Africa. A key
tradition at the IOC is supporting student participation and nurturing the next
generation of scientists. This award will provide financial assistance for
students in the United States to attend the IOC by helping them pay for travel
and lodging associated with the meeting. Funds will also be used to encourage
participation of groups that are underrepresented in science fields, including
Blacks, Hispanics, Native Americans, Native Pacific Islanders, people with
disabilities, veterans, and first-generation college students. Moreover, the
award selection committee will seek out students from institutions and research
labs where funding for student travel is scant or unavailable. The 2022 IOC will
not only expose students to cutting-edge research from all over the world, but
will also provide key opportunities for personal and professional development.
Conferences are where students learn the broader rules of conduct for their
field, and they help students internalize their professional identities.
Moreover, the IOC will provide many opportunities for students to showcase their
research and contribute to the scientific record through live presentations,
scientific posters, and video-recorded talks. Student participation in
conferences like the IOC is critical for perpetuating a vibrant scientific
community, and the 2022 IOC is poised to play a pivotal role in the careers of
its student attendees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support for student travel to the
2022 International Ornithological Congress (IOC) will be administered by an
international panel of experts who will review and rank all student
applications. In addition to NSF funds, this panel will oversee distribution of
contributions from other sources of student support; however, all NSF funds will
be earmarked for US students. Students will apply for travel support as part of
the registration process, and the selection committee will distribute funds in a
manner that encourages participation of underrepresented groups in STEM fields
as well as students who may lack financial support from their labs or academic
departments. Student attendees at the 2022 IOC will benefit from a scientific
program that is rich in interdisciplinary research as well as several special
events that promote student research and professional development. The
scientific program is organized around 45 topical symposia as well as several
open sessions for oral presentations. Students may contribute to symposia or
open sessions, and they may also present posters and 5-minute ‘speed talks.’ As
part of a new IOC format, all contributions to the scientific program will
require submission of a pre-recorded video presentation. These videos will be
compiled into digital proceedings that will be published online, complete with
citation guidelines and digital object identifiers. Hence, among the many
benefits to student participants at the 2022 IOC, there is a straightforward
means to contribute to the scientific record. Although, the ongoing COVID-19
pandemic has warranted extreme caution in the planning of the 2022 IOC (as well
as a backup plan to go online), the in-person scientific dialog afforded by
attendance at the 2022 IOC will be a vital component in the education of young
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.