* 2200416
* Excellence in Research: Human Visual Perception of Changes in Smoke and Flame Cues during Early Fire Development
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* James Milke, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2024
* USD 596,383.00

The goal of this research is to understand how people perceive growing building
fires. Fires can quickly transition from an ember to a blaze and threaten the
safety of people nearby. Fire safety science has found that predicting how
occupants respond during fires can improve building designs and safety systems.
Identifying whether a real threat is present is a crucial step in building
occupants taking action during a fire. Past studies observed that initial signs
of a fire tend to be ambiguous, with occupants often investigating the source.
When a fire is present, fire cues can be visible to the occupant, which include
smoke and, depending on proximity, flames. This research examines whether
individuals detect changes in smoke or flames and use them to judge the risk of
the fire. Better understanding how people use visible fire cues to guide
decision making during fire emergencies can improve life safety system design in
buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates how well
humans can perceive changes in visible fire cues and link these cues to the risk
posed by the developing fire. Previous research has observed that individuals
can detect changes in visible fire cues. Whether individuals use the rate of
change in fire cues to judge posed risk is unknown. Using decision-making tasks,
human participants make judgments about software-simulated building fires. By
varying characteristics of the fires and buildings, this research investigates
how well people can detect changes in fires and use this information to judge
posed risk. Investigating this connection can inform the extent to which dynamic
changes in fire cues are used by occupants to assess the posed risk of a fire
and influence pre-movement decision making, which can be incorporated into
theoretical models of occupant behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.