* 2200338
* PIPP Phase I: Coupling Predictive Intelligence with Adaptive Response to Create Pandemic-Resilient Cities
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Katherine McLaughlin, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

When the first cases of COVID-19 appeared in cities across the United States, it
triggered a process of exponential spread that could not be reversed using
available technologies, interventions, and solutions. As climate change
accelerates the emergence of pathogens with pandemic potential, cities and urban
areas will provide the media and conduits that collect and transmit novel
pathogens. Recent advances in pathogen sensing/surveillance and epidemiological
forecasting along with the early success in the use of non-pharmaceutical
interventions to reduce the spread of COVID-19 suggest that feedback loops
between predictive intelligence and adaptive response could enable cities to
efficiently attenuate pandemic threats if the feedback is sufficiently localized
and rapid. The overarching goal of this project is to lay the foundation for the
establishment of a Center that will combine and integrate
mathematical/computational modelling with engineering, public health, and public
engagement to explore the design and prototyping of city-scale feedback loops
that could proactively attenuate the rates of transmission of pathogens with
pandemic potential. The proposed PIPP Phase I Center development activities will
include targeted research projects, workshops, and workforce development
including the mentoring of four graduate students and the establishment of a
graduate student rotation program at Oregon State University that will provide
cross-training in transdisciplinary pandemic science and enable the development
and facilitation of bi-directional trainings and exchanges on pandemic dynamics
between scientists, engineers, and public health professionals and
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PIPP Phase I project will lay the
foundation for a Center that addresses the “Grand Challenge” of transforming
cities from pandemic amplifiers to attenuators. To advance this goal, the
project team proposes to design, build, and evaluate feedback loops between
predictive intelligence and adaptive response that could attenuate pandemic
threats in cities and urban areas by leveraging the networks of interacting
components in urban systems. The specific objectives of the research are to: 1)
Build and scale up community-academic partnerships with public health
professionals and community leaders to advance pandemic predictive intelligence
and adaptive response in cities and urban areas; 2) Develop mathematical and
computational models that could simulate the process of stepping back across
epidemic tipping points in urban systems; and 3) Design and prototype feedback
loops that could predict and attenuate the transmission of infectious diseases
in cities and urban areas. The successful completion of the proposed research
has the potential for transformative impact through the establishment of
community-academic partnerships to develop and validate disease contagion
prediction-response systems and evaluate their effectiveness and adoptability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the cross-directorate
Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I (PIPP) program, which is
jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological Sciences (BIO), Computer
Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Engineering (ENG), and Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.