* 2200626
* Research Initiation Award: Investigation and Design of Terahertz Communication Systems with Artificial Intelligence
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Imtiaz Ahmed, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 299,077.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career
faculty at Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new
research programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It
is expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness and improve research and teaching at the home
institution. This award to Howard University provides an opportunity to analyze
Terahertz (THz)-band communication to meet the needs of next generation cellular
communication systems. Specifically, artificial intelligence tools will be
applied to digital and statistical signal processing techniques, network
protocols, and linear and non-linear optimization techniques to develop
analytical performance analysis tools, design innovative algorithms, and
validate computer simulation techniques. This project provides an opportunity to
train undergraduate and graduate students, thereby contributing to the next
generation of scientists who can contribute to scientific innovation,
creativity, and productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data transmission in
Terahertz (THz)-band, namely 0.1 THz to 10 THz, holds the potential of using the
wide bandwidths available at THz frequencies to meet the high data rate
requirements of the (next) sixth generation (6G) of cellular communications.
However, the unprecedented multi-GHz bandwidth in THz-band comes at the expense
of high propagation loss, blockage effect, molecular absorption, and the
requirement for sophisticated design of radio frequency electronics. Therefore,
this project describes three major research thrusts, 1) investigate fundamental
challenges for baseband signal processing while operating at THz-band, 2) design
innovative, explainable, scalable, low-complexity, and robust algorithms and
protocols while leveraging machine and deep learning, and 3) analyze the end-to-
end system performance in a standardized simulation platform. Overall, the goal
of this project is to address the signal processing challenges, develop an
accurate channel model of the THz band in different propagation environments to
predict channel behavior between various system
configurations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.