* 2200769
* Understanding Faculty, Academic Careers, and Environments in Service of Equity
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Adrianna Kezar, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,499,973.00

This project addresses the fundamentally important question of who the faculty
in the United States are, and how they advance knowledge and prepare the future
workforce in STEM. Faculty are central to the success of higher education, and
through teaching, research, and service, faculty contribute to the education of
the future workforce in STEM, the advancement of knowledge, and the success of
the higher education enterprise. Since 2004, when data was last collected for
the National Study of Postsecondary Faculty (NSOPF), there has been no source of
nationally representative data on faculty. Two major developments have also
meaningfully changed the landscape for academic employment, particularly in
STEM. First, the academic labor force is increasingly contingent, including a
substantial increase in the number of non-tenure-track faculty (NTTF). Second,
there have been substantial investments into efforts to increase the number of
faculty from groups historically underrepresented in STEM (race/ethnicity,
disability, gender, and socio-economically disadvantaged). Thus, the
discontinuation of NSOPF has resulted in a significant gap in knowledge about
postsecondary faculty in the United States. The lack of good information on
faculty membersâ€™ identities, careers, working conditions, and outcomes handicaps
administrators and policymakers in supporting faculty success. Therefore, the
purpose of this project is to develop and test the Faculty, Academic Careers,
and Environments (FACE) survey, an updated and expanded version of NSOPF that
can provide a contemporary understanding of postsecondary faculty in the United
States, including who they are and how their working conditions shape their
opportunity to be effective scientists and educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this research is to design the research methods and infrastructure for
FACE and to conduct a field test to evaluate the quality and effectiveness of
project processes and products to facilitate success at scale. Achieving
nationally representative data on faculty requires a complex, two-stage sample.
At the institution level, researchers aim to (1) create and validate a
stratified sampling frame, (2) conduct focus groups with institutional data
providers from different institutional contexts to inform data collection
instruments and formats, (3) determine methods and processes for collecting
institutional data on faculty, (4) develop the institutional data repository and
questionnaire to collect accurate data about faculty, and (5) collect and
analyze pilot data from a sample of roughly 10% of eligible institutions. At the
faculty level, researchers aim to (1) create and validate a faculty-level sample
frame, (2) determine methods and processes for collecting faculty-level data to
facilitate high response rates, (3) identify valid and reliable items and
constructs that inform our understanding of academic careers and environments,
(4) develop a faculty survey instrument, and (5) collect and analyze pilot data
from a nonprobability sample of at least 1,500 faculty respondents.
Additionally, this study uses an innovative approach to field testing,
decoupling institution-level and faculty-level data collection to allow
researchers to collect pilot data at both levels
simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform
efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and
innovations to address persistent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.