* 2200255
* PIPP Phase I: Comprehensive, Integrated, Intelligent System for Early and Accurate Pandemic Prediction, Prevention, and Preparation at Personal and Population Levels
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2022,12/31/2023
* David Gurarie, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 12/31/2023
* USD 999,995.00

The COVID-19 pandemic demonstrates that our country desperately needs a next
generation public health system that can quickly adapt to, and learn from an
expected or not-expected public health crisis. By taking advantage of recent
advances in artificial intelligence (AI), such a system shall be able to
predict, detect, and respond to rapidly evolving emergent public health crises,
and resume its prior performance level rapidly in a sustainable and scalable
way. Towards that goal, this project aims to tackle the grand challenge of
sociotechnical design of nation-wide digital infrastructure for pandemic
prediction and prevention, which is built on the foundation of privacy and
inclusiveness. A multi-disciplinary team of researchers from multiple
institutions will lead a broad range of fundamental and integrated research
projects that incorporate both micro-level granular data and population-level
data to tackle the grand challenge from different aspects. A set of activities,
including meetings, workshops, and seminars, have been carefully planned to
create an effective research team, to engage diverse and inclusive stakeholders
(e.g., public health departments, health care/hospital systems,
industrial/private sectors, and geographically and ethnically diverse community
stakeholders), and to educate and train next generation researchers to conduct
team science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to develop a digital, autonomous,
and distributed infrastructure that is also privacy preserving, the team will
focus on the architecture for data storage and collection, as well as privacy
enablers for data sharing. The data collection infrastructure and privacy
enabler technologies will (i) carefully balance data utility and privacy; (ii)
balance vulnerability for known privacy risks and institutional needs to protect
sensitive data; and (iii) allow individuals (data donors) to have full control
over their data and to give informed consent while sharing their data in
different ways with different data collectors (researchers). In addition, the
team will develop a set of highly integrated research projects that work
coordinately and intelligently for pandemic prevention that also broaden
participation and inclusion. The projects include (i) early detection using
wearable devices in combination with population level social, economic, cultural
and environmental indicators; (ii) mathematical modeling of pathogen
transmission, hotspot prediction based on spatio-temporal analysis, and
mitigation; (iii) multi-level and multi-faceted surveillance; and (iv)
technological preparation for new diseases based on drug repositioning. The two
aims are complementary to each other and work synergistically to achieve the
ultimate goal of early and accurate pandemic prediction, prevention, and
preparation at personal and population levels that will also ensure privacy and
inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the cross-directorate
Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I (PIPP) program, which is
jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological Sciences (BIO), Computer
Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Engineering (ENG) and Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.