* 2200299
* PIPP Phase I: Next Generation Surveillance Incorporating Public Health, One Health, and Data Science to Detect Emerging Pathogens of Pandemic Potential
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2025
* David Ebert, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 01/31/2025
* USD 999,977.00

Emerging pathogens such as SARS-CoV-2 cross over from animals to humans and can
cause new and deadly diseases. They spread before they are identified, allowing
significant infection before detection and response. The threat of new diseases
presents a Grand Challenge: How can we routinely collect and analyze data to
provide early detection that can help prevent the spread of new diseases and
stop the next pandemic? Delayed response to COVID-19 underscores the need for
new early detection methods, more effective data management and integration,
monitoring of the human-animal interface to detect new and emerging pathogens,
and more cooperation and information sharing between animal and public health
officials. This Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention (PIPP) Phase I:
Development Grants project will improve our ability to monitor and predict
infectious disease threats using traditional and new data sources with novel
computer algorithms to produce actionable information that will improve public-
health responses to future pandemic threats. We will work with local and state
public and animal health officials, practitioners, and community leaders to
train them on the cutting-edge science while translating the results into
solutions for metropolitan, rural and tribal nation communities. The outcome
will be a comprehensive animal and public health surveillance, planning, and
response roadmap that can be tailored to the unique needs of communities while
enabling effective community response and management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will leverage multiple streams of information to identify signals of
emerging threats. Achieving this goal requires the development of new diagnostic
tools that provide novel information sources and computational frameworks that
automate the process of ingesting, harmonizing, and analyzing large, dynamic,
and heterogeneous data streams. This work develops and evaluates the outcomes of
a set of techniques to surveil and identify the presence of and behavioral
responses to an illness and/or pathogen in animals, communities, and individuals
prior to symptom onset. The project leverages science-based, human-guided
Artificial Intelligence (AI)/Machine Learning (ML) methods to analyze and fuse
data streams from surveillance and environmental data to track predictive
indicators across scales. These novel methods build on successful applications:
wastewater surveillance to detect pathogens, pharmaceuticals, and human-health
biomarkers indicative of community presence of existing or emerging infectious
diseases (EIDs), animal surveillance to detect many EIDs, environmental modeling
for forecasting infectious diseases, and breathomics to identify patients with
lung cancer, COVID-19, and tuberculosis. This approach is novel in that it
harnesses and integrates multiple surveillance data streams in a layered and
parallel approach ensuring accuracy and specificity and enabling effective
integration of individual-to-community-wide sampling scales into surveillance
systems. This project enables effective design and evaluation of response
planning techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the cross-
directorate Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I (PIPP)
program, which is jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological Sciences
(BIO), Computer Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Engineering (ENG)
and Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.