* 2200173
* PIPP Phase I: Center for Ecosystems Data Integration and Pandemic Early Warning Systems
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,02/29/2024
* E Bruce Pitman, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the need to design, build, and
implement the next-generation of integrated environmental and clinical
surveillance systems for monitoring and tracking the emergence, spread, and
transmission of pathogens with pandemic potential at the local, regional,
national, and global scale. In addition to pathogen and disease surveillance
systems, there is a critical need for more robust networks, infrastructure, and
protocols to communicate the risks of pandemic emergence to the right people at
the right time including local, regional, and national health system leaders and
stakeholders. The overarching goal of this project is to address the challenges
associated with the development and deployment of an early warning system in
Western New York that could 1) predict the onset of a pandemic by monitoring
viral and human ecosystems and 2) communicate the risks of disease transmission
and pandemic emergence to local/regional communities to guide the design and
implementation of preventative measures and behaviors. To advance this goal, the
project team will leverage funding for this PIPP Phase I planning grant to lay
the foundation for the establishment of a Center that will integrate data from
wastewater surveillance and the analyses of clinical nasopharyngeal samples to
develop a baseline of infectious pathogens in communities with the aim of
continuously tracking their spatial, temporal, and seasonal variations. In
collaboration with the New York State Erie County Department of Health, the
project team also proposes to explore the development and implementation of more
effective strategies to communicate pandemic risks and mitigation
recommendations including behavioral changes. The proposed Center development
activities will include targeted research projects, workshops, and workforce
development including the training and mentoring of two post-doctoral fellows
and two graduate students at the University at
Buffalo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PIPP Phase I project will lay the foundation
for the establishment of the Center for Ecosystems Data Integration and Pandemic
Early Warning Systems in Western New York with a mission to 1) advance the
design, development, and deployment of a robust and integrated early warning
system for pandemic preparedness and 2) catalyze community engagement to build
trust and partnerships to guide the design and implementation of preventative
measures and behaviors to mitigate future pandemics. To advance this goal, the
project team envisions an early warning system for disease outbreaks and
pandemics based on the monitoring and surveillance of local/regional viral and
human ecosystems. Building upon the availability of cutting-edge viral capture
and sequencing techniques, the project team proposes to develop more efficient
and robust assays and protocols for the routine monitoring of wastewater and de-
identified human nasopharyngeal samples for known pathogenic viruses. In
parallel, the project team proposes to evaluate the relative abundance of
different viruses in the collected wastewater and nasopharyngeal samples to
generate a detailed understanding of the local and regional viral ecosystems and
viromes with the goal of identifying perturbations in these ecosystems that
could be integrated into monitoring systems and models to serve as early
indicators of pathogen and disease emergence. Finally, the project team proposes
to develop mathematical and computational models including machine learning
based models to 1) analyze and interpret the virome data and 2) explore the
integration of clinical human data associated with a pandemic onset with the
virome data to uncover patterns of viral infections and early signs of disease
transmission and pandemic emergence in the local communities and broader Western
New York region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the cross-
directorate Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I (PIPP)
program, which is jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological Sciences
(BIO), Computer Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Engineering (ENG),
and Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.