* 2200290
* FET: Small: DNA Storage and Computation with Strand Displacement Cascades
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* David Soloveichik, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

DNA is incredibly information-dense (up to 6 orders of magnitude denser than
optical or magnetic media) and stable (readable over millennia). Storage and
retrieval of up to gigabytes of digital information in the form of text, images,
and movies has already been successfully demonstrated. DNA storage is typically
viewed as a form of passive storage (“cold storage”) and performing computation
on the stored data currently involves sequencing the DNA, electronically
computing the desired transformation, and synthesizing new DNA, which is an
expensive and slow loop. This project seeks to make the next generation of
dynamic DNA storage, where chemical interactions can manipulate the stored
information “in memory.” Investigators will develop molecular versions of
important algorithms for computation on digital data and implement them using
programmable DNA-DNA interactions. The project will also contribute to
undergraduate and graduate education and support undergraduate hands-on
research, as well as provide training of students in applying the principles of
computer science and electrical engineering to traditionally incompatible
domains of biology and chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
the SIMD-DNA (Single-Instruction Multiple-Data DNA) paradigm for using DNA
strand displacement reactions to manipulate digital information recorded in the
topological modification of the DNA substrate (location of strand breaks). Using
the inherent parallelism of chemistry, this data processing scheme will be
capable of parallel, in-memory computation, eliminating the need for sequencing
and synthesizing new DNA on each data update. More specifically, the award will
fund the development of the theoretical foundation of SIMD-DNA computation,
including strand displacement programs to simulate various data-processing
algorithms, as well as the experimental demonstration of the molecular
algorithms and methodology. Further, software to simulate and verify SIMD-DNA
programs will be developed. Theoretical and experimental studies on strand
displacement on DNA of biological origin and sequence (native DNA) will be used
to understand and decrease the spurious interactions that can occur in the
absence of conventional sequence design. Native DNA has the potential to improve
fidelity and significantly decrease cost compared to chemically synthesized DNA.
Finally, new methods to improve the speed and efficiency of large strand
displacement cascades will be explored, which may generalize beyond DNA
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.