* 2200169
* PIPP Phase I: Center for Pandemic Decision Science - Developing Robust Paradigms for Anticipating and Mitigating Uncertain Pathogen Threats
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Akihiro Nishi, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Despite decades of pandemic preparedness efforts, COVID-19 took the world by
surprise. The national and global health community did not foresee the extend of
challenges associated with charting ecosystems of potential threats, elucidating
interdependent behavioral and political dynamics, and equipping decision makers
with nimble science, strategies, and training. This project imagines a better
prepared future for responding to pathogen threats and aims to build the basis
for a Center for Pandemic Decision Science that will break down the persistent
silos separating the academic, government, and industry institutions that have
collectively, but not always collaboratively, guided pandemic preparedness and
response efforts. Over the next 18 months, a team of 35 natural scientists,
social scientists, computer scientists, engineers, physicians, and public health
officials from 10 institutions will host a series of interdisciplinary workshops
and undertake pilot studies that will lay the intellectual and organizational
groundwork for tackling three fundamental research questions - How can we
anticipate the vast universe of potential pathogen threats and detect them at
their source? How will people, communities, and leaders behave and respond to
emerging threats? How can we integrate science into decision making across the
preparedness, containment, and response spectrum? For each of these questions,
the team will identify immediate and long-term goals for basic research,
training of scientists and decision makers, and development of predictive
intelligence capabilities. These activities will establish a new research
paradigm that is grounded in complex systems modeling, integrate perspectives
and methods across diverse disciplines, and engage extensively with decision
makers to ensure that the science is both relevant and practical. The project
will broadly engage the research and public health communities through workshops
and colloquia, train a diverse group of students, develop an undergraduate
teaching module in pandemic decision science, and disseminate resulting insights
and products through online platforms, media, and peer-reviewed publications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, this interdisciplinary
team of scientists, engineers, social scientists, and clinicians has been
developing mathematical models to provide situational awareness, actionable
forecasts, and time-sensitive policy analyses for decision makers on all scales,
from local to global. The team has partnered closely with government agencies,
healthcare systems, and schools to provide predictive intelligence as the virus,
human behavioral responses, and the arsenal of effective countermeasures
continually shifted. This work has elucidated three interlinked grand
challenges. The first is the global failure of imagination in anticipating novel
pathogen threats, despite decades of concerted preparedness efforts. The second
is the fundamental inability to anticipate individual, collective, and
governmental behavioral responses during the threats. The third is the
persistent gap between science and the decisions made by individuals, agencies,
and policymakers. This project will launch a Center for Pandemic Decision
Science that tackles these grand challenges by advancing the integration of
complex systems science into pandemic decision making. As a first step, the
Center will conduct a series of inclusive, multidisciplinary workshops and pilot
studies that will spur innovative interdisciplinary research into the emergence
and detection of novel threats, the dynamics of people’s behavior, and the
design and adoption of adaptive decision paradigms for preventing, tracking and
mitigating pathogen threats under uncertainty. These activities will hone the
Center’s vision, identify key research priorities, and embark on a diverse
portfolio of educational and community building activities to advance the
science and practice of pathogen preparedness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is supported by the cross-directorate Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic
Prevention Phase I (PIPP) program, which is jointly funded by the Directorates
for Biological Sciences (BIO), Computer Information Science and Engineering
(CISE), Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE) and Engineering (ENG).
This project was also funded in collaboration with the CDC to support research
projects to further advance federal infectious disease modeling, prevention and
response capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.