* 2200683
* Excellence in Researchâ€™: Mechanistic Modelling and Validation Approaches to Decontaminate (+) ssRNA Viruses using Ultra-Violet Technologies
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Swastik Brahma, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 453,358.00

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the need for efficient and cost
effective technologies and solutions to mitigate and prevent the spread and
transmission of pathogens with pandemic potential in the built environment
including residential buildings, schools, and healthcare facilities. Many
positive strand RNA (+ssRNA) viruses, which include coronaviruses and
noroviruses, are pathogenic to humans and animals. These viruses can survive in
air, aqueous dispersions, and on surfaces. Ultraviolet germicidal systems
emitting UV-C radiation (200-280 nm in wavelength) have been proven effective at
inactivating viral pathogens attached to various media and substrates including
respiratory aerosols, aqueous dispersions, and non-porous surfaces. However, a
fundamental understanding of the UV-C sensitivity of ssRNA viruses and their
extents, rates, and mechanisms of inactivation by germicidal UV-C radiation has
remained elusive. The overarching goal of this project is to develop and
validate a genomic-based model that could be used to 1) estimate the UV-C
sensitivity of pathogenic ssRNA viruses and 2) predict the UV-C doses and
exposure times required to inactivate such viruses in aqueous dispersions and
surfaces. The successful completion of this project will benefit society through
the generation of fundamental knowledge and validated modeling tools to guide
the design of more efficient UV-C disinfection systems and protocols to mitigate
and prevent the spread and transmission of pathogenic ssRNA viruses in the built
environment and in communities during future disease outbreaks and epidemics.
Additional benefits to society will be achieved through outreach and educational
activities including the mentoring of a post-doctoral research associate, two
graduate students, and four undergraduate students at Tennessee State University
and one graduate student at the University of Tennessee,
Knoxville.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effectiveness of UV-C irradiation at
inactivating viral pathogens in a given medium depends on several factors
including viral concentration, radiation dose and exposure time, and the virus
UV-C susceptibility (D90) defined as the required radiation dose (Joule/m2) to
inactivate 90% of the viral pathogens. However, measured UV-C susceptibility
data for many positive strand RNA (+ssRNA) viruses that are pathogenic to humans
and animals are not available due to the unique challenges associated with the
collection of experimental data on viral pathogens including the need for
biosafety level-3 (BSL-3) facilities and a specialized and highly trained
workforce. The goal of this project is to develop and validate a mathematical
model (based on viral genomic parameters such as genome size and pyrimidine
dinucleotide frequency) that could be used to predict the UV-C susceptibility of
pathogenic +ssRNA viruses in air, aqueous dispersions, and onto surfaces at
standard ambient conditions. The specific objectives of the research include: 1)
Collection and/or generation of UV-C susceptibility data for a set of model
ssRNA viruses for model calibration and validation; 2) Development and
validation of quantitative structure activity relationships (QSARs) to predict
wavelength specific UV-C susceptibility of +ssRNA viruses by analyzing the
correlations between genome parameters (genome size, sequence-based pyrimidine
dinucleotide frequency value, Trp and Tyr content) and the UV-C susceptibility
data that were collected in Objective 1 ; and 3) Development and implementation
of a Java computer interface that utilizes the QSARs developed in Objective 2 to
estimate the UV-C radiation dose and exposure time required to inactive +ssRNA
viruses in air, aqueous dispersions, and onto surfaces. The successful
completion of this project has the potential for transformative impact through
the generation of fundamental knowledge, data and modeling tools to guide the
design of more efficient, and cost-effective UV-C viral inactivation and
disinfection systems and protocols. To implement the education and outreach
activities of the project, the Principal Investigators (PIs) plan to integrate
the findings from this research into existing undergraduate and graduate courses
at Tennessee State University, the University of Tennessee, Knoxville, and
Meharry Medical College to provide students with new learning modules with a
focus on technologies, solutions, and modeling tools that could guide the
mitigation and prevention of the spread and transmission of viral pathogens in
the built environment and the food industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.