* 2200781
* How multi-digit number names guide attention, memory, and place value learning en early elementary mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Lei Yuan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 468,630.00

Learning numbers involves coordinating between number symbols, number names,
ordering of digits, and the quantities they represent. Coordinating these ideas
to understand the place value system in mathematics is a common challenge for
students learning number in early elementary grades. It is a step on the way to
learning number and operations topics in later mathematics, but also builds upon
earlier knowledge of numbers. This project seeks to understand how children
learn about place value by studying different representations of multi-digit
numbers (written number symbols, heard number names) and how prior knowledge of
number influences children’s’ learning. Knowing more about multi-digit number
learning will help to create teaching and curriculum resources that better
support children’s learning. The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exploratory
project investigates the relationship between knowing multi-digit number names,
written number symbols, and students’ prior knowledge of place value. The
project uses a series of experiments to study how early rudimentary
understanding of multi-digit number symbols leads to differential in-the-moment
gaze patterns during place value instruction. The project seeks to connect
students’ learning to instructional practice and prior knowledge. Three
experimental studies will be conducted with kindergartners using eye-tracking,
measures of students’ knowledge and different instructional practices for
representing multi-digit numbers. The findings should inform how multi-digit
numbers could be described by teachers and how to best present them to
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.