* 2200138
* PIPP Phase I: Develop and Evaluate Computational Frameworks to Predict and Prevent Future Coronavirus Pandemics
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Hong Qin, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Once a novel coronavirus or a new variant is detected, how likely would the
novel coronavirus or new variant transmit from person to person, and how sick
could patients become? What kind of new coronaviruses could cause future
pandemics? Knowing the answers to these questions can help nations make proper
strategic decisions. The dilemma is how to predict the behavior and pathogenic
severity of new viruses as early as possible. A team of researchers thinks they
have found ways to answer these questions by developing new artificial
intelligence software tools to predict the virusâ€™s behaviors based on its genome
sequence. This team of researchers recognizes the potential bias in machine
learning applications and the need to increase diversity in the future
artificial intelligence workforce. Leveraging their expertise in genomics, data
science, artificial intelligence, genetics, infectious disease, chemical
engineering, public health, and communication, this team of researchers will
organize training workshops and activities providing culturally responsive
teaching of artificial intelligence, data science training to teachers, and
context-relevant coding experiences to high school students. The team will
promote public trust in science and discernment of misinformation through
community outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research team will prototype a
deep learning model based on biological knowledge and hypotheses that can
predict viral pathogenic fitness from genomic sequences to test the potential
rules for viral pathogenicity. The team will explore several methods to correct
the sampling bias in viral genomic surveillance in order to accurately estimate
the fitness of a viral strain. The team will investigate the mutation and
recombination profiles in all available bat coronavirus genomes from the
Southeastern Asia and build a prototype geospatial model to predict the
recombination probability for all available bat coronaviruses. Leveraging their
expertise in genetics and macromolecular structure modeling, the team will test
a few candidate genes in SARS-CoV-2 for potential pathogenic rules. Based on the
outcomes of these pilot projects, the team will be able to estimate the
pathogenic fitness of an emerging SARS-CoV-2 variant or another novel
coronavirus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the cross-
directorate Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I (PIPP)
program, which is jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological Sciences
(BIO), Computer Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Engineering (ENG)
and Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.