* 2200642
* Research Initiation Award: Targeting Pyocyanin Production to Study Virulence Gene Regulation in Pseudomonas Aeruginosa
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Justin Graham, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 287,252.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career
faculty at Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new
research programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It
is expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness and improve research and teaching at the home
institution. This award to Fayetteville State University supports faculty and
undergraduate research experiences investigating the molecular mechanisms of
gene expression. Specifically, the project seeks to examine the regulatory
pathways of pyocyanin (virulence factor) production in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Pyocyanin is highly regulated, extracellularly secreted, and easily
quantifiable, making it an ideal target for studying gene
regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;P. aeruginosa is a Gram-negative opportunistic
bacterium that is ubiquitous in nature, ranging from soil to jet fuel. Due to
the vast range of mechanisms necessary for P. aeruginosa survival, adaption, and
antibiotic resistance, there is a need to better understand and explore these
regulatory pathways and elucidate the molecular underpinnings. This project
targets pyocyanin production to study virulence gene regulation and discover
novel regulatory pathways. Specifically, this project aims to: 1) characterize
the role that environmental factors play in pyocyanin regulation, 2) determine
how various transcription factors and small molecules affect pyocyanin
regulation, and 3) explore if the regulatory pathways of pyocyanin can be
applied to other virulence factors in P. aeruginosa. This study will advance our
understanding of pyocyanin regulation and has the potential to serve as a
roadmap for understanding how other virulence factors are regulated. The data
generated from this work will aid future experimental exploration of pyocyanin
and the regulation of other virulence genes in P. aeruginosa. Ultimately, the
implementation of this research project will be centered around teaching and
training undergraduate students in hypothesis-driven research experiences.
Students will develop skills in experimental design, critical reading, and
understanding primary literature, enhancing their preparation for graduate
school and/or the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.