* 2200915
* Preparing mentors to support novices in eliciting student thinking during mathematics discussions: Developing and testing a simulation-based PD program
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Matt Ronfeldt, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,079,365.00

Nearly 200,000 candidates graduate from teacher preparation programs each year,
and mentor teachers have a crucial role in the preparation of teacher candidates
as they spend far more time engaging with candidates than any other teacher
educator. Effective mentoring of teacher candidates can help to bridge the gap
between the teacher-centered practices of today’s elementary mathematics
classrooms and the student-centered practices that are needed to grow curious
and competent STEM students. And yet, mentors receive little to no support about
how support candidate development. This project aims to support mentor teachers
in better modeling the effective mathematics teaching practices for candidates
in their own teach and providing candidates with actionable feedback on those
practices as they learn to teach elementary mathematics. The project supports
mentors as both: (1) teacher learners who benefit from additional support in
ambitious teaching in mathematics; and (2) teacher educators who need support in
recognizing candidates’ strengths and areas for growth, as well as in giving
useful feedback. The project will design and study an online, portable mentor
teacher professional development (PD) program that target mentors’ teaching and
feedback skills in elementary mathematics. Designing online modules will support
large-scale work in ways that in-person PD cannot. Additionally, the project
will identify factors that contribute to the differential uptake of the PD. More
broadly, this project aims to (1) promote educator development by generating new
knowledge about how to help mentors support teacher candidate learning; (2)
broaden participation in mathematics by historically marginalized and
minoritized youth, who are far more likely than their peers to be taught by a
first year teacher; and (3) enhance infrastructure for research and education by
generating PD materials and measures that can be used and studied at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to enhance the quality of
elementary mathematics teaching by developing mentors who can better support the
next generation of teacher candidates. Teaching simulations are used as a
cornerstone of the design of the professional learning, providing a low-stakes
practice space for mentors to practice and model effective elementary
mathematics teaching. The PD will focus on eliciting students’ thinking, a
teaching practice that is fundamental to leveraging students’ mathematical
resources and ideas. The professional learning also focused on mentors’ skills
in giving candidates actionable feedback on their elicitation of student
thinking in mathematics. This study uses a mixed-methods, randomized control
trial design in which 150 mentor-candidate pairs are randomly assigned to either
PD or control (business-as-usual) conditions. Mentors and candidates are
observed in both simulations and live classroom interactions to answer the
following questions: (1) Does the mentor PD impact mentors’ teaching and
feedback skills, as well as candidates’ teaching skills? (2) How are mentors’
teaching and feedback skills similar in simulated and live classroom settings?
And (3) What is the nature of the feedback that mentors give candidates? Are
there differences between the feedback of PD and control groups across the year?
Very few studies have used experimental designs to estimate credibly causal
effects of teacher education reforms on candidate (or mentor) outcomes. This
study will provide much-needed causal evidence for the effects of practice-based
preparation on the development of both mentors’ and candidates’ teaching in
elementary mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.