* 2200234
* PIPP Phase I: Robust Epidemic Surveillance and Modeling (RESUME)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Robert Lempert, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has shown how epidemiologic modeling can inform decision
making in times of crisis and uncertainty. It has also highlighted significant
gaps that must be addressed to create ongoing, interdisciplinary collaborations
that can provide more effective predictive intelligence for pandemic prevention
(PIPP). The Robust Epidemic Surveillance and Modeling (RESUME) team has
experience supporting public health stakeholders during the COVID-19 pandemic
and drawing on that has identified critical gaps in three broad areas: 1)
communication and collaboration among researchers and public health
stakeholders, 2) integration of diverse data streams including surveillance
data, and 3) foundational work to predict future pathogens and their evolution.
To address these three gaps, the project brings together an interdisciplinary
team with expertise in epidemiologic modeling, public health, policy and risk
analysis, social sciences, decision modeling, artificial intelligence (AI),
high-performance computing (HPC), molecular engineering, structural biology, and
large-scale data management and assimilation. The investigators will engage
modelers and public health stakeholders to broaden participation in
collaborative modeling, carry out pilot projects, and develop training modules
for generalizable approaches to collaborative pandemic intelligence. The project
will develop curricula for pandemic prevention education and workforce
development. The training activities and new curricula will help build a
convergent and inclusive PIPP capacity by bringing a diverse workforce into the
research pipeline from high school through graduate school and enhancing the
expertise of the public health workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
convene workshops with stakeholders and researchers and carry out pilot studies
to refine the vision for an interdisciplinary PIPP center. Activities will
advance the science and practice in the following three foci:&lt;br/&gt;1) Co-
design of policy, implementation, and risk analyses: Early and sustained
engagement with public health stakeholders for the co-design of pandemic
prevention requirements; Development and application of methods for decision
making under deep uncertainty, value of information, and adaptive interventions;
Development of novel computational approaches exploiting advances in AI, data
management, and HPC methods for creating integrated multi-fidelity, multi-
method, and multi-spatiotemporal scale modeling analyses.&lt;br/&gt;2) Robust
data for modeling: Development of novel real-time sensors and near real-time
data streams from sensor-based air, wastewater, and human monitoring (including
for novel pathogens); Integration of sensor, public health surveillance and
clinical data through model-based, data assimilation approaches for combining
data streams and epidemiological model forecasts; Creation of large-scale open-
science data storage and indexing capabilities for epidemiologic
modelers.&lt;br/&gt;3) Prediction of future pathogens: Fundamental research in
experimental and theoretical pathogen structure and evolution; Scenario
development for epidemiological and decision support modeling of emerging
pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;To support these foci, the project will demonstrate a
sustainable simulation, data, decision support, and learning collaborative
platform, the Open Science Platform for Robust Epidemic analYsis (OSPREY). The
OSPREY platform will serve as crucial PIPP cyberinfrastructure built to leverage
investments in forthcoming exascale and increasingly ubiquitous HPC and data
resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the cross-
directorate Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I (PIPP)
program, which is jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological Sciences
(BIO), Computer Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Engineering (ENG)
and Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.