* 2200633
* Excellence in Research/Collaborative Research: Modeling Transportation Choices Under the Presence of Real-time Information Using Simulated-based Virtual Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Md Sami Hasnine, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 205,569.00

This Excellence in Research (EiR) project will investigate the impacts of real-
time information on the sequential choice-making behavior of travelers using
transportation infrastructure and services in smart cities. Smart cities of the
future are envisioned as a place where digitalization of day-to-day services,
interconnectedness of sensing technologies, and intelligent algorithms for city
management lead to innovative socioeconomic and socio-technical growth.
Travelers using transportation services in these “cities of the future” make
various choices in a dynamically evolving system such as the choice of
destination, departure time, mode of travel, travel route, and/or parking
location. This project studies the interrelation of choices and the impact of
real-time information on choices by adopting a data-driven modeling approach.
The tools and models developed as part of this project will enable data-driven
choice modeling and management of future transportation systems and will
contribute toward NSF’s mission of promoting the progress of science and
advancing the nation’s prosperity and welfare. Beyond its intellectual merit,
this project will (a) enable underrepresented students at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities to participate in research on future transportation
systems, (b) develop educational tools for accurate choice modeling of travelers
in response to real-time information, and (c) develop incentives that guide the
design and development of smart cities of the future. Eventually, the project
will enable agencies to perform better short-term and long-term transportation
planning, which will have a substantial societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
its primary goal, the project will explain travelers’ choices under the presence
of real-time information using an advanced econometric framework that identifies
the factors affecting these choices, including time-varying characteristics of
emerging technologies, level-of-service, and socio-demographic variables. This
project will contribute to the choice modeling theory and experiments by (1)
explicitly incorporating real-time information in sequential dynamic choices of
travelers, (2) modeling the impact of the error-prone or aggregated information
on travel choices through D-efficient experimental design, and (3) developing a
policy-sensitive tool that will be able to evaluate a wide range of smart-city-
related transportation policies. This project will adopt innovative techniques
such as creating a simulation-based virtual environment for experiments on
choices made by travelers in a dynamically evolving system, and developing and
calibrating robust mathematical models useful for accurate forecasting of travel
behavior. The focus applications in this project will also provide guidance on
optimization and operations of civil infrastructure systems and will enable
methodological evaluation of transportation policies in Smart Cities that may
impact travel behavior over the long term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.