* 2200830
* Empowering Changemakers: Urban Biodiversity Initiative for Teachers and Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Ashley Iveland, WestEd
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,439,333.00

The project will design, develop, and test a research-based professional
development (PD) approach that will ensure that teachers, and ultimately their
middle-school students, have the knowledge to act in a way that promotes zero
net loss of biodiversity in their communities. The project will serve 54
teachers, their students and administrators, across nine school sites. Through
their participation in the PD, teachers will be equipped to plan for and
implement NGSS-aligned (Next Generation Science Standards) instruction,
facilitate student identification and understanding of biodiversity and
environmental justice issues in their local community, and foster student
capacity to take action. Students will come to understand that biodiversity is a
global issue that they can influence at the local level, and will become
empowered, in both their knowledge and their agency, to be leaders in solving
biodiversity problems in their communities. Rather than simply following agendas
set by adults, students will become problem identifiers and solvers in their own
right. To support this, the project will create equitable learning opportunities
by supporting teachers in centering on an asset view of students’ cultural
competence (i.e., what learners bring to the classroom) and in acknowledging
that a learner’s culture profoundly influences opportunities to learn. The
project involves a multi-agency partnership including the WestEd research team
and K-12 Alliance, the University of California, Los Angeles, DoGoodery, Los
Angeles Sanitation and Environment, and the Learning Policy Institute. The
project will use targeted and wide dissemination to share project research
results and resources with teachers, administrators, and educational
organizations and leaders, environmental organizations and policy makers through
conferences, publications, and briefings. A “playbook” including project tools
and processes will be published by WestEd.org to support teachers, teacher
leaders and PL providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will gather data from
multiple sources to determine the extent to which the PD model influences
beliefs, knowledge, and achievement of teachers, administrators, and students.
The project will examine how knowledge of the NGSS, environmental literacy, and
environmental justice issues amonjg teachers and students change over time and
how recipients of PL incorporate materials and pedagogy into their practice.
Research questions will be addressed by utilizing a Multiple Baseline Design,
using pre- and post-measures with staggered implementation of the intervention,
to measure teacher, administrator, and student outcomes. A mixed-methods
research approach will be applied to ascertain the qualitative outcomes of the
intervention in the identified groups and these data will be triangulated with
the quantitative outcome measures. Qualitative open-ended survey and interview
data, as well as comprehensive curriculum captures, teacher instructional logs,
3D formative assessments, and concept maps, will also be analyzed to describe
impacts on teachers’, administrators’, and students’ understanding. For the
quantitative analyses of pre-/post- measures, the project will use an analysis
of covariance (ANCOVA) to compare all responses on the student, administrator,
and teacher surveys, to determine whether perceived understandings of the
constructs that the intervention is anticipated to impact changed over time. The
resulting analysis will inform potential revisions to the PD.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.