* 2200531
* HBCU-Excellence in Research:  Radiative Forcing Due to Carbon Dioxide and Black Carbon in Urban Areas
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Zhiming Yang, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 108,323.00

It is well known that carbon dioxide (CO2) and black carbon are two potent
climate drivers that absorb sunlight and play a critical role to influence the
Earth's radiation budget and local/regional climate. Black carbon (BC) is also
associated with human health problems such as respiratory and cardiovascular
disease, and cancer. Thus, it is essential to know concentrations of CO2 and BC
and have a clear understanding of direct radiative forcing (DRF) due to CO2 and
black carbon at a city level. Current radiative forcing is estimated at a
regional or global level due to limited concentration measurements of CO2 and
BC. The objective of this study is to examine temporal variations of CO2 and BC
at one urban site and develop a unique approach to estimate radiative forcing at
a city level. The findings from this project will help better understand larger
uncertainties in climate change prediction by various climate models. Also, this
research exposes both graduate and undergraduate students to real-life
environmental problems and provides them great opportunities to learn
quantitative skills used in the fields of environmental science. This will in
turn help increase the number of minority students who will pursue STEM
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, one Multifilter Rotating
Shadowband Radiometer (MFR-7) will be used to measure total, diffuse, and direct
irradiance at six wavelengths at one urban site and one ObservAir® sensor will
be used to monitor BC, carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide concentrations. Mobile
measurements will be conducted at one urban site and one rural site six times
per day weekly using 5-wavelength UV-IR Black Carbon monitor (microAeth® MA200).
Also, one Air Quality Particle Counting Meter will be used to provide measures
of 6 sizes of particles. Then the Santa Barbara Discrete Ordinate (DISORT) model
will be used to retrieve optical and microphysical parameters including single
scatter albedo(SSA) and asymmetry parameter with the inclusion of MODIS imagery.
The next step involves the estimation of CO2 radiative forcing and the
calculation of aerosol radiative forcing using Santa Barbara DISORT Atmospheric
Radiative Transfer(SBDART) model at a city level and different seasons. This
research will allow better characterization of aerosol optical and microphysical
parameters including single scattering albedo and asymmetry parameter at a city
level, which could help understand large uncertainties in estimates of DRF used
for many climate models. Also, a new method on estimation of DRF will be
developed in order to estimate DRF at a city level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.