* 2200322
* Numerical Modeling of Thermo-chemical Convection in Earths Core and Implications for Geodynamo Evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Cian Wilson, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2024
* USD 389,244.00

Earth’s magnetic field acts as a “magnetic shield” by deflecting high energy
particles and keeping the surface habitable for life. Evidence for the existence
of Earth’s magnetic field goes back billions of years, and may span the entire
age of our planet. Despite its ever-presence, the way the magnetic field has
been maintained by fluid motion in Earth’s liquid outer core for so long remains
a mystery. In fact, the timing of the most dramatic event in the core’s history,
the solidification of the inner core, is not known. The first solidification of
the iron-rich alloy at the center of the Earth is expected to release a large
pulse of energy that is manifested as a rapid change in the magnetic field at
Earth’s surface. So far no clear signature of inner core solidification has been
found in the rock magnetic record. This project will address this conundrum by
developing a numerical simulation that models the effects of inner core
solidification and its continued growth over time on the surface magnetic field.
The impact of this modeling effort will go well beyond Earth’s core: a better
understanding of the magnetic effects of core solidification can provide insight
into how Earth has cooled over time and whether the ancient surface environment
was protected by a magnetic shield that allowed life to
flourish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to implement
additional buoyancy fields in a community dynamo code, investigate how thermal
and compositional buoyancy fields couple together in driving convection and
dynamo action in Earth’s core, and predict how the geomagnetic field has behaved
since inner core nucleation. In Earth’s core the thermal and compositional
buoyancy fields are coupled at the inner core boundary where thermal cooling
drives solidification and releases light elements (composition) that combine
together to drive convective flows that induce a global magnetic field. This
thermo- chemical boundary coupling has not previously been explored in direct
numerical simulations of the dynamo, and will shed new light on how the
geomagnetic field was influenced by the growth of the inner core. The project
plan is to (1) perform further development of an existing dynamo code (Rayleigh)
to include an arbitrary number of scalar buoyancy fields, each with individual
boundary conditions and diffusivities, and (2) perform a systematic numerical
investigation of the physics of two interacting and boundary-coupled buoyancy
fields undergoing rotating convection and dynamo action. The modeling will
provide valuable new insight into how Earth’s core convects and how the growth
of the inner core has influenced the geodynamo over Earth history. The project
will fund a postdoc to develop the code, numerically investigate coupled thermo-
chemical dynamo action, and apply these results to the evolution of the
geodynamo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by a collaboration
between the Directorate for Geosciences and Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure to support AI/ML and open science activities in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.