* 2200343
* SHF: Small: Practical Analyses and Safe Transformations for Imperative Deep Learning Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Anita Raja, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2025
* USD 599,974.00

Learning often occurs by pattern recognition. Software systems learn by using
algorithms to recognize patterns and draw inferences from existing data and
apply the inferences to previously unseen data. Deep Learning (DL) is a kind of
machine-learning algorithm inspired by neural networks of human brains. A DL
model learns decision logic from a large set of examples. A classic application
is image processing, where a model may learn to recognize particular images
through training with many sample images. While software systems that
incorporate DL models involve large amounts of data, they still have to be
efficient and responsive. This project is expected to increase DL system
robustness, reliability, and scalability, positively impacting computer vision,
autonomous driving, medicine, and extremism identification. Tools developed as a
result of this project are also expected to democratize the Artificial
Intelligence workforce, as they will assist data scientists and software
engineers of varying proficiencies in writing quality DL code. Such tools can
potentially contribute to a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce and
increase US economic competitiveness. This project will also promote software
engineering concepts in machine learning by augmenting and creating several
undergraduate and graduate courses. Dissemination will occur through publicly
distributing datasets, papers, open-source software, and Open Educational
Resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DL frameworks increasingly make various
tradeoffs to balance the often competing requirements of reliability, usability,
and generality. Popular DL frameworks have historically embraced graph-based,
deferred execution-style (low-level) Application Programming Interfaces (APIs).
While efficient, (legacy) systems using such interfaces are cumbersome, error-
prone, and difficult to debug, maintain, and port. Contrarily, (modern) eager
execution-style DL APIs facilitate higher-level, imperative, and Object-Oriented
(Python) programs that are easier to debug, less error-prone, and more
extensible have consequently emerged at the expense of run-time performance.
Though hybrid approaches aim to bridge the two paradigms, they necessitate a
non-trivial amount of technical metadata and exhibit several limitations and
known issues on the use of native program constructs. This project is expected
to contribute practical analyses and safe transformations for modern imperative
and Object-Oriented DL programs that markedly improve their reliability and
scalability. First, various software engineering artifacts will be mined for bug
fixes, (manual) refactorings (semantics-preserving source-to-source program
transformations), and missed opportunities in efficiently executing imperative
DL code. Then, novel analyses and refactorings for automatically (i) migrating
legacy, deferred execution-style DL code to more robust imperative DL code and
(ii) specifying how their otherwise eagerly-executed imperative DL code should
be reliably and efficiently executed as graphs at run-time will be formulated.
Finally, novel analyses for detecting performance bottlenecks and semantic
errors associated with graph-based execution of imperative, otherwise eagerly-
executed DL code will be designed. This contribution is significant because it
fills the void of techniques, methodologies, and tools for effectively
developing---and evolving long-lived---trustworthy and efficient DL systems that
pervasively use imperative and Object-Oriented DL
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.