* 2200613
* Catalyst Project: Microstructural Evolution and Constitutive Modeling of Creep and Elevated Temperature Quasi-Static Tensile Deformation in Additively Manufactured Grade 91 Alloy
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Abiodun Fasoro, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 149,988.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
undergraduate education and research. It is expected that the award will further
the faculty member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the
institution, and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This
award to Tennessee State University supports faculty and undergraduate research
experiences in the development of phenomenological constitutive creep
deformation models for Additively manufactured (AM) Grade 91 alloy. The proposed
models will provide insights into the nature of the metallurgical processes
taking place during hot deformation processes in AM Grade 91 alloy, which will
ultimately determine the mechanical behavior of the
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creep, the time-dependent deformation under
statically applied load at high homologous temperature is detrimental, resulting
in catastrophic failures and/or substantially reduced life of critical
structural components in nuclear, aerospace, and microelectronic industries.
Given that additive manufacturing (AM) is proliferating as a manufacturing
technique across many industries, it is imperative to characterize creep
mechanisms in AM ferritic steel alloys, a topic that has not been addressed in
either the AM literature or the materials science literature. The goal of this
research is to study the creep behavior of AM ferritic grade 91 steel alloys
which are potential materials for high-temperature structural applications in
the aerospace and nuclear energy industries. For this study, the test loads will
range from 100 MPa to 300 MPa, while the test temperatures will range from 300⁰C
– 700⁰C. The minimum creep rates obtained from the plots of creep strain against
time provides a measure of the creep resistance. Creep testing will be
complimented with microstructural study using optical microscopy (OM), scanning
electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), and Rietveld
refinement to gain insight into the fundamental mechanisms that control creep in
AM ferritic grade 91 steels. The results of this study will aid the development
of new generation of creep resistant superalloys, impacting the scholarly
communities of AM and materials science, aerospace, and nuclear engineering
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.