* 2200838
* Addressing historic and systemic racial inequities: Coeur d’Alene land-based STEM education
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Dale Chess, Coeur d' Alene Tribe
* Continuing Grant
* Adrienne Dixson
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,091,864.00

Improving diversity in STEM fields is key to addressing the critical and complex
issues faced by society in the 21st century. Research shows that only 17% of
American Indian/Alaska Native (AIAN) students continue their education after
high school versus 60% of the U.S. population. AIAN communities experience some
of the greatest educational disparities of any racial/ethnic group in STEM
subjects and overall academic achievement in both K12 and post-secondary
education. Despite natural resources and environmental careers’ important to
tribes, less than 20% of Native Americans graduating from college do so with
STEM degrees, with numbers decreasing in the past five years The Coeur d’Alene
Tribe faces daunting environmental challenges that threaten its ability to
maintain and restore its culture, language and landscape. Tribal members who are
proficient in Coeur d’Alene and Western STEM are needed to advance racial equity
and address systemic racism in STEM education for Indigenous youth.
Increasingly, research is demonstrating how critical the inclusion of Native
history and ways of knowing is to attract and retain Native students. Developing
interest, and a sense of belonging in the STEM fields must begin before students
enter college; this is especially important for Indigenous youth. In alignment
with this goal, this project will address systemic racism by integrating
historical and present-day events with culturally relevant. The project will
advance racial equity through experiential teaching to provide a template for
tribal and underrepresented communities wishing to develop a STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project centers on an Indigenous Scholars
program, immersing students in land-based learning to deepen a relationship with
their homeland while understanding how legal and political conflicts impact
environmental and community health. Students will explore ways of knowing in
language, mathematics, science, arts, and society and culture, through sessions
led by scholars versed in Indigenous methodologies. Inter-generational mentoring
will focus on academic coaching supporting students to see themselves as change
agents through their educational achievement. Through a summer youth internship
and the production of multi-media documentaries, students will demonstrate
knowledge about their aboriginal territory, the impact of external policies and
actions on the Tribe, and how STEM fields support self-determination. These
components will support students’ understanding of their community’s history and
core values and strengthen their sense of agency in protecting resources for
future generations. This Tribally-led project will inform researchers how
participation in a summer internship designed using critical Indigenous
pedagogies of place impacts youth identities as Native STEM learners, and is
demonstrated in multimedia documentary products; 2) how intergenerational
mentoring and exposure to Indigenous research and scholarship impacts critical
consciousness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the Racial
Equity in STEM Education program (EHR Racial Equity). The program supports
research and practice projects that investigate how considerations of racial
equity factor into the improvement of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the
voices, knowledge, and experiences of the individuals, communities, and
institutions most impacted by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise.
This program aligns with NSF’s core value of supporting outstanding researchers
and innovative thinkers from across the Nation's diversity of demographic
groups, regions, and types of organizations. Funds for EHR Racial Equity are
pooled from programs across EHR in recognition of the alignment of its projects
with the collective research and development thrusts of the four divisions of
the directorate. Institutions may include those with significant percentages of
low-income undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.