* 2200804
* Geometrization of the Local and Global Theta Correspondence with Applications to the Kudla Program
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Keerthi Madapusi Pera, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2025
* USD 189,456.00

For well over a century now, mathematicians have known that certain quantities
arising from the arithmetic of the integers (such as the number of ways of
representing a natural number as a sum of four squares) have subtle
relationships with quantities (Fourier coefficients) arising from representation
theory and harmonic analysis, which is the process of understanding how graphs
of functions can be realized as superpositions of simpler waveforms. The
overarching goal of this project is to study the geometry of these
relationships, via the so-called theta correspondence, thereby making progress
towards resolving longstanding conjectures in arithmetic geometry. The project
provides training opportunities for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;These wide-ranging conjectures posit a deep relationship between
Eisenstein series and the internal geometry of certain Shimura varieties, which
have turned out to be fundamental objects in modern arithmetic geometry. The
principal investigator intends to use methods from derived algebraic geometry in
the global setting and recent developments in the local setting to gain a
conceptual understanding of the geometry undergirding the truth of these
conjectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.