* 2200596
* NSF : EiR: Building capacity at an HCBU: Tropical plants, their endosymbionts, and their metabolomes.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Anne Osano, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Diverse plant species are used traditionally by diverse human cultures worldwide
for their medicinal properties. These plants are culturally important and
impactful because chemical compounds (metabolites) from them can have
therapeutic effects. It is now understood that all plants host diverse microbes
within their tissues, including those used medicinally. This project focuses on
two species of traditional importance in Africa to ask how fungi and bacteria
occurring within plants can influence plant metabolites of medicinal use, either
by increasing or changing the expression of plant metabolites, or by expressing
their own chemical compounds. This project will advance an understanding of the
ways in which plant-affiliated microbes influence the metabolites of plants
while supporting training for undergraduates at Bowie State University (BSU), a
Historically Black College and University (HBCU), in international and inter-
institutional research experiences that range from field collections in Kenya to
training at US partner universities in molecular ecology and the science of
metabolomes (metabolomics). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observation that microbes
occur within living plant tissues as endophytes raises the question: to what
degree are endophytes responsible for the secondary metabolites attributed to
medicinal plants by cultural practitioners and scientists alike? This project
will (1) characterize endophyte communities in above-ground tissues of the
medicinal plants Azadiracta indica (neem) and Melia azedarach (melea) in Kenya
and the US, (2) use inoculation experiments to establish metabolite profiles for
each species in the presence and absence of selected endophytes, and (3)
characterize and quantify the production of metabolites by selected endophytes
on diverse substrates. This project will provide insight into an understudied
but ubiquitous symbiosis – that of endophytes and the host plants whose tissues
humans use directly – to link plant metabolic phenotypes to those of their
microbial symbionts. It will do so by engaging students from BSU in (a)
authentic academic-year and classroom-based research and (b) mentored research
in Kenya and at the University of Arizona (a Hispanic-Serving Institution, HSI),
(c) in collaboration with a metabolomics laboratory at Morgan State University
(an HBCU). By providing capacity-building and training, this project will expand
opportunities in microbiology, metabolomics, plant science, and international
engagement for undergraduates, support a cross-cutting international and inter-
institutional research experience for BSU students, foster authentic research
and support a postdoc in the plant science curriculum at BSU, and strengthen
ties among US HBCUs, an HSI, and international partners in
Kenya.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.