* 2200650
* Research Initiation Award: Environmental Factors Modulation of Structure-Function of Biological Systems
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Sarah Adjei-Fremah, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 07/31/2025
* USD 299,835.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career
faculty at Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new
research programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It
is expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness and improve research and teaching at the home
institution. This award to Winston Salem State University supports faculty and
undergraduate research experiences investigating perfluoroalkyl-substance
(PFAS), a class of frequently used environmental toxins. Specifically, a
comprehensive analysis, utilizing different experimental techniques, will be
used to assess PFAS-induced changes in mitochondrial function, wherein the
mitochondrion serves as an endogenous biosensor to environment stimuli and
functions as a key indicator of cell health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the proposed study is to elucidate the effect of PFASs on multiscale structure-
function (structural, cellular, and molecular) of the subcellular organelle,
mitochondrion in biological systems. The specific aims of this project are to:
1) examine and visualize PFAS-induced effects on mitochondrion structural
dynamics utilizing light sheet microscopy; 2) determine PFAS-induced effects on
mitochondrial metabolic changes at the cellular level using novel mass cytometry
and fluorescence-activated cell sorting; and 3) identify and characterize PFAS-
mediated molecular signatures associated with mitochondria dysfunction using
genomic and proteomic approaches. This study will result in understanding the
mechanism underlying short and long-term response effects of environmental PFASs
on cells. The proposed research will may inform long-term efforts for risk
assessment and toxicity of the PFAS on biological systems and
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.