* 2200310
* PIPP Phase 1: International Center for Avian Influenza Pandemic Prediction and Prevention
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2022,12/31/2023
* A. Townsend Peterson, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 999,999.00

Avian influenza, often referred to as bird flu, has had many outbreaks in Asia,
Africa, Europe, and North America in the past decades, resulting in losses of
billions of poultry, thousands of wild waterfowl, and hundreds of humans. As the
1918 Influenza Pandemic revealed the potential of influenza viruses that
originate in birds to kill millions of humans, prediction and prevention of the
next influenza pandemic is one of the grand challenges in global health.
Although significant investment and research have been made in avian influenza
virus (AIV) research over the past two decades, the capacity to predict AIV
pandemic is still woefully inadequate. There is an urgent and imperative need to
fortify the prediction capacity, as AIV risk factors in the human-animal-
environment systems (HAES) have changed rapidly in the past few decades and are
expected to change at a much faster pace across the world in the next few
decades. This Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention (PIPP) Phase I:
Development Grant assembles a multi-institutional team to explore the
appropriate pathways for establishing an International Center for Avian
Influenza Pandemic Prediction and Prevention (ICAIP3). The mission of the center
is to tackle the grand challenges in global health with a focus on avian-
influenza pandemic prediction and prevention. The broader impacts of this
project include increased international partnerships between researchers,
stakeholders, and decision makers; development of STEM workforce for
international and convergent research and diverse career paths; increased public
scientific literacy and public engagement; and increased capacity for avian
influenza pandemic prediction and prevention.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientifically, this project focuses on four major
problems in pandemic prediction and prevention. First, this project investigates
the complex and dynamic data problem via the OneHealth (Human-Animal-
Environmental Health) approach and the Big Data approach. Researchers review and
assess diverse AIV and HAES datasets and identify the pathways and procedures
for harnessing the disparate datasets into analysis-ready datasets for modeling
and analysis. Second, this project tackles the multi-scale and interwoven model
problem via the integrated modeling approach. Researchers review and assess
various AIV models and artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML)
algorithms, and then identify appropriate AIV models and AI/ML algorithms for
developing new integrated models to predict AIV evolution, spillover, and
transmission. Third, this project assesses the decision support system problem
via the structure decision making approach. Researchers review and assess
various AIV decision support systems and tools (DSST), and then identify
appropriate AIV DSST for further development and practical use in the AIV
surveillance, pandemic preparedness, and response. Finally, this project
identifies appropriate pathways to develop cyberinfrastructure for data-
intensive research, communication, and sharing among the community of zoonotic
infectious diseases. The center will be focused on prediction and prevention of
AIV pandemic in Eurasia and its potential linkage and risk with North
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the cross-directorate
Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I (PIPP) program, which is
jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological Sciences (BIO), Computer
Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Engineering (ENG) and Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.