* 2200456
* Excellence in Research: Transition metal carbides and nitrides supported single-atom catalysts for aqueous-phase methanol reforming
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Shyam Kattel, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2025
* USD 650,787.00

Hydrogen, a clean fuel, is primarily produced from fossil resources via the
catalytic reforming of hydrocarbons at high temperatures. Alternatively, it can
be produced more efficiently at low temperature through the aqueous-phase
reforming of simple alcohols such as methanol. The project explores the
feasibility of hydrogen generation from methanol (a renewable feedstock) as
facilitated by novel catalysts designed to work efficiently at low temperatures
in liquid environments. Concomitantly, the project lays the groundwork for a
multidisciplinary research program providing research and education
opportunities for underrepresented African American students in the area of
computational sciences, while more broadly strengthening the research capability
of Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University (FAMU), a historically black
college and university (HBCU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study involves a
combined computational and experimental study of aqueous-phase reforming of
methanol (APRM) on single-atom catalysts (SACs) supported on low-cost transition
metal carbides (TMCs) and nitrides (TMNs). SACs are an emerging class of
materials that offer near 100% metal utilization and possess the combined
advantages of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts. Theoretical calculations
will be validated with experimental measurements to unravel the stability and
structure-activity relationships of Pt, Pd, Rh, and Ni SACs supported on
transition metal carbides and nitrides (TMCs and TMNs). The project embraces
three objectives: 1) investigation of stability and electronic structure of SACs
deposited on various TMCs and TMNs via density functional theory (DFT)
calculations, machine learning (ML) methods, and scanning tunneling
microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS) measurements in ultrahigh vacuum; 2)
identification of active sites and reaction mechanisms of APRM on stable SACs
through DFT simulations of reaction energetics associated with catalyst
structures identified by in-situ and ex-situ STM; and 3) application of Kinetic
Monte Carlo (KMC) simulations and results of gas-liquid batch reactor
experiments to identify promising SAC candidates for APRM. The atomistic
understanding of structure compositions and stability of SACs, as well as the
mechanistic insight of APRM obtained from this project, is expected to be
transferable to other SAC configurations and other alcohol reforming reactions.
Beyond the technical aspects, the project involves educational and outreach
activities focused on minorities and underrepresented groups ranging from K-12
through graduate students, and involving student interactions with local high-
schools, Tallahassee Community College, and the FAMU affiliated Developmental
Research School.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.