* 2200862
* Identities from Vertex Operator Algebras on the Moduli of Curves
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Angela Gibney, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2025
* USD 234,883.00

In algebraic geometry, one aims to understand varieties, modeled on solutions of
polynomial equations. By varying the coefficients of the polynomials, one
obtains families of related objects. Often the family itself can be described as
a variety, and by studying it, one learns about the objects it parameterizes.
Moduli spaces of curves are successful examples of this approach, giving insight
into families of curves and their degenerations, and serving as a prototype for
other moduli spaces. Amenable to analogies and recursive arguments, they have
achieved the status of special varieties on which the theory of algebraic
geometry has been tested and explored. Most importantly, moduli spaces of curves
have benefited from their connections to many different areas of mathematics and
mathematical physics. The grant will also provide support for mathematics
enrichment activities for high-school students in
Philadelphia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, vertex operator algebras
(VOAs) and their representations define sheaves of coinvariants (and dual
sheaves of conformal blocks) on moduli spaces of curves. Studied in special
cases since the 1980's, these were recently extended to the moduli space of
stable pointed curves by the PI and her coauthors, who proved that when defined
by VOAs satisfying finite and semi-simplicity assumptions, sheaves of
coinvariants have factorization and sewing properties, and give rise to vector
bundles. This project has three major objectives: (1) to generalize these
results to the context where VOAs are finite but not semi-simple, as is expected
from results in log-conformal field theory; (2) to study important properties
and features of such sheaves in general, including their ranks and higher Chern
classes; and (3) to find geometric interpretations of vector spaces of VOA
conformal blocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.