* 2200534
* Excellence in Research: The role of Neuregulin-1 in proliferation and differentiation of brain cortical neuronal stem cells during fetal development
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Jonathan Stiles, Morehouse School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 05/31/2025
* USD 840,872.00

Neuregulins (NRGs) are a family of structurally related signaling proteins that
bind to receptor tyrosine kinases of the ErbB family and mediate a myriad of
cellular functions including survival, proliferation, and differentiation in
both neuronal and non-neural systems. Signaling mediated by Neuregulin-1 (NRG-1)
and its receptor ErB4 plays a critical role in brain development and functions.
This project will use conglomerations of neurons grown in cell culture (called
“cortical organoids”), as well as experiments in mice, to investigate the role
of Neuregulin-1 and its receptor ErbB4 in brain development. Because deletion of
the NGR1 gene is lethal in embryonic mice, cortical organoids are used as a
substitute to elucidate its role in brain development. Parallel comparisons in
mice will enable validation of observed effects and provide a new platform
amenable to manipulation and hypothesis testing that was not previously
possible. Furthermore, understanding the effects of NRG1 on cell proliferation
and differentiation in cortical neurons will unveil key mechanisms mediating
brain morphogenesis. The proposed study will advance the field by generating a
developmental map of Neuregulin-1/ErbB4 expression and cellular localization.
The project provides a unique opportunity for mentoring underrepresented high
school, minority undergraduate and graduate students as well as postdoctoral
fellows to participate in cutting edge 3D organoid tissue engineering research
at Morehouse School of Medicine, that will position them to pursue STEM careers
with the ultimate goal of enhancing the diversity of the scientific workforce in
the USA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neuregulins (NRGs) mediate various functions
associated with the development and maintenance of the nervous system, breast,
heart, and other organs. NRG-1 is of great interest because it regulates cell
maintenance, differentiation, proliferation, migration, and apoptosis in
neuronal and non-neuronal cell types. While the role of NRG-1 in fetal
development has been reported, its role in signaling mechanisms during brain
development is not well understood. The role of NRG-1/ErbB4 signaling, as well
as its crosstalk with factors (biomarkers) associated with neural stem cell
(NSC) proliferation and differentiation, neural migration and cellular
maturation during brain cortex development remains unknown. This project
examines how NRG-1 mediates normal brain cortical development via an
ErbB4-dependent pathway involving moderators (effectors) of cell cycle, neural
migration, differentiation, and cellular maturation. Region-specific expression
and function of NRG-1 and its receptor ErbB4 in human cortical organoids (either
alone or in co-culture with microglial cells) will be compared with cortices of
NRG-1 deficient mice to elucidate the role of NRG-1 in brain development.
Multiple techniques including Digital Space Profiling (DSP), signals of proteins
secreted from single cells (IsoPlexis), biological imaging (confocal, light
sheet and 2-photon microscopy), immunohistochemistry (IHC), Western blotting and
single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA seq) will be used to compare cellular
expression and function of NRG-1 in human and murine cortical organoid
development. Crosstalk between NRG1/ErbB4 signaling and developmental factors
during cortical brain development will be assessed. This project will clarify
the role of NRG-1/ErbB4 signaling in the development of a functional
brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.