* 2200585
* Excellence in Research: PathoRadi ‒ an interactive web server for AI-assisted radiologic-pathologic image analysis, correlation and visualization
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Mark Burke, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 08/31/2025
* USD 651,130.00

Radiological imaging is a critical part of healthcare services which physicians
rely heavily upon in the medical decision-making process. A major goal of modern
radiology and imaging sciences is to exploit specialized biophysical modeling
that simulates the biological process in the living tissue to generate sensitive
imaging contrast for disease detection. In order to understand the relations
between the simulated image contrast and the underlying pathophysiology,
radiologic-pathologic image analysis has to be performed to validate the image
correlations in tissue structure, pathology and disease characteristics. Given
the complex microenvironments in the tissues, comparison of radiologic and
pathologic images is particularly challenging. Many of the routine analyses in
the laboratories largely depend on manual or semi-automatic counting and
segmentation of cells and tissues in the “gold standard” pathological images
using commercially available software that are designed for general purposes.
Researchers often have to give up an ample amount of information that shows in
the pathological images but not quantifiable using the existing methods. This
project aims to close the gap by utilizing deep learning methodology to extract
the important features in the radiological and pathological images for
quantitative analysis of the correlations previously unattainable in the
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the challenges that persist in
comparing radiologic and pathologic images, the technical aims of the project
are divided into three aspects: (1) deep learning algorithms for quantifying
cell morphological phenotypes in the whole brain sections, (2) a graphical and
interactive statistic toolbox to visualize the radiologic-pathologic image
correlation analysis, (3) a website-as-a-service software package that
implements computer-aided image analysis and database for radiologic-pathologic
correlations in a user-friendly platform. The project outcome provides a novel
deep learning methodology that can be used to standardize the benchmark
evaluations in the development of radiological imaging biomarkers. The award
enhances the graduate and undergraduate STEM education at the Howard University,
with supports to a diverse and underrepresented cohort of the students in the
biology and mathematics majors, through the use of cutting-edge artificial
intelligence in the field of bioimaging research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.