* 2200976
* Preparing for the Future of the STEM Teacher Workforce in the 21st Century: Leveraging Multi-contextual Evidence
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* James Anglum, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 05/31/2025
* USD 126,084.00

This project aims to identify trends in the demographics and turnover behavior
of the STEM teacher workforce. It focuses on specific remedies and investments
needed to retain prospective teachers in high-need schools, especially rural
communities, and to improve outcomes for their students. The project includes
two complementary studies, one using the National Teacher and Principal Survey
(an update from the earlier Schools and Staffing Survey) and a second, using
longitudinal administrative data from the states of Kansas and Missouri. The
project will explore a range of questions, including: how STEM teacher
demographics, turnover intentions, and actual turnover may have changed
nationally due to the COVID-19 pandemic; and how the Great Recession of 2007-08
and the COVID-19 pandemic may have influenced teacher outcomes. This body of
research will produce insights to inform actionable recruitment and retention
practices for high-need school districts and future research focused on teacher
labor markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conceptual framework and proposed
analyses build upon a model of teacher turnover that suggests three main
categories of factors that drive teacher turnover: teacher factors, school
factors, and external factors and events. Leveraging this framework, the
investigators group the research questions and analyses into three broad themes:
STEM teacher characteristics, the school and student characteristics in which
STEM teachers are employed, and contemporary secular trends that impact STEM
teachers. They also consider the interplay between the STEM teacher
characteristics and the school context in which STEM teachers work. The
investigating team will employ descriptive and regression analyses to answer the
research questions. Across interconnected lines of inquiry, the researchers will
balance national generalizability with comprehensive state-specific application
to inform current and future practice, policy, and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the EHR Core
Research(ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform
efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and
innovations to address persistent issues in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.