* 2200365
* Research Initiation Award: Laboratory Investigation of Heterogeneous Chemistry of Exoplanetary Atmospheres
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Beni Dangi, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 298,569.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career
faculty at Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new
research programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It
is expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness and improve research and teaching at the home
institution. Advancements in observations and modeling of planetary and
exoplanetary atmospheres have created new opportunities in space research to
identify potential future habitats for humanity. Simulated laboratory
experiments mimicking the atmospheric environments of exoplanets may reveal the
complex roles of catalytic surfaces in the formation of atmospheric haze and
refractory materials. These experiments, in combination with mathematical models
and telescopic observations, can help in the search of the “perfect” atmosphere
for habitability. Research, training, and education of minority students will
aid in the increase of the under-represented population group in the U.S.
science and engineering work force while enhancing the research capabilities of
Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sophisticated chemical modeling of exoplanetary
atmospheres is often utilized to infer the associated reactions and chemical
compositions. However, these models suffer from lack of fundamental data, such
as the rate of reactions and identity of products which often leads to a failure
to describe the observations. Hence, laboratory experiments simulating
atmospheric environments are the key to plug the gap between modeling and
observations. The principal investigator is proposing to utilize a laboratory,
dedicated to the understanding of fundamental physical and chemical processes in
exoplanetary atmospheres and, to investigate chemical reactions. Heterogeneous
atmospheric reactions on the surfaces of solid particles or liquid droplets will
be investigated at a controlled gas pressure, radiation and temperature,
simulating the exoplanetary environments. In situ Raman spectroscopy and ex situ
surface imaging techniques help characterize the reaction products. Further
insights into the molecular mechanisms of these reactions are gained from
computational methods. These experiments and computations can provide
fundamental data required to model such atmospheres, and may reveal the complex
roles of catalytic surfaces in the conversion of gas-to-particle and formation
of haze and refractory materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.