* 2200753
* Supporting School Administrators in Leading Towards Racially Just and Ambitious Mathematics Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Elham Kazemi, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,448,399.00

School and district leaders play an important role in supporting teachers to
learn new practices, especially those related to equity. Both researchers and
educators have often treated educational leadership that promotes racial justice
as separate from mathematics teaching. This project focuses on developing anti-
racist mathematics teaching and learning practices that have led to inequitable
school experiences for Black, Indigenous, and Latinx students. This study is a
partnership with school and central office leaders from one district and
educational researchers from three universities with expertise in both
educational leadership and mathematics education. Partnership activities include
documenting how leaders learn and develop anti-racist leadership practices and
then measuring the impact on teachers’ instruction and students’ experiences.
This project will result in a refined set of leadership practices that support
anti-racist, ambitious teaching and learning by fostering Black, Indigenous, and
Latinx students’ positive racialized mathematical identities, positioning
students as central members of their mathematics learning communities, and
affirming their home and cultural assets. Moreover, the tools, routines, and
leadership moves developed and used by the partner educators will help
researchers and educators better envision and advocate for anti-racist
leadership in the areas of school systems and policies, mathematics teaching and
learning, and supports for teacher learning. This award is funded by the
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) which seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mixed-methods study aims to document how
leaders learn and develop leadership practices to support anti-racist and
ambitious mathematics learning opportunities for students, and measure the
relationship between these practices and a) teachers’ instruction and b)
students’ experiences. In a research-practice partnership (RPP), both
educational leadership and mathematics education researchers from three
universities and leadership practitioners from three elementary schools and a
central office team in one district will collaborate to understand how and if
leadership for anti-racist, ambitious mathematics teaching and learning is a key
lever to create more racially just schools. Qualitative analysis of
observations, interviews, documents, and artifacts from the RPP and from
leaders’ practices will demonstrate leaders’ developing understandings and
practices. Mixed-methods analyses of classroom video recordings and artifacts,
teacher interviews, student focus groups and student surveys will describe the
relationship between leaders’ actions, teachers’ practices, and students’
learning experiences. Findings will contribute to both the fields of justice
focused leadership and mathematics education by explaining how this type of
leadership shapes content-specific instruction and will provide much-needed
guidance for practitioners looking to cultivate antiracist teaching, learning,
and leadership in schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.