* 2200384
* Excellence in Research: Understanding the interactions of terrestrial and freshwater systems for developing a data-driven decision-making framework to manage Algal Blooms
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Yanshuo Sun, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2025
* USD 415,694.00

Human sources of nutrients, such as point discharges from wastewater treatment
plants, and nutrient rich runoff from agriculture and urban areas, are driving
factors of harmful algal blooms. Conservation practices, also called best
management practices and sometimes green infrastructure, are strategies to
reduce runoff and nutrient loads from urban watersheds. Best management
practices have the potential to control harmful algal blooms in freshwater lakes
by reducing nutrient exports in upstream urban watersheds. However, there is a
lack of understanding of the relationships among the implementation of best
management practices, landscape export of nutrients, and the occurrences of
harmful algal blooms. The overarching goal of this research is to understand the
hydrological, meteorological, biological, physical, and geochemical processes
affecting the landscape export of nutrients and to evaluate the effects of best
management practices on the occurrence of harmful algal blooms. This project
aims to create a decision support tool for determining the most cost-effective
best management practices for urban watersheds to reduce nutrient escape and
subsequently control harmful algal blooms. The project will involve key
partners, community members, and stakeholders throughout the planning process to
ensure broad utility of the resulting strategic plan. The project will also
provide educational activities for graduate and undergraduate students from
historically underrepresented groups, with the goal of cultivating diversity for
the next generation of professionals. The outcome of this project will be
incorporated into the educational activities coordinated by the PI to educate
the K-12 educators in Florida on sustainable water management with the goal of
developing a curriculum that can be used by teachers from under-resourced middle
schools in rural areas of Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives
of this proposal are: Objective 1 - provide a better understanding of the key
hydrological, meteorological, biological, physical, and geochemical processes
affecting landscape nutrient export in freshwater lakes; Objective 2 - predict
occurrences of harmful algal blooms based on learned relationships between
nutrient fluxes and nutrient pollution from a terrestrial system using physics-
informed machine learning; and Objective 3 - design an innovative data-driven
decision-making framework for evaluating the effectiveness of conservation
practices in managing harmful algal blooms in downstream water bodies. This
research targets shedding light on the interactive hydrological, meteorological,
biological, physical, and geochemical processes affecting the transport and flux
of nutrients from terrestrial systems to freshwater lakes, by applying physics-
informed machine learning and developing data-driven decision-making frameworks.
The project will formulate water quality protection strategies for terrestrial
systems that promote sustainability of freshwater ecosystems. The project will
bridge disciplinary research on hydrology, data science, and mathematical
optimization. The research team will use a system-level approach driven through
convergent collaboration with the goal of providing a comprehensive
understanding of integrated terrestrial freshwater
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.