* 2200914
* NSF-BSF: Derived and quantum corrected  structures on arithmetic and geometric moduli
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Tony Pantev, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2025
* USD 116,237.00

This is a research in algebraic geometry. The field of algebraic geometry
studies geometric models by distilling and encoding their essential complexity
in polynomial equations. The project integrates ideas from quantum physics and
the physical study of symmetries of the fundamental laws of nature to extract
new and unexpected information about the geometry of spaces and the deep
properties of number systems. The project will focus on unraveling the structure
of hidden and broken symmetries of quantum fields and to capture this structure
in computable invariants. These invariants will give a new mathematical tool for
understanding and proving various empirically observed physics dualities, and
also mysterious arithmetic dualities, which are expected to identify a priori
unrelated quantum theories. The project will unify the analytic and geometric
properties of parameter spaces of representations in arbitrary dimension and
sets the stage for understanding the basic local symmetries of moduli problems
in a way suitable for pragmatic use in a broad spectrum of applications. The
work will be immediately relevant to deep questions in symplectic geometry,
number theory, string theory and quantum field theory. This project provides
research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three directions will be studied. The first is to
construct geometric realizations of arithmetic duality maps and will use
geometry to produce new insights into the complexity of Galois representations.
In the second project a new method is proposed for understanding maps between
coisotropic branes, parametrizing the deformations of the composition laws for
such maps, and extracting new symplectic information from such deformations. The
final project uses the geometry of higher stacks to develop a duality and
decomposition formalism for canceling anomalies and understanding secondary
quantum symmetries in quantum field theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.