* 2200600
* Catalyst Project: New Hydrazine Reagents for Late-Stage Diversification of Bioactive Molecules
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Manish Singh, Lincoln University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
undergraduate education and research. It is expected that the award will further
the faculty member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the
institution, and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This
award to Lincoln University (MO) supports faculty and undergraduate research
experiences in the development of cyclic-bis(silyl)hydrazines, a novel class of
hydrazine reagents. Specifically, the proposal seeks to create the first strong
metal-base free Wolff-Kishner type gem-difluorination of carbonyl carbons (C=O)
under neutral conditions, result in synthetically made bioactive molecules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the proposal is to develop a new
metal-base free late-stage gem-difluorination technique for converting the
carbonyl carbon (C=O) of aldehydes and ketones into CF2 group, resulting in a
new class of hydrazine reagents. This project has been divided into five
specific aims: (1) to develop synthetic and purification protocols for the
proposed cyclic-bis(silyl)hydrazine reagents, (2) to study the tautomeric
equilibrium of the new cyclic-bis(silyl)hydrazine reagents in different organic
solvents and assess their hydrolytic stability, (3) to develop a general method
for synthesis of hydrazones using cyclic-bis(silyl)hydrazine reagents, (4) use
the cyclic-bis(silyl)hydrazones to develop a new gem-difluorination methodology
of carbonyl carbon of aldehydes and ketones, and (5) validate the utility of the
proposed fluorination technique by performing the gem-difluorination of a
bioactive complex molecule, hecogenin acetate. Basic synthetic chemistry
principles and techniques will be used to synthesize the novel reagents. These
compounds will be purified using flash column chromatography and characterized
by 1H, 19F, 13C-NMR, and HRMS techniques. Progress of the reaction will be
monitored by Thin Layer Chromatography (TLC) and 1H, 19F NMR. Successful
completion of the proposed research will provide new cyclic-bis(silyl)hydrazine
reagents for late-stage gem-difluorination of carbonyl carbon (C=O) of ketones
and aldehydes without using any strong metal-base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.