* 2200873
* Shimura Varieties with Parahoric and Deeper Level Structure
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Thomas Haines, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 07/31/2025
* USD 210,000.00

The Langlands program is a far-reaching web of conjectures linking seemingly
unrelated subjects in mathematics: number theory, representation theory,
analysis, and algebraic geometry. More specifically, the Langlands reciprocity
conjectures seek to uncover mysterious identities relating functions of
arithmetic/number-theoretic nature with functions of analytic/representation-
theoretic nature. Such identities reveal hidden symmetries in the objects that
give rise to the functions, and each instance of such identities usually has
deep consequences. For example, a special case of Langlands' reciprocity
conjectures was proved by Wiles and his school, finally resulting in a proof of
Fermat's Last Theorem. Fermat's Last Theorem concerned integer solutions of a
particular polynomial equation. More general solution sets of polynomials are
called algebraic varieties, and among those, Shimura varieties have been central
in establishing cases of Langlands' vision. Their study brings together
techniques from diverse fields and challenges mathematicians from many different
directions. This project centers on the study Shimura varieties as a testing
ground of Langlands' reciprocity conjectures. Along the way, the PI will involve
his PhD students and Postdocs, and will continue his work on disseminating
fundamental science, and on building interactions between different mathematics
departments and between mathematicians with diverse fields of
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the PI will study
Shimura varieties from a geometric and representation-theoretic viewpoint, using
recent breakthroughs in various domains, in order to express Hasse-Weil zeta
functions of very general Shimura varieties in terms of automorphic L-functions.
The focus will be on Shimura varieties of abelian type, and the PI will solve
various difficulties arising from the presence of singularities on these
varieties. These bad reduction issues are easiest to study in the case of
parahoric level structure, which will be investigated first, building on prior
work of the PI along with recent methods of Kisin-Shin-Zhu in the good reduction
(no singularities) cases. The PI will also address deeper level structure
situations, bringing in new p-adic geometry techniques due to Scholze and
Fargues-Scholze. Of particular importance will be the Fargues-Scholze
geometrization of the local Langlands correspondence, and the way this interacts
with the PI's ideas on implementing the Langlands-Kottwitz method for deeper
level Shimura varieties. This study of bad reduction phenomena will provide
steps toward the ultimate goal of realizing links between Galois representations
and automorphic representations in the cohomology of Shimura
varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.