* 2200052
* PIPP Phase I: Predicting and Preventing Epidemic to Pandemic Transitions
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Ioannis Paschalidis, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 01/31/2024
* USD 999,997.00

The COVID-19 pandemic and its effects, both in terms of the millions of lives
lost and the trillions in estimated costs, are a recent example of the
devastation pandemics can cause. Any discernible progress in the prediction,
early detection, and rapid response would have significant impacts on human
welfare. The overarching goal of this project is to develop a comprehensive
strategy and the required science for predicting and preventing future
pandemics. Predicting a pandemic at its pre-emergence, zoonotic stage requires
considering millions of undescribed viruses thought to exist in mammals and
birds, which could lead to many false alarms. On the other hand, detecting a
pandemic after it has spread widely is too late. Instead, this project will
develop methods for detecting when an emerging pathogen has spilled over from
its natural animal reservoir into humans, causing a small, localized disease
cluster, and will seek to develop a suite of rapid response and mitigation
strategies. The research agenda will form the basis of a research Center to
undertake a longer-term effort. This project offers educational and training
opportunities for graduate students and post-docs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is organized around four tasks that map to a natural progression from
prediction and detection to prevention. Task 1 seeks to identify location
hotspots of pathogen emergence and to compile ranked lists of the most likely
zoonotic pathogens that could cause an initial outbreak. Task 2 will focus on
detecting disease anomalies in healthcare settings with methods applicable to
resource-limited settings, leveraging alternative data sources from social
media, web search, cell phone mobility patterns, local case reports, and death
reports. Task 3 will consider the more detailed characterization of a pathogen
causing a local disease cluster. It will also develop network-based disease
spread models to predict if, and under what conditions, the local disease
cluster is likely to evolve into a pandemic. Task 4 will focus on mitigation and
response strategies, including individual therapeutics and vaccines, issues of
global governance, and decision-making tools to deploy control mechanisms in the
form of travel restrictions, lockdowns, social distancing and mask-wearing
directives, and drug/vaccine resource allocation. To evaluate the developed
framework, the team will apply it to recent historical epidemics and pandemics,
considering COVID-19, H1N1, and Ebola. The research team spans a large
multidisciplinary space, including biology, ecology, epidemiology, medicine
(infectious diseases, virology and microbiology), computer &amp; information
science &amp; engineering, and social sciences (behavioral sciences, health
policy, and emerging media).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the
cross-directorate Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I (PIPP)
program, which is jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological Sciences
(BIO), Computer Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Social, Behavioral
and Economic Sciences (SBE) and Engineering (ENG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.