* 2200518
* Catalyst Project: Age and temperature-dependent millimeter-wave charge carrier dynamics in hybrid perovskite films
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Biswadev Roy, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 149,999.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
undergraduate education and research. It is expected that the award will further
the faculty member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the
institution, and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This
award to North Carolina Central University supports faculty and undergraduate
research experiences investigating the effects of aging and temperature on
hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites to predict charge carrier density.
Specifically, the project seeks to utilize high-throughput testing and a machine
learning algorithm for data analyses to understand aging related stability and
the causes of degradation of organometallic halide
perovskites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perovskite in 3-D form is a very attractive
material for applications such as a field-effect transistor (FET), light-
emitting diodes (LED), photo- and radiation detection, scintillation,
biochemical applications, and has direct industrial application for hydrogen
production. Since monomolecular (trap-assisted) recombination trends in
methylammonium lead-halide (MAL3I) and its cation engineered variants can be
directly measured using the time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC)
measurements, this project aims to use a free-space time-resolved millimeter-
wave conductivity apparatus (TR-mmWC), developed at NCCU, to observe the age-
peak voltage and non-radiative age-recombination decay trends in MAL3I and its
structural variants at different exposure temperature regimes. The experimental
data collection and analysis will help inform two questions: (1) Does the sample
develop shallow defects over time for a better charge transport with aging, or
does the reverse process hold? and (2) How do the positive peak and negative
photoconductivity behave in an hybrid organic (MA) â€“ inorganic (L3I) system?
These studies have the potential to reveal the frequency dependence of
electromagnetic interaction with material dielectric properties and
conductivity, and the systematical collection of frequency-swept absorption
profiles in a large temperature range, demonstrating how the charge dynamical
properties at millimeter-wave frequencies change by age at different
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.