* 2200529
* Excellence in Research: Elucidating the mechanisms that regulate cell uptake of homogeneous biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles to improve targeted therapeutic delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Vida Dennis, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 09/30/2025
* USD 500,003.00

Over the past two decades, there has been a significant increase in therapeutics
targeting multiple diseases, infections, and vaccines. However, many challenges
are still being faced with therapeutic delivery to specific tissues and cells
and high dosages causing unwanted side effects. Biodegradable polymeric
nanoparticles offer many advantages for the delivery of therapeutic drugs and
vaccines, such as cell and tissue targeting, slow-release, and reduced side
effects to enhance the efficacy. The goal of this project is to show that by
using nanoparticles of similar size and shape, better cell uptake and delivery
will result in improved efficacy. The innovativeness of this project has the
potential to develop safe and novel therapeutics that are effective for many
infectious diseases caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi, as well as cancers. The
project will provide research training and mentoring to underrepresented
undergraduate and graduate students in STEM fields at Alabama State University
from disciplines such as nanotechnology, immunology, cell biology, genomics, and
proteomics. Students will also be provided other educational opportunities,
including seminars, professional development training activities such as ethics
in research, scientific writing, and presentations at scientific meetings. The
project will considerably strengthen the research and educational skills of
students to bring diversity to the global
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Endocytosis is one major route that regulates
biodegradable polymeric nanoparticle uptake and transport mechanisms in
biological systems for therapeutic delivery. Understanding the endocytosis
mechanisms of nanoparticles is critical for effective therapeutic delivery and
function, especially regarding their homogeneous and heterogeneous physical
properties. Much of what is known for the delivery of therapeutics comes from
heterogeneous rather than homogeneous polymeric nanoparticles. Although both
nanoparticle types may have distinct endocytosis mechanisms due to their
physical properties, there is a paucity of data on the endocytosis mechanism
regulating homogeneous nanoparticles' cellular uptake and impact on therapeutic
delivery and function. The hypothesis to be tested is that therapeutic delivery
efficiency is dependent on the homogeneity of nanoparticles; homogeneous rather
than heterogeneous nanoparticles will be more efficiently endocytosed to improve
therapeutic delivery and function due to uniformity and distinct endocytosis
mechanisms. This project will focus on intracellular protein targeting for
delivery of a chlamydial bacterial protein encapsulated in poly D, L-lactide-co-
glycolide, and poly(lactic acid)-poly(ethylene glycol to evaluate the
interaction with dendritic cells as antigen-presenting cells in vitro and mice.
The objectives are: 1) to formulate and characterize the encapsulated protein to
understand its interactions with dendritic cells leading to uptake and
regulation of cellular function; 2) to decipher the specific endocytosis pathway
exploited by the encapsulated protein of different size and formulation, 3) to
determine the role of specific endocytosis pathways regulating the encapsulated
protein uptake and therapeutic function in mice, and 4) to extend the dendritic
cells findings to other cell lineages. The research will exploit various
mechanistic approaches to unveil new knowledge leading to scientific discoveries
to improve human health-related diseases. The results will show how endocytosis
differentially regulates the delivery of homogeneous and heterogeneous
nanoparticles to enhance targeted delivery and therapeutic function. The new
knowledge will enable scientists to develop efficient homogeneous size-specific
intracellular nanocarriers for therapeutics targeting multipurpose biomedical
applications. The broader impact is that the findings will apply to more
categories of nanoparticles, further advancing new scientific knowledge leading
to novel nanotherapeutics impacting biomedical and biopharmaceutical
applications. This project will also broaden the research infrastructure in
nanotechnology and advance the mission of Alabama State University by providing
quality education and cutting-edge skills to the underrepresented minority
population in Alabama and the society at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.