* 2200045
* PIPP Phase I: Community Informed Computational Prevention of Pandemics
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* T Murali, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has revealed multiple gaps in our understanding of how
viruses emerge to infect humans. This Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic
Prevention (PIPP) Phase I: Development Grant seeks to create a cohesive
interdisciplinary research team to investigate three distinct yet related
scientific challenges with the goal of predicting and preventing future
pandemics. In the first theme, the project will develop computational and
experimental methods that analyze the genomic sequences of viruses that
currently infect animals to determine how they may evolve in order to cross
species barriers and infect humans in the future. The second theme of the
project will be to investigate and develop predictive models to find drugs that
can be used to combat a virus identified in the first theme as having the
potential to infect humans. A distinguishing characteristic of the approach will
be to identify new uses for or to chemically modify drugs that have already been
approved for other human diseases. Finally, in the third theme, the
investigators will engage with the community at large to develop an
understanding of societal and ethical concerns of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 pandemic has brought to the
spotlight the urgent need to be prepared both on scientific and societal fronts
to detect and curb novel zoonotic viral infections. The project seeks to control
and prevent future viral pandemics through ethically-grounded and community-
informed research that will (a) predict in silico cross-species virus infection
and host adaptation and (b) perform computational drug redesign and repurposing.
The deep learning methods to be developed will detect positive selection events
in virus sequences that permit a zoonotic shift from an animal host to humans.
These methods will be translatable to any viral pathogen whose genome has been
sequenced. The project will experimentally validate predictions using single or
integrated human organoids, which will enable a comprehensive understanding on
how a pathogen could infect and harm a broad range of organs and tissues. Other
explainable machine learning systems to be developed will predict interactions
between viral and human proteins, repurpose drugs that target key host proteins
required by a virus, and redesign high affinity antiviral drugs. The
investigators will use innovative efforts to integrate community engagement into
the scientific goals of the project. The community-informed framework addresses
the challenges faced during pandemics related to public perception of preventive
strategies, societal concerns, inequities in healthcare. It will result in a
multifaceted strategy to prepare for and address the next pandemic. These
efforts can be translated to best practices in future potential crises on how to
effectively integrate disciplines and utilize feedback from diverse sources to
successfully implement preventative measures. Team-building and peer-mentoring
activities will enable participants to think outside the realms of traditional
scientific boundaries and instill the importance of interdisciplinary research,
thereby providing a pipeline to a workforce in the future that will value and
thrive in a team science environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
supported by the cross-directorate Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic
Prevention Phase I (PIPP) program, which is jointly funded by the Directorates
for Biological Sciences (BIO), Computer Information Science and Engineering
(CISE), Engineering (ENG) and Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.