* 2200887
* Contextualizing Data Education via Project-Based Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Joseph Polman, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2024
* USD 999,436.00

This DataPBL project is working to develop, implement, and research the
introduction of data experiences and practices into a series of
interdisciplinary, middle school project-based learning modules. Data fills all
aspects of our lives, and data science has become a vital interdisciplinary
endeavor. To succeed in the future, students must see data as a tool they can
wield to address relevant issues across disciplines. Students need opportunities
to apply data science practices to appropriately realistic datasets from
contexts meaningful to them, and to have opportunities to demonstrate their
skills and knowledge authentically. Project-based learning (PBL) approaches have
cultivated a growing base of classrooms dedicated to supporting such situations
via authentic, interdisciplinary learning experiences. Co-designing these
modules with middle school teachers and piloting them in urban, low-income
schools in New York City and Chicago, this project examines how
interdisciplinary data education can provide opportunities for students to take
more control of their own learning and develop positive identities related to
data, through integration with social studies and science topics. Curriculum
modules and teaching resources produced by the project serve as guides for
subsequent efforts at integrating data science concepts into teaching and
learning in various subject areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This design-based
research project integrates data-focused learning into interdisciplinary PBL in
ways that prepare marginalized learners for the future. The project develops
descriptive case studies investigating three questions: (1) In implementations
of the DataPBL curriculum, what interdisciplinary data practices do students
participate in, and under what conditions? (2) Under what conditions do students
manifest agency in the course of their data-infused PBL? and (3) How do aspects
of the experienced projects contribute to developing positive identities related
to data? Through this case study analysis, the project provides a thick
description of how agency and identity develop during DataPBL projects in the
participating classes. The project applies Qualitative Comparative Analysis to
generate cross-case patterns and illustrate the multiple pathways available to
students in reaching the desired outcomes. In combination with the case studies,
this work illuminates how the learning environment fosters the aims of the
project. The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly
enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12
program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.