* 2200323
* ADVANCE Catalyst: Organizational Change for Gender Equity in STEM Academic Professions
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Aubrey Kemp, CSUB Auxiliary for Sponsored Programs Administration
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,949.00

As the nation continues to focus on the importance and significance of diversity
in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) educators within
higher education, many universities are taking a closer look at their hiring
practices and their culture of equity and inclusion. Evidence suggests that a
diverse STEM workforce is essential to the education of future scientists.
Addressing systemic barriers to developing a diverse and supported STEM faculty,
particularly for women and women of color, requires transformative change at all
recruitment, promotion, and retention levels. In the interest of emphasizing a
focus on intersectionality, we will refer to women, women of color, queer women,
and women with intersectional marginalized identities in STEM fields as womxn
faculty in STEM. Even though the number of womxn receiving doctorates in the
sciences is increasing, research has shown that womxn in academia are less
likely than men to be recruited, promoted, and retained in STEM departments.
Womxn who become STEM faculty members in tenure-track positions are often
promoted slower than men into leadership positions because of a variety of
barriers in the workplace. Resistance to programs that attempt to correct gender
bias and an inclination to devalue or dismiss research on the biases that womxn
in STEM face continue to persist. This situation calls for a transformative
approach to an institution's culture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
increase female-identifying STEM faculty recruitment, hiring, promotion, and
retention. This project aims to focus on three goals directly addressing each
area of recruitment, retention, and promotion: (1) implement rigorous data
tracking for each stage of faculty recruitment and hiring practices, (2) explore
perceptions and realities of equity and transparency in faculty teaching and
service loads, and (3) review policies and practices related to tenure and
promotion to leadership. The project will result in a collaboratively developed
five-year plan to enhance and support faculty diversity in STEM at
CSUB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender
equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of organizational
barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of diverse faculty
in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist
in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate.
ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide support for institutional equity assessments
and the development of five-year faculty equity strategic plans at academic,
non-profit institutions of higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.