* 2200158
* PIPP Phase I: Heterogeneous Model Integration for Infectious Disease Intelligence
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Bogdan Epureanu, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

During outbreaks of emerging infectious diseases, leaders in government and the
private sector must make timely decisions to control spread and mitigate
damages. Computer models are often used to support decision-making, for instance
to provide forecasts of future transmission or to understand how public policies
may be received by the population. However, infectious disease intelligence
suffers from the fact that infectious disease modeling is largely disjointed
because most models examine only one or two aspects of transmission, whereas
epidemics and pandemics are complicated, multi-faceted events that touch on many
aspects of society. For this reason, intelligence for pandemic prediction and
prevention must be a multidisciplinary endeavor that integrates diverse
theories, concepts, and frameworks from the natural and social sciences,
although a framework for this integration is currently lacking. To fill this
gap, this project will develop a Systems-of-Systems (SoS) framework that allows
the knowledge gained from different disciplinary approaches to be integrated
with one another. Anticipated outcomes of this framework include improved
situation awareness, real-time forecasting, risk analysis, public policy
interventions, and individual decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SoS
modeling approach will address the grand challenge of modeling interdependence
across scales by allowing for interactive feedback through the integration of
information from different sources. This project will plan and execute six
Demonstration Projects (DPs) that individually connect at least two different
scales and/or scientific methodologies. All DPs will focus on Highly Pathogenic
Avian Influenza (HPAI) as a model for the spillover and emergence of an emerging
respiratory pathogen of animal origin. DP1 will develop an automated reasoning
engine -- a kind of Artificial Intelligence (AI) that learns and reasons from a
comprehensive, multi-disciplinary representational ontology of knowledge about
HPAI across disciplines. DP2 will develop prototype explainable AI algorithms to
generalize our understanding of how vaccines can be used to contain pandemics.
DP3 will collect new data on the behavioral responsiveness of the population to
health communications and integrate that data into disease transmission models.
DP4 will develop a new dynamical model to characterize how variation in
compliance with public policies creates epidemic tipping points and how these
tipping points can be anticipated. DP5 will develop new methods for estimating
the pandemic potential of wildlife pathogens from genetic data. DP6 will develop
techniques for extrapolating the results of laboratory experiments to
characterize the pandemic potential of virus lineages before they emerge in the
human population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the cross-
directorate Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I (PIPP)
program, which is jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological Sciences
(BIO), Computer Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Social, Behavioral
and Economic Sciences (SBE) and Engineering (ENG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.