* 2200420
* Excellence in Research: A Computational Study of the Gas-Phase Reactions of Simple Epoxides and their Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Kathleen Morgan, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 05/31/2025
* USD 308,849.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B program is
supporting Professor Kathleen Morgan and her students at Xavier University of
Louisiana to study the chemistry of epoxides, a type of volatile organic
compound which is commonly found in the atmosphere. Increasingly, citizens are
recognizing the potential dangers of industrial plants that produce and store
hazardous chemicals, and one major concern is the release of volatile organic
compounds (VOC) into the air they breathe. This study is concerned with the
'epoxide' class of compounds. Ethylene oxide and propene oxide are common
commodity chemicals of the epoxide family with a variety of important commercial
purposes but they are also carcinogenic. Understanding the fate of these and
related VOC in the atmosphere, through knowledge of likely decomposition
mechanisms and rates, is critical. The proposed computational modeling study
seeks to extend our understanding of the degradation reactions, and has the
potential to suggest new reactions that can remediate pollutants. The study is
designed for full participation by undergraduate research students from Xavier
University of Louisiana, a primarily undergraduate and Historically Black
College or University (HBCU), where the majority of students are African
American women, and science majors. The computational analyses provide excellent
training experiences for undergraduates that will prepare them for graduate
studies and careers in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics)
fields. This study will also enable students to connect basic science research
to the real-world problems that underlie this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed computational study is concerned with gas-phase radical reactions of
simple epoxides. Epoxides of interest include ethylene oxide, propene oxide,
cis- and trans-2-butene oxide, 2-methylpropene oxide, and epifluorohydrin. Three
types of calculations, using commercially-available software, will be considered
to explore the influence of substituents on epoxide reactivity: (1) epoxide bond
dissociation energies; (2) degradation of parent epoxides and/or their radical
counterparts; and (3) addition reactions of hydroxyl radical and other radical
species to epoxides. Together, these calculations will provide insight into the
behavior of epoxides in the gas phase, and the effects of substituents on
epoxide reactivity and decomposition products. Through this project, the
detailed training program for undergraduate minority students is expected to
make an important contribution to the development of a diverse workforce for the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.