* 2200047
* PIPP Phase I:  Modeling the Pandemic Lifecycle for Disease Control
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* James Moody, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Despite considerable effort, infectious disease experts are unable to predict
the next major pandemic. Bold new approaches are needed for pandemic prediction,
prevention, and mitigation. This research team investigates the “pandemic
lifecycle” – starting from transmission on local contact networks, to regional
and then international spread – with a focus on early stages of this lifecycle.
During the early stages of an outbreak, an infectious disease spreads among
individuals locally through contact patterns; as the outbreak grows,
opportunities arise for infections to seed new communities and repeat the
process of local transmission. Most transmission goes undetected in these early
stages, yet this is when control is most cost-effective and most likely to
succeed. The project examines how infectious disease and human knowledge
interact on human contact networks, identifies methods and data needed to
investigate early stages of outbreaks, and implements new approaches to predict
and control outbreaks in the context of the pandemic lifecycle. Findings can
help public health authorities and scientists to better model and monitor future
outbreaks, with the potential to reduce disease risk, save lives, and improve
economic outcomes globally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers from across three
institutions in the North Carolina Triangle region collaborate to investigate
outbreaks using a network-centered perspective. The investigators use existing
data and build on international partnerships and strengths in global health,
statistical network sciences, economics, engineering, ecology and evolution,
geography, and sociology to characterize outbreaks and the dissemination of
infection regionally. The Phase I research activities focus on a series of
Working Groups and a Pilot Study. The Working Groups are organized around
fundamental – but currently unanswered – questions about the pandemic lifecycle.
The Pilot Study aims to develop a simulation model to further explore these
questions, and to validate and extend statistical methods to characterize early-
stage transmission in relation to incomplete sampling. The ultimate goals of the
project are to advance methods and knowledge, train graduate students and a
postdoctoral researcher, and prepare for future implementation of these research
thrusts to enhance pandemic prediction and control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is supported by the cross-directorate Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic
Prevention Phase I (PIPP) program, which is jointly funded by the Directorates
for Biological Sciences (BIO), Computer Information Science and Engineering
(CISE), Engineering (ENG) and Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.