* 2200575
* Excellence in Research: Genomic Characterization of Seed Filling and Nutritional Features in Edamame and Mature Soybeans
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Qijian Song, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,144,218.00

Soybean is one of the most widely grown crops worldwide and has an important
role in food security and international trade. It provides a major source of
plant protein and oil for human consumption as well as protein meal for animal
feeds. Edamame is a vegetable soybean relatively new to North America that is
harvested at the green bean stage and directly used for diet dishes or snacks.
Seed filling and nutritional features are crucial for crop yield and product
quality. This project will elucidate the biological and genomic features of seed
filling as well as nutritional composition in edamame and mature soybeans and
will identify genomic variants and causal candidate genes associated with the
target traits. Rapid and efficient techniques of evaluation and genetic analysis
will be used. The methodologies and research results will be used to improve
STEM education, including student and next-generation scientist training as well
as course teaching, and increase public scientific literacy and engagement
through a showcase to different stakeholders. In addition, this project will
benefit related research in grain crops, vegetables, and fruit species. The
results will be valuable to a broad research and public
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seed filling represents an economically
important complex trait under genetic control that involves many functional
genes and/or metabolism pathways. Preliminary observations indicate that edamame
has a high level of genetic variability that contributes to soybean genetic
diversity. The goal of this project is to elucidate the underlying genetic
architecture and molecular mechanisms regulating seed composition and seed
filling through genomic analysis of the traits in both edamame and mature
soybeans. The project will specifically address: 1) biological and genomic
characterization of seed filling including seed filling duration, filling rate
and seed size in soybean; 2) development of a high throughput phenotyping
methodology for evaluating soybean nutritional composition traits and
application of the methodology to characterize seed nutritional composition
(protein, oil, fiber sucrose, etc.) in edamame and mature soybeans; 3) detection
of genomic features, QTL, and/or candidate genes associated with seed filling
and seed composition regulation based on the analysis of diverse germplasm
accessions and breeding lines which will be sequenced; and 4) investigation of
the roles of the major genomic determinants of the traits in the artificial
selection of modern soybeans. Two large populations of germplasm accessions and
breeding lines with high diversity will be used, and genome-wide association
study (GWAS) and whole genome sequencing will be employed. Along with the
publication of achieved results, the generated datasets for public access, and
the training of post-doc and students, this project will have a broad and
sustainable impact and benefit to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.