* 2200616
* Excellence in Research: System Oriented Research and Environmental Impact of Poultry Litter Conversion Process into Biochar
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Seong Lee, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,047.00

Excessive land application of poultry waste (called litter) has been linked to
eutrophication, pathogen contamination, fish death, and other negative effects
on human and animal health. Increases in poultry production in the Delmarva
Peninsula underscore the need for more efficient, cost-effective, and
sustainable disposal technologies for poultry litter. Pyrolysis of poultry
litter has promise to produce nutrient-rich biochar while killing off any
microorganisms that would otherwise trigger negative environmental health
effects. Production yield, quality, and structure of biochar from pyrolysis
depend on physicochemical properties (e.g., moisture content, particle size) and
varying pyrolysis conditions (e.g., temperature, heating rate, residence time,
pressure, catalyst). This study will develop an innovative evaluation method for
studying the effects of poultry litter properties and pyrolysis conditions on
biochar properties and yield. Researchers will measure biophysical system
responses and impact of applying prepared poultry litter-based biochar. They
will perform a life-cycle assessment (LCA) with techno-economic analysis of
biochar production from poultry litter and its core
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to the
development of a comprehensive evaluation method for the physicochemical
properties of biomass fuels (e.g., poultry litter) and benefits of biochar on
soil properties and plant growth. In addition, an improved life cycle analysis
(LCA) will help to effectively evaluate the environmental, economic, and social
attributes of the pyrolysis process for converting poultry litter waste into
poultry litter biochar. This project will facilitate interdisciplinary
collaboration between Morgan State University's Departments of Industrial and
Systems Engineering, Civil and Environmental Engineering, and Chemistry so that
each department can utilize state-of-the-art instrumentation needed for
undertaking novel research applications of poultry litter pyrolysis technology.
The project will introduce new tools, instrumentation, methods, and processes to
minority students to facilitate diverse and interdisciplinary collaborations.
The project will also build a new systematic process for understanding the
production, applications, and benefits of biochar. This study will assist
regional poultry farmers (i.e., about 2,000 farms in Maryland) in selecting
cost-effective bedding materials and optimizing pyrolysis conditions for
converting poultry litter into high-quality poultry litter
biochar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.