* 2200670
* Excellence in Research - Exploring Frontiers in Novel Material Synthesis at High Pressures: Synthesis and Recovery of Superhard and High Energy-Density Polynitrides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Mohammad Mahmood, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2025
* USD 498,690.00

Non-technical summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applying high pressure drastically
changes physical and chemical properties of elements and compounds, which leads
to the formation of fascinating new materials with unmatched properties. With
support from NSF’s Office of Integrative Activities, researchers at Howard
University and Carnegie Institution of Washington investigate nitrogen-rich
metal compounds that form polymeric structures or large molecules (polynitrides)
under high pressure. These materials show great promise as possible next-
generation superhard or high-energy-density materials. The researchers explore
the formation of specific alkali, alkali-earth and transition metal polynitrides
at high-pressures and temperatures. Then they establish the material’s crystal
chemistry and physical properties using a combination of laser-heated diamond
anvil cells, synchrotron X-ray diffraction and Raman scattering experiments to
tune the pressure-temperature conditions of synthesis and to probe the
structure, physical properties, and chemical bonding of novel polynitrogen
compounds. This research could aid and direct the functional design of new
polynitrogen compounds with industrially relevant properties in the future. The
project advances the Materials Science field in the search for new materials
with potential energy applications as well as adjacent fields in Earth and
Planetary sciences, which would benefit from better knowledge of crystal
chemistry at extreme conditions. The project provides support and training to
one postdoctoral associate at Howard University/Carnegie Institution for Science
and advanced facilities (e.g. Advanced Photon Source, APS), as well as research
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students at Howard University. High
school students will be engaged through a summer apprenticeship
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Material
properties are greatly altered at high pressures, where unusual chemical bonding
schemes and novel stoichiometries become thermodynamically stable. With support
from NSF’s Office of Integrative Activities, researchers at Howard University
and Carnegie Institution of Washington study the formation of alkali, alkali-
earth and transition metal polynitrides (with focus on Li, K, Re, Os, W, Cr, Ru,
Ti, Zr, Hf) at high-pressure high-temperature conditions, and their crystal
chemistry and physical properties. The researchers exploit pressure as a tool to
create a variety of unusual chemical bonding schemes and compositions, which
become thermodynamically stable at high densities, but can be metastable at
ambient pressure. Using a combination of X-ray diffraction and Raman experiments
in laser-heated diamond anvil cell the researchers build a basis for further
scaling-up of the synthesis, and reveal relations between synthesis conditions,
chemical bonding, structure, and properties of polynitrides of different metals.
This enables them to formulate crystal chemical principles governing the
formation and behavior of polynitrides at extreme conditions. Furthermore, the
researchers manipulate chemical composition, external strain, dimensionality,
temperature, and chemical precursors as key variables that can be used to
perform synthesis in the pressure-temperature range suitable for practical
application and for metastable recovery of the
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.