* 2200410
* RI: Small: Robustness to Undesirable Behavior in Peer Review
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Nihar Shah, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 05/31/2025
* USD 599,952.00

Peer review is the backbone of scientific research. It is used widely to review
the quality of papers as well as for awarding grants worth billions of dollars
every year. However, due to more quantitative evaluations for jobs and
promotions, incentives to have papers or proposals accepted are only growing.
While the vast majority of the research community consists of honest people,
recently there have been discoveries of a certain kind of fraud in peer review.
In this type of fraud, a group of authors and reviewers form a coalition outside
of the review process, and aim to get assigned each others' papers or proposals
and then illegitimately accept them. If left untreated, there is significant
risk of bad behavior spreading. The presence and prevalence of such malicious
activities also leads to increased skepticism and distrust in science among the
general public. The proposed research will have a broad impact in terms of
addressing these critical issues. This research will develop a computational
toolkit for organizers of peer review to detect and/or mitigate such fraud. The
researchers will also assist any organizers who wish to employ this
toolkit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large number of submissions in many
conferences and the increase in scale and sophistication of manipulation
attempts makes it infeasible to manually detect and/or mitigate these issues.
This research will design a theoretical framework that explicitly considers
coalition-based fraud, and allows to make precise claims about guarantees that
the algorithms give us. The research will also design algorithms that achieve
desirable guarantees within that framework. These will be built into an open-
sourced toolkit that will be made publicly available for use. The research will
design and use techniques spanning machine learning, optimization, statistics,
and game theory and mechanism design. The research will advance the
understanding of the fundamental limits of mitigating collusions in various
peer-assessment settings, and how these limits can be achieved or approached
through the design of scalable and practical
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.