* 2200353
* Mechanical Characterization of Nonlinear Soft Materials Using Surface Waves
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Melih Eriten, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 593,489.00

This grant will fund research that enables on-the-fly characterization of
nonlinear properties of soft materials, with application to additive
manufacturing, tissue engineering, food processing, and biomedical diagnostics,
thereby promoting the progress of science and advancing the national prosperity,
health, and welfare. Soft materials occur naturally in biological tissue and
find increased use as load-bearing elements in engineered systems, including
robotic devices and 3d-printed biomaterial scaffolds. Their accurate mechanical
characterization could enable in-vivo diagnosis of tumor formation, ensure
reliable performance of flexible actuators, and support successful tissue growth
for transplantation. Existing techniques for characterization, such as shear-
wave elastography and ultrasonics, rely on body waves and monitor linear
material response. Consequently, they fall short of capturing amplitude- and
rate-dependent effects associated with large deformations and the complex
constitution of typical soft materials. In this project, a new characterization
technique will be developed that relies on surface waves, which propagate longer
distances than body waves and interact constructively with the nonlinear
mechanical properties of the underlying material. The research will demonstrate
how a surface-wave-based methodology can achieve reliable, quick, non-contact,
and non-destructive characterization of soft materials under normal operating
conditions. Wave-based material characterization techniques and instrumentation
will be presented at a workshop targeting local industry and as part of
interactive exhibits at annual outreach programs for K-12 students and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to uncover mechanisms whereby
surface waves on soft materials interact with constitutive nonlinearities,
trigger internal resonances, and generate higher-order harmonics that propagate
long distances and are detectable by appropriate instrumentation. Numerical and
experimental studies will be performed to correlate surface-wave characteristics
to rate-dependent nonlinear properties and establish how those correlations
depend on preloads in the soft materials due to thermal, mechanical, and
chemical effects that are residual from fabrication or induced during operation.
The direct outcome of the research will be experimentally validated physics-
based correlation maps between constitutive nonlinearities and dispersion,
attenuation, and acoustoelasticity of surface waves. In addition, the project
will advance the current measurement and analysis techniques for mechanical
waves via fracture-induced transient excitations and advanced multipoint laser
vibrometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.