* 2200418
* Evaluating Actions, Obstructions, and Reductions for Covers of Curves
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Rachel Pries, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 07/31/2025
* USD 270,315.00

This project will focus on the study of curves with rare properties, by both
building foundations and yielding new applications. The PI will study geometric,
arithmetic, and algebraic structures of these curves, thereby developing
connections between the areas of arithmetic geometry, algebraic number theory,
and Galois theory. The PI will also build connections in the mathematical
community by developing the VaNTAGe seminar, a virtual seminar about open
conjectures in number theory and arithmetic geometry. To make the seminar more
accessible and long-lasting, the PI will organize VaNTAGe activities to train
graduate students and develop the VaNTAGe YouTube channel. The PI will mentor
students in mathematics, for example, as the faculty advisor for the Sonia
Kovalevsky day for high school students at Colorado State University.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;More precisely, the PI will evaluate Galois actions,
cohomological obstructions, and supersingular reductions of curves. The first
research project of the PI will yield results about the action of Galois groups
on the cohomology of curves with automorphisms. The importance of this topic is
that it will shed light on the absolute Galois group of the field of rational
numbers, as understood by the work of Grothendieck, Anderson, and Ihara. To do
this project, the PI will evaluate maps in cohomology for Belyi curves,
including the classifying map, the transgression map, and obstruction maps. In
the second research project, the PI will generalize a result of Elkies by
proving that certain curves of genus four have infinitely many primes of
supersingular reduction. This project will be centered on special families of
cyclic covers of the projective line branched at four points, and their
associated Hurwitz spaces and unitary Shimura varieties. The strategy will use
uniformization, quadratic forms, complex multiplication, and reduction
techniques. In the third research project, the PI will count the number of
supersingular curves in one-dimensional families of curves with automorphisms.
This project will shed light on conjectures of Oort about the existence of
supersingular curves of arbitrary genus and will generalize the Eichler-Deuring
mass formula to the case of Hurwitz spaces of cyclic covers. A unifying theme of
the projects is that they will demonstrate the rich interplay between geometric
and arithmetic techniques for curves with
automorphisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.