* 2200777
* Collaborative Research: Middle School Students Graphing From the Ground Up
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Teo Paoletti, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 05/31/2025
* USD 150,935.00

Graphical representations are common in STEM fields for modeling, communicating,
and analyzing phenomena, and understanding graphical representations is critical
to student success in STEM fields. Yet, research indicates that many students
struggle to develop an understanding of graphical representations. We contend
that students’ understanding of coordinate systems, an understanding required to
construct and interpret graphs, underlies their struggles to understand
graphical representations and, moreover, lays the foundation necessary for
developing that understanding. In this project, we examine middle-school
students’ understandings of coordinate systems and frames of reference prior to
examining their graph construction and interpretation. This focus allows us to
design instructional materials that can support students’ graphing
understandings in ways that avoid or mitigate how persistent challenges in
students’ graphing understandings identified in the research
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of this project are to
advance knowledge of middle school students’ developing understandings of graphs
“from the ground up” with attention to underlying coordinate systems and frames
of reference that comprise the coordinate systems. Three research questions
guide the project: (i) What are the ways of thinking through which individual
students create and interpret frames of reference, coordinate systems, and
graphs? (ii) In what general progressions do students develop these ways of
thinking? (iii) What sequence of instructional tasks support and build on
students’ varied ways of thinking in their development of graphing
understandings? The project addresses these questions by leveraging a design-
based methodology in which we will engage in cycles of intervention and revision
to develop, test, and refine cognitive models, constructive itineraries, and
instructional tasks. Through several iterations of clinical interviews and
small-scale teaching experiments, we intend to produce a theory that explains
students’ developing graphing understandings and accounts for their varied ways
of thinking. Through this process, we will iteratively design instructional
tasks and task sequences that support students developing understandings for
frames of reference, coordinate systems, and graphs in the widely used and
freely available Desmos platform. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.