* 2200474
* Research Initiation Award: Defining the role of DJ-1 in regulating L-type voltage-dependent calcium channel expression in neuronal plasticity
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Farr Niere, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 299,983.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career
faculty at Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new
research programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It
is expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness and improve research and teaching at the home
institution. This award to North Carolina A &amp; T State University provides an
opportunity to establish a molecular neuroscience laboratory that investigates
the mechanisms underlying learning and memory. Specifically, the project aims to
examine how L-type calcium ion channels, proteins that allow calcium to enter a
neuron, are prevented from being made during long-term synaptic depression,
which is a form of neuronal plasticity. With this award, efforts also include
the training of undergraduate students thereby contributing to the next
generation of scientists who can contribute to scientific innovation, creativity
and productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Encoding learning and memory, such as the
ability to distinguish between new and old experiences, requires neurons to
synthesize some and repress other proteins in synapses and dendrites. One
mechanism underlying the ability of neurons to regulate their protein levels
rapidly is through RNA-binding proteins (RBPs). However, current knowledge about
the identity of these RBPs, their messenger RNA (mRNA) targets, and how these
RBPs regulate the protein expression of their targets are poorly understood.
Recent studies revealed that DJ-1, an under-characterized RBP, resides in
dendrites and synapses, and modulates the activity of some dendritic calcium
channels. Thus, this project seeks to investigate the role of DJ-1 in regulating
the translation of mRNAs that encode the different protein subunits that make up
L-type voltage-dependent calcium channels (L-VDCC) during long-term synaptic
depression (LTD). Specifically, the research will evaluate the translation of
the following L-VDCC-associated mRNAs: Cacna1c, Cacna1d, Cacna2d1, Cacna2d2, and
Cacna2d3. Assessment on the role of DJ-1 in long-term synaptic depression will
be determined by manipulating the expression of DJ-1 virally and by using a
mouse model of impaired LTD. To mimic LTD, dissociated hippocampal neurons will
be treated with (RS)-3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine (DHPG). The studies will use a
novel protein synthesis assay, surface sensing of translation (SUnSET) coupled
with proximity ligation assay (PLA), to determine how DJ-1 controls the
translation of L-VDCC-associated mRNAs with temporal and spatial resolution in
primary hippocampal neurons. Results from these studies will advance our
understanding of the mechanisms underlying hippocampal LTD, which is fundamental
to how we encode novel experiences into habituation. Moreover, these studies
will establish a novel role for DJ-1 as a regulator of calcium dynamics relevant
to learning and memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.