* 2200042
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: From Capture to Consumption: System Challenges in Pervasive 360-Degree Video Sharing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Yao Liu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 238,545.00

360-degree video allows users to explore a recorded scene at any angle from the
camera position. This greater flexibility provided by the 360-degree video
format has led to its increased popularity. However, widespread adoption has
slowed because of the large amounts of resources required by the format. This
work proposes methods to improve efficiency at each stage of the 360-degree
video sharing path, from video capture at the sender side to consumption at the
receiver side. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses these challenges via
four research thrusts. The first thrust explores approaches for generating high-
quality frames during real-time stitching of multiple videos captured using
commodity lenses. The proposed approach applies gradient decent to refine an
initial rough stitching. The second thrust investigates mechanisms to spatially
adapt content to be uploaded based on the available bandwidth. The third thrust
aims to optimize the fine-grained representation of omnidirectional content to
achieve high projection efficiency and view efficiency. The last thrust uses
edge computing techniques to optimize the look-ahead window size on the receiver
side to allow bandwidth-efficient content downloading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
techniques developed during the course of the project will allow users to enjoy
more efficient 360-degree video streaming applications. These techniques are not
only applicable to 360-degree video streaming but will also have applications in
future generations of virtual reality (VR) technologies. The project will also
motivate general student interest in computer science research, directly train
students during the course of the projectâ€™s research, and contribute to
curriculum development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will produce
publications, code, data, and other research artifacts. All such artifacts will
be made available publicly through the URLs http://www.cs.gmu.edu/~sqchen/ and
http://www.cs.binghamton.edu/~yaoliu/ during the course of the project and
remain available for at least five years after completion of the project. The
code will be open sourced and will also be made available at code hosting
website, e.g., GitHub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.