* 2200140
* PIPP Phase I: Predicting Emergence in Multidisciplinary Pandemic Tipping-points (PREEMPT)
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2025
* K. Selcuk Candan, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 01/31/2025
* USD 999,790.00

Pandemics arise from the confluence of many contributing factors. These factors
may be individually inconsequential but become critical when acting together,
and a complex set of seemingly unrelated factors can result in a perfect storm
for pandemic emergence. Yet prevailing approaches to predicting pandemic
emergence remain focused on disciplinary investigations of individual or subsets
of factors. Preparing for and preventing the next pandemic will require
multidisciplinary approaches that leverage knowledge of complex
interdependencies across scales from molecular to social and from individual
diagnosis to global surveillance. This project assembles a multi-disciplinary
team of scientists, representing expertise spanning the gamut from basic
biology, to social, behavioral, and economic sciences, to engineering, computer,
and information sciences, to focus on understanding how to identify, recognize,
and predict when emerging disease threats create a perfect storm of factors that
cause an otherwise localized outbreak to “tip over” into a pandemic. The project
team will work together to leverage their collective diversity of expertise,
experience, and perspective to innovate a collaborative framework for knitting
together disciplinary pursuits into a complete, multifaceted, and predictive
understanding of pandemic tipping points. Going beyond the confines of this
project, the resulting framework will serve as a blueprint for all institutions
dedicated to the discovery and analysis of complex linkages and thus will
improve capacity to predict and prevent coming pandemics and other emergent
threats to the modern world. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The fact that pandemic
tipping points are multifactorial makes their study fundamentally more
challenging than system- or discipline-specific tipping points. The project will
develop a blueprint for an institution dedicated to advancing understanding and
analysis of systems with dynamics that require interrogation by multiple
disciplines. The driving hypothesis for the institute is that the greatest
barriers to multidisciplinary insights exist when disciplinary researchers fail
to converge on shared intuition for the value other fields could provide in
addressing complex research questions. The framework directly addresses this
challenge by employing a Give-Take methodology: to investigate multidisciplinary
research hypotheses, project teams of researchers will assemble via a
bidirectional process. Researchers will identify (a – “giving”) hypotheses from
other fields their own discipline could meaningfully impact and (b – “taking”)
disciplines from which they anticipate useful input for their own hypotheses,
and teams will include both directions of identification. This innovative
framework improves the capacity for researchers in disparate fields to better
recognize their interdependence and eliminates the need for researchers to
understand other fields before benefiting from or contributing to
investigations. The research will apply these methodologies to the complex
challenge of multidisciplinary tipping points in the form of a set of case
studies that will directly support our ability to address many of the complex
and interconnected challenges in pandemic preparedness and
response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the cross-directorate
Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I (PIPP) program, which is
jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological Sciences (BIO); Computer,
Information Science and Engineering (CISE); Engineering (ENG) and Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.