* 2200538
* Excellence in Research: Cyber Threats Early Warning Framework for Operational Technology Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Salil Desai, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 08/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

The cyber community is experiencing an imminent shift in cyber-attacks from
traditional Information Technology (IT) infrastructures that run business
systems to the Operational Technology (OT) infrastructures that control
industrial operations. A hasty reaction to this change in the cyber threat
landscape has been reusing existing cyber security solutions commonly applied to
the IT domain. This is not a robust long-term solution. IT and OT systems are
intrinsically different; hence, their attack surfaces and vectors can also be
different. Moreover, the cyber community needs to broaden its knowledge about
the malicious techniques and methods used by attackers to target OT
infrastructures. Accordingly, this project investigates a cyber threats early
warning framework for operational technology environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projectâ€™s outcomes will advance the science of
securing operational technology systems and inspiring attack-resilient designs
and deployments for such environments. It introduces intelligent-interaction
decoys to mimic temporal and spatial characteristics and behavior of
heterogeneous operational technology systems. The project also investigates the
feasibility of a deep programmable, open, and software-defined infrastructure to
facilitate fast, adaptive, and intelligent-assisted attack collection,
characterization, and detection/prediction. The proposed framework runs on off-
the-shelf commodity servers on the edge of OT domains while its performance and
throughput scale exponentially with increased computational
power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.