* 2200689
* 4th International Conference on Microbiome Engineering (ICME)
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Michelle O'Malley, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 10/31/2022
* USD 12,525.00

Microbiomes consist of diverse microorganisms and viruses that exist in every
environment on Earth ranging from the deep ocean to human skin. Microbiomes are
highly complex since they contain hundreds to thousands of members and change as
a function of time, space and environmental context. By compartmentalizing
functions in different organisms and coordinating these activities, microbial
communities can perform biotransformations more efficiently than single
populations. Environmental perturbations can alter the composition and functions
of microbiomes. Microbiome engineering aims to design targeted interventions to
predictably alter microbiome properties or wire together interacting microbial
strains with desired functions from the bottom-up for biotechnological,
agricultural and therapeutic applications. The 4th International Conference on
Microbiome Engineering is designed in this framework. This conference brings in
experts in industry and academia worldwide to discuss the challenges in
microbiome engineering and the future of the field. The conference is the fourth
in the series, following the success of the previous ones held in previous years
(including the virtual conference in 2020). This award provides partial support
for US-based graduate student/postdoctoral associate participants, and by
providing a forum for the interactions between normally separated leading
medical professionals and engineers the conference stimulates new ideas about
materials that could benefit economic, health and pharmaceutical related
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 4th International Conference on Microbiome
Engineering aims to create a platform for the sharing of groundbreaking
knowledge in the field. The conference draws attendees from academia as well as
industry to allow new knowledge from the laboratory to potentially be utilized
to manufacture new products. The conference allows for active participation with
question-and-answer sessions as well as a panel discussion. The networking
opportunities at the conference allow attendees to exchange their ideas and
foster an environment for future collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.