* 2200831
* SHF: Small: Ubiquitous and Transparent Near-data Computing for General Purpose Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Anthony Nowatzki, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2025
* USD 615,300.00

As multicore processors scale, the overheads of data movement and communication
become the primary limitations to achieving commensurate performance and energy-
efficiency gains. This is especially true for “big-data” workloads that rely on
enormous datasets. One increasingly popular solution is to perform computation
near where the data is stored to avoid communication; this is a paradigm called
near-data processing. Despite the potential, existing near-data systems have
severe limitations: they often require programmer help, they are limited to
support a small subset of workloads, and they do not exploit the full range of
near-data processing technologies in a coherent framework. To address these
challenges, this project develops new hardware/software abstractions that can
enable near-data processing capabilities for general purpose architectures, and
which can be constructed by a compiler or in hardware to avoid programmer
burden. The potential impact of this research is to steer microprocessor design
in novel ways that can help sustain expected exponential performance
improvements, including efficiently scaling existing multicore processor size by
an order-of-magnitude. In addition, our open source near-data
compiler/simulation framework can foster research in this new direction. In
terms of education, this project enhances courses with the infrastructure to
give students cross-stack experience in co-designing hardware and software.
Finally, the project develops an outreach program to provide mentorship and
networking opportunities to prospective graduate students across multiple
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards the goal of ubiquitous and
transparent near-data processing, the primary technical insight of this research
is that a more powerful near-data abstraction would encapsulate the program’s
interaction with each individual data-structure: its address pattern, associated
computation, and dependences -- this new program abstraction is called a
“fiber”. Each fiber can be offloaded to a level of the memory hierarchy (e.g.
last-level caches or memory) that best optimizes for data locality, and all
accesses maintain sequential memory semantics. Fibers are attractive because
their high-level properties can be used to determine an optimal near-data
offloading strategy, and they are sufficiently coarse grain to enable efficient
coherence and coordination. Towards these goals, the project addresses five
fundamental intellectual questions: What set of primitive offloading strategies
is required for generality, especially considering offloading to multiple
memory-hierarchy levels? How is it possible to enable programmer and even ISA-
transparent NDP? How to enable sequential memory semantics without being
overwhelmed by coordination messages? How to perform near-data computation at
high throughput and low overhead, either by reusing general cores, processing-
using-memory (PUM), or reconfigurable accelerators? And finally, how to optimize
data-placement for NDP, considering the importance of co-locating the operands
of near-data tasks? Overall, this project explores a radical departure from the
core-centric paradigm of traditional general purpose processors, and will
develop new program abstractions and microarchitectures for efficient
decentralized computation based on near-data
principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.