* 2200990
* Attributions of Mathematical Excellence in Teaching and Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Dionne Cross Francis, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,386,765.00

Teachers’ beliefs influence their instructional decisions and these decisions
shape the mathematical learning opportunities for all students. This is
particularly important when considering the learning opportunities for groups
that have historically been marginalized in mathematics, including girls and
students of color. There are few validated, mathematics-specific instruments
that measure teachers’ beliefs about mathematics learning related to race,
ethnicity, and gender. This project seeks to investigate teachers’ beliefs
related to how they explain the systemic racial and gender differences in
mathematics education outcomes by developing and validating a survey instrument
and to explore how those beliefs might impact their teaching. The central
hypothesis of the project is that teachers’ beliefs about attributions of
mathematical excellence interact with students’ racial and gender identities to
cause racial and gender inequity in the learning opportunities available to
students in the same mathematics classrooms. The basis of these beliefs may be
attributions to genetic, social, or personal characteristics that are based in
biased and inaccurate conceptions of the sources of mathematical
excellence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to achieve the project's main aims,
the project will conduct three interrelated studies. (1) The Attributions and
Items study will use interviews with teachers, teacher educators, and
researchers to write, pilot, and refine items to establish reliability and
construct representation of the Attributions of Mathematical Excellence Scale
(AMES). (2) The Structure &amp; Relations Study will provide validity evidence
of internal structure and relations with other variables, including established
equity instruments, and a measure of implicit bias. Student test data linked
with a subset of the sample will be used to compare AMES scores with race and
gender equity in achievement. This study will be expanded to include samples of
preservice and inservice teachers and use a variety of data sources including
interviews, surveys and classroom observation. (3) The Classroom Study will
compare AMES scores with direct observation of race and gender equity in
classroom instruction. Through the development of the instrument and analysis of
scores, the project team will be able to posit and design teacher professional
learning opportunities that have the potential to address the sources of
bias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks
to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.