* 2200762
* Noncommutative Algebras and Monoidal Triangulated Categories
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Milen Yakimov, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 05/31/2025
* USD 210,260.00

Many models in the sciences and engineering are based on mathematical settings
that involve commuting variables. However, starting with quantum mechanics, a
great number of models emerged that led to important mathematical problems
involving variables that no longer commute. Noncommutative Algebra is one of the
major areas of mathematics that studies those structures. This project addresses
key problems about the properties and symmetries of noncommutative objects, as
well as the representations of the corresponding noncommutative algebras. The
latter area of representations theory investigates noncommutative algebras
through all possible ways to present them in terms of matrices. Three major
approaches are used: (1) Poisson geometry--geometry arising from the deformation
of commutative objects to noncommutative ones, (2) cluster algebras--a
combinatorial approach based on intricate internal transformations of the
objects, called cluster mutations and (3) monoidal triangulated categories--
general abstract algebraic structures arising from considering all
representations of an algebra simultaneously. These research activities will be
used as the foundation for the training of graduate and undergraduate students
and for mentoring of mathematics postdocs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In more
detail, in this project the PI will investigate the structure of quantum
symmetric spaces, Nichols algebras, monoidal triangulated categories, as well as
support theories for finite dimensional algebras and, more generally, finite
tensor categories. The following three broad directions will be pursued: (1)
Root of unity quantum cluster algebras will be investigated in two interrelated
plans: description of their discriminant ideals and classification of
irreducible representations. This will be based on the theory of Poisson orders
and Cayley-Hamilton algebras. (2) Quantum cluster algebra structures will be
constructed on quantum flag varieties, quantum Bott-Samelson varieties and
quantum symmetric spaces. The irreducible representations and discriminant
ideals of their root of unity quantum counterparts will be studied through the
techniques developed in part 1. The representation theory of quantum symmetric
pairs and quantum supergroups at roots of unity will be developed using star
products and Poisson orders. (3) Methods for the classification of the
noncommutative Balmer spectra of the stable categories of finite tensor
categories will be developed. They will be used for the descriptions of the
cohomological supports of finite dimensional Hopf algebras, and more generally,
finite tensor categories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.