* 2200615
* Excellence in Research: Metaomics-based characterization of the mutually beneficial interkingdom “cross-talk” between algae and bacteria- it takes two to tango
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Ashvini Chauhan, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2025
* USD 499,820.00

Algae are typically considered nuisance organisms in the environment because
some species can cause harmful algal blooms and/or red tides leading to beach
closures and disruption of leisurely and fishing activities. However, some algal
species, when grown under specific conditions, can solve a major global societal
problem; namely, some algal species can aid in the cleaning of human-generated
wastewater. Recent research using a newly isolated microalgae (Scenedesmus sp.
strain AC-2) and bacterial strain (Pseudomonas sp. strain AC-1) has shown that
the organisms form mutually beneficial partnerships resulting in faster clean-up
of wastewater. The goal of this project is to better understand bacterial-algal
symbiotic partnerships and to use this information to enhance the clean up of
larger amounts of wastewater. This project will also offer minority students
innovative research and mentoring opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A growing
body of literature now refers algae as nature’s green gold because algal cells
possess an unparallel ability to produce a wide variety of bio-based value-added
products, such as biofuels (biodiesel, bioelectricity, biomethane and jet
fuels), nutraceuticals/ pharmaceuticals (carotenoids, ß-Carotene, omega 3
polyunsaturated unsaturated fats (PUFA) and astaxanthin) and other products
(cosmetics, bioplastics, starches proteins, oils and fertilizers). Most studies
conducted to date have relied on the use of a single microalgal strain to obtain
bioproducts, but recent findings indicate that symbiotic associations between
bacterial species (Pseudomonas sp. strain AC-1) and microalgae (Scenedesmus sp.
strain AC-2) can significantly enhance remediation of untreated wastewater
concurrent to higher production of algal crude oil and potentially other value-
added products. Therefore, the overarching hypothesis of this project is that a
consortium of symbiotic bacteria and algal cells, when grown together, will
result in mutually beneficial positive impacts, such as faster growth and higher
yields of bio-based products. Conversely, algal and bacterial isolates, when
grown separately, will disrupt the mutually beneficial symbiotic processes and
manifest in a loss of positive impacts (e.g., wastewater nutrient depletion and
crude oil yields). To address the overarching hypothesis, this project will do
the following: 1) evaluate the interkingdom “cross-talk” between the newly
isolated bacterial-algal symbionts using innovative experiments that rely on
isotopically-labelled cells to trace shifts in cellular proteomes and
metabolomes that correlate to mutually beneficial impacts; 2) utilize customized
co-culture devices to experimentally validate the symbiotic networks identified
between bacteria and algae; 3) apply bioinformatics and statistical analyses to
characterize “cross-talk” between pathways; 4) train the next generation of
minority students using the above cutting-edge research. This project will
significantly enhance research and student training activities, and build upon
the proven track record of innovative research-based education and training of
underrepresented students in STEM disciplines. The proposed work will interface
and leverage from ongoing NSF and other funded projects such as the NOAA-funded
Center for Coastal and Marine Ecosystems (CCME); these projects continue to
provide innovative research-based pedagogy and student training, particularly to
underrepresented African American minority students. Obtaining a comprehensive
and deeper understanding of the molecular underpinnings of bacterial-algal
associations and mutually beneficial positive impacts will provide
transformative findings for stimulating the algal-based green economy and
advance sustainable developmental goals for society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.