* 2200228
* PIPP Phase 1; PILOT: Predictive Intelligence for Limiting Outbreak Threats
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Milind Tambe, Children's Hospital Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 12/31/2023
* USD 999,978.00

In recent decades, new infectious diseases have emerged at a rapid rate around
the world—driven by climate change, urbanization, and conflict. To prepare for
future infectious disease crises, there is an urgent need to devise new data-
driven tools for pandemic surveillance, prediction, and mitigation. The COVID-19
pandemic has demonstrated that such tools must incorporate not only our
understanding of the science that underpins new infectious diseases, but also
how society’s responses to them can affect their propagation. To address this
urgent need, the PIPP Phase I PILOT (Predictive Intelligence for Limiting
Outbreak Threats) planning project will bring together the expertise from a wide
range of relevant disciplines, including public health, clinical biomedicine,
computer science, artificial intelligence, and social science. PILOT
Investigators will collaborate with academic, practitioner, and decision-maker
communities through multiple roundtable workshops to determine existing
knowledge gaps and establish best practices in pandemic surveillance,
prediction, and mitigation. This project will also engage the next generation of
pandemic scholars by educating and training graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows, with an emphasis on communicating science for societal impact. Students
and fellows will assist the Investigator team in distilling workshop outcomes
into white papers and policy briefs, which will be shared with the public via an
open access online knowledge portal and virtual town hall meetings. Moreover, to
enable experiential learning, members of the public will be invited to
participate in a globally-broadcast, community-wide infectious disease crisis
simulation. Success in operationalizing this PIPP Phase I planning project will
lead to the development and deployment of a new data-driven modeling pipeline
for future pandemic threats during PIPP Phase II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PILOT
modeling pipeline will combine novel digital data sources with methods from the
aforementioned disciplines to address three interconnected scientific
challenges: (1) understanding and modeling pandemic potential for disease
surveillance, (2) understanding and modeling the impact of interventions for
disease prediction, and (3) understanding and modeling intervention acceptance
(and refusal) for disease mitigation. During the PIPP Phase I planning project,
progress towards the first challenge will involve determining which information
sources and computational approaches should be preferentially leveraged when
assessing a given pathogen’s pandemic potential at a single point in time (i.e.,
immediately following its emergence or re-emergence in a given context).
Likewise, progress towards the second challenge will involve exploring existing
knowledge gaps in simulating interventions via agent-based and game-theoretic
models of multi-agent decision-making, particularly under conditions with
limited information (i.e., wherein simulation-based scenario analyses may be
necessary). Finally, progress towards the third challenge will involve
establishing best practices for social contagion models that aim to encourage
intervention uptake (i.e., with a focus on complex contagion and identification
of influencers across social networks). Thus, the overarching goal of the PIPP
Phase I PILOT project will be to plan for a center-scale effort by ascertaining
which data types and methodological choices are most appropriate for the
development and deployment of the PILOT modeling pipeline (i.e., given existing
knowledge gaps and best practices). Implementation of the pipeline will be
pursued in a future center-scale effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
supported by the cross-directorate Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic
Prevention Phase I (PIPP) program, which is jointly funded by the Directorates
for Biological Sciences (BIO), Computer Information Science and Engineering
(CISE), Engineering (ENG) and Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.