* 2200792
* CC* Compute:  The MSU Data Machine - a high-memory, GPU-enabled compute cluster for data-intensive and AI applications
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Arika Ligmann-Zielinska, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,865.00

The MSU Data Machine addresses the exponential growth of large and complex
datasets in many fields of study, particularly those where computing has not
been widely used or where the research and teaching approaches needed to work
with “big data”, which present a different set of computing requirements than in
traditional high performance computing. The Data Machine facilitates data-
intensive research by having computing nodes with large amounts of memory, a
high speed file system, graphics processing units that are optimized for machine
learning and artificial intelligence-based analysis techniques, and a high speed
file system. It also includes software, usage policies, and training that makes
it easy for users to interactively analyze and visualize their data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on four specific research areas - in
the areas of microbial genomics, social system modeling, spatial and community
ecology, and data-driven turbulence modeling - however, the Data Machine broadly
enables MSU’s research community to pursue data-intensive research projects by
lowering barriers to engaging with these types of resources. The project also
provides a valuable computational resource to the nation via the Open Science
Grid and MSU’s NSF-funded Science DMZ project, advancing research in a wide
spectrum of areas. Furthermore, MSU undergraduate and graduate students are
participating in the deployment and administration of the Data Machine as well
as using it for research and educational activities, contributing to the
development of a globally competitive STEM workforce and promoting the
advancement of under-represented groups in computational and data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.