* 2200371
* Collaborative Research: Project AIM-NEXT: All Included in Mathematics New Extensions
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Daniel Heck, Horizon Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 08/31/2027
* USD 463,735.00

Building on two prior NSF-funded projects, the All Included in Mathematics K-2
New Extensions professional learning program will develop and research the
impact of an augmented model for mathematics professional development on K-2
student learning through the addition of supports for coaches and leaders to the
existing professional development model . The project is designing a web-based,
district-led professional development implementation, focusing on improving
mathematics discourse practices in K-2 classrooms, with particular attention to
emergent multilingual learners. Earlier research on the program demonstrated
impacts on K-2 teachers’ knowledge, beliefs, and practices. This project will
examine whether additional components, specifically coaching and leadership
support, augment the impacts of the PD on teachers and teaching in ways that
produce detectable changes in student mathematics learning when measured with
proximal assessment instruments. The project will also strengthen attention to
equity, supporting teachers’ noticing of both dominant and critical components
of mathematics teaching and learning. The project partnership between university
faculty, education researchers, and prior facilitators and participants from
school districts will develop and field test the additional coach and leadership
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching purpose of the project is to
strengthen and examine the connections between PD and student learning in the
context of supporting K-2 teachers. The research questions ask about the
mathematical knowledge and key efficacious, equity-focused practices coaches use
in their work with teachers, the extent to which they are used with integrity,
and the extent to which they improve over time. The research will also look at
what school administrators need to know and do to support high-quality
mathematics instruction and bring the ideas of the project into practice. In
addition, the study is examining the impact on teachers’ knowledge, beliefs, and
mathematics discourse practices, and on students’ mathematics learning, with
attention to emergent multilingual learners. The study is an experimental design
in which school teams are randomly assigned to the newly-developed professional
development condition or a condition with the prior iteration of the
professional development. Data will be collected to understand the impacts of
the augmented model and will include videorecording of coaching cycles,
interviews with leaders, measures of teacher knowledge, observations of
classroom teaching, and student achievement scores. The final products of the
project will include a set of empirically-tested and evidence-based hybrid
programs with professional learning materials for use with different audiences
and tools to support their work: (1) Professional Development for teachers, (2)
Facilitator Preparation for PD leaders, (3) Coach Preparation for instructional
coaches, and (4) AIM-Leadership Preparation for school administrators. All these
materials will be designed for scale and available for use in any district
across the nation and beyond to transform teachers' instruction and the
mathematical understanding of each and every K-2
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.