* 2200256
* PIPP Phase I: Evaluating the Effectiveness of Messaging and Modeling during Pandemics (PandEval)
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Louiqa Raschid, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2024
* USD 999,537.00

An effective response to fight the spread of a pandemic requires a clear
understanding of the complex interactions between biological, environmental and
human networks. The COVID19 pandemic revealed both human and systemic failures
along this chain. A key takeaway was the need for timely, relevant and
actionable information to support effective public messaging and policy making
that can impact in-real-life (IRL) outcomes. The COVID19 pandemic also revealed
the need for messaging and policy making at a local scale, when national- or
state-level approaches might not appropriately address the needs at community
scale. Frontline public health officials often had little insight into the
individuals that they wished to serve. Decision makers who managed cities or
school systems often relied on epidemiological models that did not account for
the impact of human beliefs and in-real-life behaviors - e.g., the willingness
to wear a mask - on disease transmission. The PandEval project will address
these challenges, so as to ultimately increase the trust and confidence in our
public health infrastructure. If successful, public health officials will gain
insight into the success of (past) messaging campaigns so that they can deliver
the right message at the right time. In addition, decision makers will be able
to use the outcomes of the epidemiological models, customized to population
segments, while planning vaccine rollout, or admitting visitors to congregate
living.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovation of the PandEval project is to rely
on curating rich complex multimodal datasets. Social media-based models of
community beliefs and attitudes around science skepticism, moral foundations, or
the willingness to contribute to the public good, will be developed. Baseline
profiles of in-real-life (IRL) behavior tracked by human mobility traces will be
computed. Compartmental epidemiological models that account for population
characteristics will be customized to account for a diversity of micro-targeted
population segments and regions across the US. The PandEval platform will be
engineered to measure the effectiveness of community targeted messaging around
pandemic mitigation, including recommendations and mandates, and to measure the
prediction accuracy of the customized epidemiological models. As the nation
faces the potential of endemic COVID19, the PandEval project will create and
curate Pand-Index, an index of online social beliefs and in-real-life (IRL)
profiles at a national scale. Pand-Index profiles will help individuals to make
personalized decisions about social distancing or masking versus working from
home.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the cross-directorate
Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I (PIPP) program, which is
jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological Sciences (BIO), Computer
Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Engineering (ENG) and Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.