* 2200956
* AF: Small: The Unique Games Conjecture and Related Problems in Hardness of Approximation
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Dana Moshkovitz, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 03/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Numerous optimization problems are NP-hard and thus unlikely to have efficient
algorithms. Approximation algorithms, often based on geometric techniques like
linear and semidefinite programming, are so far the most successful approach
against NP-hardness. This project explores their limitations, and its heart is a
program towards a proof of the Unique Games Conjecture. The Unique Games
Conjecture is widely recognized as the central open problem in hardness of
approximation in the past two decades. Its resolution would settle the
approximability of a large number of optimization problems and prove the
optimality of geometric techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aforementioned
program towards the Unique Games Conjecture consists of two independent
components. (1) Resolve the Boolean case of the Unique Games Conjecture. The
investigator is collaboraing with experts in geometric functional analysis and
probability in order to analyze a reduction from an NP-hard problem to Boolean
unique games. This collaboration has already led to a milestone, namely an
analysis of a reduction from a problem in the same spirit as NP-hard problems to
Boolean Unique Games. (2) Show that the Boolean case of the Unique Games
Conjecture implies the full Unique Games Conjecture. The investigator is
developing techniques for "fortifying" hard Boolean unique games so they admit
strong parallel repetition and imply the Unique Games
Conjecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.