* 2200489
* Catalyst Project: Quantification of immunohistochemistry images of neuroglia
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Tsang-Wei Tu, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 08/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
undergraduate education and research. It is expected that the award will further
the faculty member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the
institution, and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This
award to Howard University supports the use of artificial intelligence and
machine learning to develop improved technology for the unbiased, high
throughput morphological detection and quantification of glial cells. It is
anticipated that the proposed model will overcome the limitations existing
methodologies, and the new deep learning system will reveal previously
uncharacterized yet fundamental limitations in high-resolution segmentation of
neuroglia cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of a novel deep learning
system is proposed to resolve the difficulties in quantifying region-specific
morphology and the cell subcategories in brain pathology. The proposal aims to
characterize the hallmark features within glial cells, include the some and
extended glial processes, which are known pathological determinants of glial
cells. The approach involves a composite deep learning system with a
convolutional neural network for cell detection, followed by a dedicated
segmentation classifier for single cell segmentation to identify the
heterogeneous glial cells with appearance of region-specific features in the
background. Morphological parameters will be determined and used to predict the
activation phenotypes of glial cells based on the most widely used 2D, 20X
immunohistochemistry images. To enhance the model performance, a user-friendly
web toolbox will be developed for fast data curation and integrated into a
comprehensive database of the annotated cell morphology and phenotypes for model
training and testing. The proposed model will be compared to the gold-standard
manual data curated by pathology experts, and other existing computer-aided
methodologies, including the rule-based semi-automatic methods, and deep
learning-based methods to control for effectiveness, consistency, and
computational efficiency. The automated analysis, feature-rich visualization,
database integration and open-source distribution with easy access from the
community, will allow this system to become a routine workflow for glial image
analysis. This new technological will benefit the neuroscience research
community by providing a fully automated tool for quantitative
histology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.