* 2200501
* Studies in Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Melvin Hochster, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2027
* USD 121,332.00

Algebraic geometry studies solutions of families of polynomial equations. One
can study the solution set geometrically, using higher dimensional analogues of
the graph of an equation, or algebraically, by investigating the behavior of
functions on the geometric solution set that form what is called a commutative
ring. This provides a valuable dual perspective. The project will yield a deeper
understanding of central, fundamental notions in this area, several of which
have been used recently to make progress on long-standing conjectures. The
results will give both quantitative and qualitative information about the nature
of the solution sets of equations and are expected to lead to significant
progress on a number of long-standing questions. The project is multi-faceted
and will provide many opportunities for collaboration with graduate students and
postdoctoral faculty that will foster their growth as researchers. Some portions
of the project will be suitable for training undergraduates to do
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore applications of the
strength of a polynomial. This notion of strength was recently introduced by the
PI, in joint work with a collaborator, and proved to be a critical element in
their proof of Stillman's conjecture. The project will use polynomial strength
to answer several remaining questions, for example, about obtaining bounds for
primary decomposition--independent of the number of variables--that are as sharp
as possible. Another direction is to use ideas from perfectoid geometry to
construct a tight closure theory, valid in all characteristics, that has both
persistence and a satisfactory theory of test elements. Perfectoid techniques
have already led to a great deal of progress in this area. The PI will also
continue to work on the theory of lim Cohen-Macaulay modules, aimed at resolving
a long-standing conjecture about the behavior of intersection multiplicities.
Other directions include the study of: finiteness of minimal primes of local
cohomology modules; filtration theorems for local cohomology that can be used to
investigate strongly F-regular rings; a long-standing conjecture of Eisenbud,
Green, and Harris on the behavior of Hilbert functions of ideals in polynomial
rings; and the uniform comparison of ordinary and symbolic powers of
ideals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.