* 2200488
* Research Initiation Award: Development and utilization of fluorescent biosensors for dopamine sensing in Caenorhabditis elegans
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Zeinab Yadegari, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 298,336.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career
faculty at Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new
research programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It
is expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness and improve research and teaching at the home
institution. This award to Fisk University provides an opportunity to develop
tools that can detect dopamine with high spatiotemporal resolution, thereby
enhancing the extent to which its impact on neural circuitry can be analyzed.
Utilizing Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) as a model organism, genetically
encoded protein sensors and non-genetically encoded nanosensors will be
developed, characterized, and used to investigate signaling mechanisms of
cognitive function and animal behavior. This project also provides an
opportunity to train undergraduate students, thereby contributing to the next
generation of scientists who can contribute to scientific innovation,
creativity, and productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dopamine (DA) is an important
neurotransmitter involved in many different conserved signaling functions across
the animal kingdom, including humans. Despite its well-known importance in
processes including motor control, reward-motivated behaviors, and learning,
there remains a dearth of tools to tracking DA levels or the activity of DA
neurons in vivo. This project aims to develop DA biosensors in C. elegans that
can precisely measure the spatiotemporal content of DA. Genetically encoded and
synthetic DA biosensors will be developed to contain fluorescent components that
will emit light upon the release of DA. After release of DA from presynaptic
vesicles, DA will bind to the receptor and result an increase of florescent
intensity. The synthetic DA nanosensors include a) single-walled carbon nanotube
sensors (nIRCat) and b) carbon dot (CD) sensors. Binding of DA to nIRCat will
increase its fluorescent intensity. Moreover, CDs will be used in combination
with MnO2 nanosheets (NSs). CDs are naturally photoluminescence and can be
quenched by MnO2 NSs. However, DA can transform MnO2 NSs into Mn2+ ions and
result in the recovery of the photoluminescent signal. Florescent microscopy of
the transgenic worm (dLight) and in the presence of synthetic biosensors, will
enable dynamic tracking of DA in the live animal. These biosensors will be
developed, optimized for C. elegans and their toxicity and efficiency will be
investigated. Utilization of DA biosensors in combination with optogenetic
manipulation of neuronal activity will support further inquiry on the
spatiotemporal transmission of DA at the single cell
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.