* 2200748
* ADVANCE Catalyst: Advancing kaulike (equity) focusing on STEM intersectional experiences at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa.
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Michael Bruno, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 309,998.00

As one of six US institutions that is a land-, sea-, space-, and sun-grant
institution, University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa (UHM) attracts many STEM
professionals who want to explore, innovate, study, share, and educate in our
rich ecosystems. Yet, by the numbers, the presence of women in the STEM academic
professions is low. STEM fields that include diverse peoples are more effective
at achieving optimal solutions, innovating, and competing in the market. The NSF
ADVANCE Catalyst at UHM will add to the existing and rich body of knowledge
about the intersectional experiences of women in STEM at a geographically-
isolated, island-based, indigenous-serving, R1 university. An institutional
self-assessment will be conducted to investigate supports and barriers to
advancements by women faculty in STEM, pilot potential activities towards an
organizational change strategy around tenure and promotion, and develop a five-
year STEM faculty equity plan. The project will focus on the experiences of na
wāhine or women, in particular Native Hawaiian, Filipino and other
underrepresented groups who center their experience as women in STEM academic
professions at UHM. The project will inform future gender equity models at other
minority- and indigenous-serving institutions, and provide support for their
work toward systemic change that improves career outcomes for women faculty in
the STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes a feminist,
intersectional approach to examine women’s experience in STEM professions, and
intends to situate islandness as a mediating variable. Methods include the
collection and analysis of institutional data, the implementation of a
structured unbiased questionnaire, and focus group interviews. This project will
provide UHM with strategic plans for increasing the number of underrepresented,
wāhine faculty in the STEM fields through modified recruitment, retention, and
promotion practices, including revamping the UHM Tenure and Promotion process,
mentoring, and creating pathways to hiring UHM graduates into faculty positions.
The project has four major communication strategies including (i) internal
communication to executive leadership, deans, directors, STEM faculty, staff,
and students, (ii) a website established under the Office of the Provost on the
main UHM website with relevant details and links to resources and publications,
(iii) sharing lessons learned, products and materials with the ARC Network on a
quarterly basis, and (iv) external dissemination through the submission of
articles for consideration in high impact journals and presentations at relevant
conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster
gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide support for institutional
equity assessments and the development of five-year faculty equity strategic
plans at academic, non-profit institutions of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.