* 2200033
* EDGE: Generating Tools to Study Spiralian Development
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Jonathan Henry, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,665.00

Difficulties associated with the supply and culture of live marine animals is a
major hurdle for biological research, especially for in-land laboratories
without direct access to fresh sea water. This project is developing a
convenient, high capacity culture system to raise marine invertebrates without
the need to be located near the ocean. The immediate goal is to develop a
recirculating aquarium system with automated controls to monitor and adjust
water quality, which also incorporates robotic, continuous feeding. Conditions
will be optimized to raise slipper snails, a highly useful system for many
different types of biological studies, but these culture methods will also be
useful for raising other filter-feeding animals, including clams, sponges,
corals, etc., which are of great interest to the scientific community. As such,
this project will also permit more general advances in marine aquaculture that
should be applicable for rearing various types of seafood (shellfish). As this
research involves undergraduate and post-doctoral students, it will provide
valuable opportunities to train future generations of scientists and teachers.
Finally, this project will also foster interdisciplinary interactions between
the fields of biology and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
developing high capacity culture conditions and equipment to rapidly rear large
numbers of Crepidula atrasolea snails for biological studies. The goal is to
develop a recirculating aquarium system with automated controls to monitor and
adjust water quality, which also incorporates automated, continuous feeding. The
proposed project will develop a critical set of tools needed to permit labs to
study basic biological processes using a versatile representative of the
largest, but least studied, clade of bilaterian metazoans (the
Lophotrochozoa/Spiralia). Husbandry approaches developed in this project will
permit labs to rear these animals rapidly through successive generations, to
provide a continuous supply of embryos and adults, and ultimately to develop
inbred lines, without the need to be located near the ocean. These lab-reared
snails will be freely distribute to other research labs who request these
resources. Furthermore, these culture methods will be of use more broadly to
others working with filter-feeding marine organisms, including bivalves,
crustaceans, sponges, corals, polychaetes, etc. Finally, this project provides
valuable training for researchers to set up and use these resources. Outreach
efforts provide training on how to use these approaches through detailed
publications, and schematics, and by distributing a series of narrated
instructional videos through our public, open-access lab web site. This research
involves undergraduate and post-doctoral students to provide valuable
opportunities to train future scientists and teachers, and will generate
valuable resources for the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.