* 2200761
* Improving Technician Training in Industry 4.0 technologies Using Competency-Based Education
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Sheri Plain, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 04/30/2025
* USD 556,314.00

Technician education programs that include competency-based education in
Industry 4.0 technologies can provide entry points for students into technical
careers at advanced manufacturing companies. There is a recognized need for more
skilled technicians that can implement and maintain these technologies in
manufacturing facilities. This project will develop and pilot a new competency-
based educational approach that supports greater access to technician training
and improves postsecondary student learning in emerging Industry 4.0
technologies. This should result in a pipeline of highly skilled, next
generation manufacturing technicians. This will also address the growing worker
shortage in manufacturing, which will help ensure future economic health for
Kentucky, as well as the nation. This project will include model practices to
recruit and retain students from traditionally underrepresented groups in
manufacturing education programs. Competency-based education components will
help prepare students for the technician workforce by engaging learners and
improving the learning process. The project will increase partnerships between
academia, industry, and other stakeholders to ensure that the competency-based
education is aligned with the needs of industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to develop a competency-based educational approach to help
current and future manufacturing technicians learn new skills in Industry 4.0
technologies. Additionally, the project will encourage students from underserved
groups to consider manufacturing as a career choice and provide students with
personalized support so that they have a successful learning experience and
transition to the workforce. The project team will redesign seven existing
advanced manufacturing courses that fulfill the academic requirements for six,
credit-bearing, industry-recognized certificates and two national
certifications. The courses will be restructured to focus on helping students
learn content, related skills, and competencies followed by assessments to
determine if they have achieved specific learning objectives. These competencies
will focus on the technical areas of fluid power, maintaining industrial
equipment, circuits, electrical motor controls, industrial robotics and robotics
maintenance, and programmable logic controllers. The project will recruit
incumbent manufacturing technicians and/or dislocated and underemployed workers
as well as students from underserved groups to earn industry credentials. The
effectiveness of the competency-based education will be assessed using student
and industry survey data. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.