* 2200197
* PIPP Phase I: Collective Intelligence for Pandemic Prediction Prevention and Response
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Eliah Aronoff-Spencer, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Goli Yamini
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention (PIPP) Phase I: Development
Grant aims to test the feasibility and performance of a new platform that can
merge currently siloed tools, in order to transform infectious-disease
surveillance and public-health intervention. The digital platform will be an
evolving resource that provides the toolkit for four key pandemic-prevention
intelligence areas. The first area targets surveillance, such as contact tracing
(human interaction) and wastewater detection of pathogens. The second area is
diagnosis, such as rapid testing for disease. The third area is developing
analytic intelligence, such as knowledge graphs or prediction methods. The final
area is action, such as policy and public health recommendations. As a key
feature of the platform, all stakeholders from researchers and medical doctors
to politicians and the general public will be able to both contribute data to
the platform and draw information from it. If successful, such a system would
provide critical scientific evidence and become a testbed to foster further
public-health investigations via a future Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic
Prevention (PIPP) Center that combines social sciences with lab-oriented natural
science and brings together expertise from across disciplines. In addition to
research, training to prepare a future pandemic-ready workforce and outreach
activities that educate and integrate the community into pandemic prevention
efforts will be important parts of future PIPP Center
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance convergence science
for pandemic intelligence by uniting public-health implementers, the community,
and experts in infectious disease, bioengineering, statistical modeling, public
health, computer science, human-centered design, policy, and gender, equity to
explore an operational framework for a future PIPP Center. Project activities
will be implemented according to the following objectives: 1) Create a
collective intelligence cyberinfrastructure prototype and test it through a
tabletop simulation in a real-world setting; 2) Use knowledge translation and
prototype-community interaction to generate new knowledge, plans, and
infrastructure for a future PIPP center; 3) Develop a team-science approach and
ethics-focused framework for Center activities and policies, and build community
and stakeholder engagement to guide Center development. The collaborative,
interdisciplinary discussions held as part of the development activities will
result in the identification of knowledge gaps, research challenges, and new
opportunities for education and public engagement regarding pandemic prevention
and response. Development activities will result in a prototype collective
intelligence platform that will provide important insights into effective human-
technology integration and closed-loop methods of pandemic prediction and
response. Finally, a critical roadmap imbued with ethics and people-centered
vision will be produced and converted to practice as a framework for stitching
together participatory design, team science, and cyber-physical system
development. Through this practice-to-learn approach, this project will advance
the science of pandemic intelligence and support the education and training of a
pandemic-ready workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the
cross-directorate Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I (PIPP)
program, which is jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological Sciences
(BIO), Computer Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Engineering (ENG)
and Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.