* 2200523
* CAREER: A longitudinal study of the emotional and behavioral processes of Environmental Identity Development among rural and non-rural Alaskan children
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Carie Green, South Dakota State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leher Singh
* 06/30/2024
* USD 132,491.00

Despite the importance for human development of childhood experiences with the
natural world, little research has focused on young children's emotional
encounters with nature or how these experiences shape their values, perceptions,
and behaviors. This research will systematically examine children's behavioral
and emotional reactions to nature over a five-year period. The project will
examine how family, culture, and geographical locations shape the manner in
which children form their identity in nature. The project will enhance
understanding of how children learn to regulate their emotions in nature, and it
will expand knowledge about the role education plays in shaping how children
develop empathy and care for living and non-living aspects of their natural
environments. The project will highlight the voices and perspectives of young
Alaska Native and non-Native children living in Alaska, thereby, broadening
participation in socio-ecological science in Polar Regions. The approaches used
in this project offer a framework for participatory and naturalistic
developmental research involving young children. Videos of the nature tours will
be transformed into video lessons that will be shared with the public as a means
of illustrating the role of culture in Alaska Native children's learning about,
and interactions with, the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will enhance understanding of children's Environmental Identity
Development by examining the following research questions: What informs Alaskan
children's emotions and behaviors during outdoor wilderness experiences? How do
children's experiences in the Alaska wilderness affect development over time?
Research will occur in rural and non-rural Alaska during the spring and autumn
seasons. The study will include children from a small isolated Alaskan village
where the majority of families are of Alaska Native descent, and where access to
consumer goods is limited. The study will also examine the experiences of non-
Native children growing up in an Alaskan city. Because consumer goods are
readily available in the city, these children may or may not learn hunting and
gathering skills. This study will use a family survey to understand the
different types of experiences that rural and non-rural Alaskan children have in
the wilderness. Children's drawings and descriptions of their drawings will be
collected to learn about their favorite outdoor activities. Additionally, the
study will use child-led nature tours. The tours will involve wearable cameras
in order to examine children's experiences participating in outdoor activities
with family members as well as their wilderness explorations with classmates.
Data will be collected from rural and non-rural children at 4-5 years of age and
again when they are 7-8 years old. In this way, the researcher will assess how
children's emotional and behavioral interactions with nature develop through
family and educational experiences over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.