* 2200972
* Improving Biotechnology Outcomes Through Pre-Professional Experiences and Industry Partnerships
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Michelle Stieber, Cerritos College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 349,641.00

Over the past six years, Southern California has become one of the nation’s
leading centers for biotechnology, with a focus on biomanufacturing as well as
biological and chemical technology. In the last decade, more than 93,000 workers
have been hired by 2,800 companies in the region. In order to meet industrial
needs, Cerritos College will establish the Cerritos College Biotechnology
Initiative with the goal of providing an accessible academic pathway to high
wage jobs with high growth potential. The Biotechnology Initiative will create
new certificate and degree programs, offer enrichment activities to increase
awareness, provide professional development, and strengthen partnerships with
regional employers. This initiative should generate new knowledge regarding
effective strategies to create interest in biotechnology careers through pre-
professional experiences that will ultimately result in a more highly skilled
technical workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cerritos College will develop and
implement an academic pathway with three new courses that will result in a
biotechnology certificate and may also be used to complete an associate's
degree. This project is expected to enroll 42 students each year. To attract
current students into the program, a new biotechnology focused lab module will
be implemented in the high enrollment general biology course featuring
experiments on antibody testing and effective manufacturing practices. To
further support the initiative, faculty from Chemistry and Biology will
participate in 27 hours of professional development activities that will
increase their knowledge of relevant biotechnology experiments and content, and
optimize their ability to recruit students through more personalized “shoulder
tap” methods. In order to professionalize students, the Biotechnology Initiative
will feature a seminar series, field trips, mock interviews, and community
service activities. An in-depth evaluation plan will assess the success of the
program and the degree to which certificate and degree completers are able to
meet the needs of regional employers. Results from the project will be
disseminated regionally through professional organizations and nationally among
the two-year college community. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.