* 2200895
* An Evaluation of a Statewide Mathematics Corequisite Developmental Education Reform
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2027
* Benjamin Backes, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2027
* USD 691,489.00

America’s community colleges play a vital role in strengthening the country’s
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce. More than
one-quarter of all STEM jobs are held by workers with either an associate’s
degree or some other sub-baccalaureate training. Community colleges also play a
central role in increasing the diversity of the STEM workforce, as they often
serve students from populations underrepresented in their participation in STEM
fields of study. Unfortunately, approximately three quarters of incoming
community college students are considered not ready to succeed in college-level
mathematics. Historically, such students have been unlikely to ever complete a
STEM degree. Traditionally, students deemed not ready for college mathematics
must enroll in prerequisite developmental education (DE), which requires
students to pay for and complete a sequence of noncredit-bearing courses before
enrolling in credit-bearing college courses. Mounting evidence suggests that
prerequisite DE is ineffective and could even be harmful. This project examines
a statewide reform in the Kentucky Community and Technical College System
(KCTCS), which replaced traditional prerequisite DE with co-requisite DE. In
this increasingly popular DE model academically under-prepared students enroll
directly in a credit-bearing, college-level course paired with developmental
support. The KCTCS reform has two distinct features. First, it makes college
mathematics courses accessible to students with a wider range of initial
mathematics skills; and second, it incorporates high school grades, instead of
just standardized test results, as an additional indicator determining whether a
student is eligible to enroll in college mathematics. The study will address
three important knowledge gaps related to how co-requisite DE supports under-
prepared students by: i) studying students close to being college ready, ii)
comparing co-requisite DE relative to no DE, and iii) through using high school
grades in place of test scores for determining college
placement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary study sample consists of students
who attend the 16 campuses that constitute KCTCS. The project will merge
secondary and postsecondary records from all students in public secondary
schools and all students in in-state postsecondary institutions. The primary
impact analysis sample will include all first-time students enrolled in a KCTCS
degree program who have recent ACT scores. There will be five cohorts of first
year students followed for three years. The goal of the co-requisite reform is
to increase the completion rate of gatekeeper mathematics courses. The primary
measure will be whether a student completes a gatekeeper mathematics course
within one year of initial enrollment. The project also entails measuring
longer-term progress towards key outcomes such as persisting to a second year of
enrollment, credit accumulation, and degree completion or successful transfer to
a four-year institution within three years of initial enrollment. The primary
method of analysis will be using cut scores of both ACT mathematics scores and
high school grades in order to conduct regression discontinuity designs that
compare students who are just above the DE placement thresholds to those are
just below. In addition to the analysis of administrative data, the project will
feature original data collection in order to bolster knowledge of how the reform
has been implemented and its associated costs. This component will begin with
telephone interviews with assessment and placement directors in each of the 16
KCTCS colleges. Guided by administrator responses, the project will next survey
instructors who provided supplemental support or college-level instruction in
mathematics. Specifically, the project team will investigate implementation
attributes and college responses to the co-requisite reform along dimensions
such as support structure, instructor assignment, and student
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform
efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and
innovations to address persistent challenges in
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.