* 2200800
* Hyperkähler Manifolds, Moduli Spaces, and Fano Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Laure Flapan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2025
* USD 151,427.00

This project is focused on questions in algebraic geometry. This field of
mathematics focuses on geometric spaces, called algebraic varieties, which can
locally be described as the set of solutions of a system of polynomial equations
in several variables. As such, the field lends itself to applications in
computing and information as well as computer science and physics. One of the
main aims of algebraic geometry is to classify algebraic varieties. One discrete
invariant that can be used to distinguish distinct classes is curvature:
varieties with positive curvature are called Fano, while varieties with zero
curvature are called Calabi-Yau, and those with negative curvature are called
general type. This project is focused on a particular class of Calabi-Yau
varieties, which are called hyperkähler manifolds. The project uses moduli
theory to explore relationships between hyperkähler manifolds and varieties that
are Fano, varieties that are Calabi-Yau, and varieties that are general type.
The project also supports the PI’s continued efforts and activities towards
broadening participation among underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project centers around three broad goals. (1) The PI aims to strengthen
connections between hyperkähler manifolds and Fano varieties by formalizing
geometric constructions associating a Fano variety to a hyperkähler manifold of
K3 type. (2) Another goal is to advance the study of Lagrangian fibrations of
hyperkähler manifolds by investigating which abelian varieties may arise as
smooth fibers of a Lagrangian-fibered hyperkähler manifold. (3) The PI will
expand the theory of moduli of hyperkähler manifolds by studying the geometry of
such moduli spaces, in particular describing when moduli spaces of hyperkähler
manifolds are of general type. In addition, the PI will co-organize various
events with a view towards educating and training the next generation and
growing broad participation in the mathematical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.