* 2200918
* Collaborative Research: Designing Computational Modeling Curricula across Science Subjects to Study How Repeated Engagement Impacts Student Learning throughout High School
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Luke Conlin, Salem State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 07/31/2026
* USD 133,758.00

Computational thinking is becoming an essential part of what students need to
know as computer science and data science are more embedded in STEM careers and
daily life. Computational thinking is the process of using tools from computer
science to solve and analyze problems. The focus of this project is the design
of learning experiences in different high school science courses to help
students gain experience in computational thinking. The project uses a
partnership between two universities and school district to develop and refine
the units as a collaboration between researchers, teachers, and school leaders.
The goal is to help all students have opportunities to learn about computational
thinking in multiple science courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Research and
Practice Partnership between the universities and the school district will
address two problems of practice at the high school level. First, students will
engage in computational modeling in science classes to provide all students
opportunities to learn computational thinking. Second, teachers will have the
opportunity to learn more about the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) and
develop curriculum to support the standards. The project will create units for
four science subjects and investigate the design and implementation of those
units. Using design-based implementation research, the project has three
research questions that focus on the design of the units and what students and
teachers learn in the process.. (1) How and under what conditions does engaging
in computational modeling practices (CMPs) through the designed units in one
course lead to shifts in: learning of disciplinary core ideas and cross-cutting
concepts, computational modeling practices (CMPs) , and attitudes towards
science and computation? (2) How and under what conditions does repeated
exposure to CMPs across science courses impact student learning? (3) How do
teachers see the role of professional development in preparing them to use the
curricula? (4) How and why do they adapt the curricula to fit their classrooms?
(4) What kinds of design supports do students and teachers need to use these
units? (5) How can we design a collection of computational modeling units that
integrate 3-dimensional NGSS learning with computational thinking practices for
multiple subjects? The data collection will include classroom observations and
videos, surveys of teachers and students, measures of students’ learning, The
project will also gather log data from the StarLogo Nova platform that is being
used as a tool for computational modeling and simulation in the units.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.