* 2200763
* Using Problem-Based Learning Analytics to Investigate Individual and Collaborative Mathematics Learning in a Digital Environment Over Time
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Elizabeth Phillips, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,620,651.00

Supporting rich student learning, discourse, and collaboration in technology-
enhanced classrooms can be a significant challenge as technology can act as an
impediment to conversation. This project supports the development of a
collaborative digital learning environment that embeds rich middle school
mathematics tasks. The project aims to understand how students' individual and
collaborative engagement in learning mathematics is enhanced by the digital
platform, and how student engagement and learning is affected over the course of
a year-long seventh grade course. The project will develop the initial digital
collaborative platform using the Connected Mathematics Project materials, a
rich, problem-based middle grades mathematics curriculum. Using digital
notebooks, platform analytics, and other class artifacts, the team will develop
a set of design characteristics for digital platforms that support student
collaboration in learning mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore two key questions related to student learning and collaboration in the
technological platform: how does the platform enhance students' individual and
collaborative engagement, and how do student learning outcomes, engagement, and
attitudes develop over an academic year in which the platform is used
repeatedly. The project will use the platform to collect data related to student
collaboration, engagement, instructional practices, classroom artifacts, and
written and spoken mathematical reflections from students and teachers. The
research outcomes will include guidelines for a research-based approach to the
use of learning analytics in technology-enhanced mathematics education, an
understanding of design features that support meaningful STEM learning using
digital notebooks, and the nature of the teacher-student boundaries in using
digital learning resources to support students' individual needs. The project
will focus on a deep examination of a key mathematical idea in the seventh-grade
curriculum, proportional reasoning, to understand how students' understandings
are influenced over time using the platform. Project activities will include
development and testing of the platform with students, pilot and field testing
with teachers, and professional learning opportunities for teachers to ensure
thoughtful implementation of the platform in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.