* 2200886
* Stability of Functional and Geometric Inequalities and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Robin Neumayer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 09/30/2022
* USD 54,923.00

The study of functional and geometric inequalities plays a pivotal role in
modern mathematics. An example of a geometric inequality, with a history dating
back to the ancient Greeks, is the isoperimetric inequality, which states that a
ball has the least perimeter among all shapes of a fixed volume. The stability
of such inequalities is a property that describes behavior of almost-equilibrium
states. The topic of stability has generated substantial interest in recent
years, due in large part to its exciting applications to physical models. This
project analyzes the stability properties of certain functional and geometric
inequalities, and applies them as a tool to address problems across various
mathematical fields and with diverse applications in physics and materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given an inequality for which all equality cases
are characterized, the question of stability is the following: suppose a
function (or set) almost achieves equality in the inequality. Then is it close,
in a suitable sense, to an equality case? In this project, stability estimates
will be employed in varied contexts, including the study of regularity
properties for limit spaces of Riemannian manifolds with lower bounds on scalar
curvature, regularity in spectral shape optimization problems, and properties of
energy minimizers in the liquid drop model for atomic nuclei. The project brings
together ideas across geometric analysis, partial differential equations and the
calculus of variations, in terms of both techniques and
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.