* 2200787
* The Brumer-Stark Conjecture and its Refinements
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Samit Dasgupta, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2027
* USD 220,922.00

This project concerns algebraic number theory, a branch of mathematics that aims
to study properties of the basic number systems arising from roots of
polynomials (called number fields). Number theorists are interested in
classifying number fields whose symmetry groups (called Galois groups) have the
commutative property, and in producing formulas to generate these special number
fields. Modern methods have demonstrated the connection between number fields
and certain associated functions called L-functions, whose values encode many of
the most important conjectures in number theory. The principal investigator, Dr.
Samit Dasgupta, has made important progress on these topics in recent work, and
the current proposal aims to push further in this direction. Dr. Dasgupta also
plans to continue and expand his activities to disseminate mathematics to
students and academics of all age groups and career stages. Dr. Dasgupta gives
expository lectures for undergraduates in various math clubs, teaches
minicourses for graduate students, is involved in graduate and postdoctoral
advising, is involved in local conference organizing, and is on the editorial
board of several journals. All these activities connect to Dr. Dasgupta’s goal
to promote mathematics holistically in society, with a particular view toward
supporting various groups that have been traditionally underrepresented.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Dr. Dasgupta’s work is motivated by two
central problems in modern algebraic number theory: the expression of special
values of classical and p-adic L-functions as regulators of algebraic objects,
and the generation of abelian extensions of number fields through analytic means
intrinsic to the ground field, as codified in Hilbert's 12th problem. Dr.
Dasgupta’s prior work has made significant progress on the Brumer-Stark
Conjecture, the Gross-Stark Conjecture, and the explicit analytic construction
of class fields of totally real fields. Dr. Dasgupta will continue his
explorations in this direction with five specific questions on the connections
between Stark units, L-functions, modular forms, and Galois representations. All
these projects will advance our knowledge in a significant way on the
relationship between special values of L-functions and associated algebraic
objects. Firstly, he will complete the proof of the Brumer-Stark conjecture by
handling the localization at p=2. Next, he will extend his work with Kakde to
prove the Equivariant Tamagawa Number Conjecture for the minus part of CM
abelian extensions of totally real fields, including at the prime 2. In joint
work with Spiess, Dr. Dasgupta will prove their joint conjecture on the
characteristic polynomial of Gross's regulator matrix. Separately, he will work
with Darmon and Charollois on expanding the strategy of Darmon, Vonk, and Pozzi
for real quadratic fields to give a purely p-adic analytic proof of Dr.
Dasgupta's explicit analytic formula for Brumer-Stark units over arbitrary
totally real fields. Dr. Dasgupta will work with Victor Rotger to study a
conjecture of Harris and Venkatesh relating the derived Hecke operators defined
by Venkatesh to Stark units in the Galois extension cut out by the adjoint of
the Galois representation attached to weight one
forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.