* 2200161
* PIPP Phase I: Computational Foundations for Bio-social Modeling of Unseen Pandemics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Patricia Solis, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 02/29/2024
* USD 897,531.00

Pandemics unfold in a social, behavioral, and decision-making context that
alters the geospatial patterns of spread, depending on an existing underlying
landscape of risk and adaptive behavior. Layering socioeconomic factors into
traditional predictive modeling frameworks is not sufficient to understand this
complexity, nor does it account for the dynamics and vicissitudes of human
behavior and free-will. Unexpected human behaviors play a major role, as well as
broader factors such as vaccine availability, seasonal effects from human
contact patterns, viral environmental persistence, and federal and state-level
policy changes around masking and business closures. Enumerating a finite list
of factors that should form the basis of a predictive model itself seems like a
grand challenge. This project will advance modeling as a continuous, iterative,
and dynamic component of pandemic response, where incremental predictions are
far more robust, and approaches that innately allow for complexity, adaptation,
and surprise can be expected to be operationally
useful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pandemic prevention for unseen pandemics requires
several interconnected efforts across immunology, mechanistic modeling, data-
driven modeling, and understanding sociopolitical contexts of decision making.
Technical aspects of the project include machine learning based tools for
predicting immune response from pathogen mutations, switching dynamical systems
based models of time-series for fast adaptation, adaptive population sampling
techniques, and model predictive control methods for designing behavioral
interventions. The project will develop integrative protocols and frameworks
that a) leverage techniques for using binding patterns of pathogens for never-
before-seen viruses and advances in wastewater-based epidemiology, b) understand
the variation in performance of predictive models over geospatial scales using
regularizing models, c) design effective interventions under resource
constraints, and d) understand their impact on policy making.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the cross-directorate
Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I (PIPP) program, which is
jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological Sciences (BIO), Computer
Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) and Engineering (ENG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.