* 2200066
* PIPP Phase I: Dynamics of Pandemic Spread and Prevention in Indigenous Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Jessecae Marsh, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2024
* USD 999,894.00

It hardly needs stating in todayâ€™s world how deadly and destructive to society
pandemics can be, and how important it is to understand and predict the
evolution of pandemics over time and space. Notably, the severity of pandemics
impacts communities differently, often causing much greater mortality in
underserved and isolated communities. For example, over the decades and across
different types of epidemics, including the current COVID-19 pandemic, mortality
rates among Indigenous populations have been more than three times that of the
general public. This research team aims to contribute to global pandemic
prediction and prevention by advancing knowledge about pandemic dynamics within
isolated and underserved populations. Specifically, the investigators examine
how pandemics of infectious disease affect and are affected by their spread in
Indigenous communities. The focus will be on how specific features of these
communities influence various aspects of epidemics, such as the initial
spillover to humans, the human-to-human spread of the pathogen, the biological
behavior of the pathogen, and countermeasures that can mitigate the impact of
the disease. The assembled team is highly interdisciplinary, covering the broad
scientific expertise, including members of the Cheyenne River Sioux and Prairie
Band Potawatomi tribes, and connecting with external partners. Team meetings
serve as observational data for a study of convergent team science, and student
training and mentoring activities provide opportunities for bridging to the next
generation of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators have
identified three overarching questions that motivate four specific research
thrusts: (1) What factors, environmental to molecular, contribute to the
mortality rates in Indigenous communities? (2) Can the findings of this study
translate to broader understanding of pandemic dynamics? (3) What engineering,
education, biological, and policy solutions can be devised to address the root
causes of the problems? The project initially focuses on Influenza, although it
is expected that the findings will apply to other viral diseases such as
COVID-19, EBOLA, and Zika. In order to address these overarching questions, the
project will innovate collaboratively in the fields of engineering, biology,
data science, and cognitive psychology along four interlinked thrusts: (I)
Community Understanding of Cause and Prevention, which will establish the
beliefs in Indigenous communities regarding disease and its amelioration. The
investigators will employ a Community Based Participatory Research (CBPR)
approach, which involves communities in all aspects of the research, so as to
build trust between communities and researchers. (II) Predicting Virus Spillover
and Spread, which will bring computational, statistical, and data science
expertise in Catastrophe and Network Modeling to predicting dynamics in isolated
communities. (III) Engineering Devices for Point-of-Care Sensing, which will
develop sensitive and simplified tools to enhance testing capability in
underserved Indigenous populations and improve pandemic tracking. (IV)
Biological Differentiators: Predicting Infection, which will investigate virus-
host cell interactions, and phenotypic and genotypic differentiators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the cross-directorate
Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I (PIPP) program, which is
jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological Sciences (BIO), Computer
Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Engineering (ENG) and Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.