* 2200036
* REMOVAL OF METALS FROM PETROLEUM PRODUCED WATER BY DOLOMITE
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* David Borrok, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 398,478.00

In the United States, every year, the production of oil and gas generates more
than 890 billion barrels of contaminated wastewater, commonly referred to as
produced water (PW). This PW typically contains high concentrations of salts
(predominantly sodium chloride) and a broad range of alkaline earth metals,
heavy metals, and naturally occurring radioactive materials. These contaminants
include calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg), barium (Ba), strontium (Sr), arsenic (As),
cadmium (Cd), and radium (Ra). This combination of high concentrations of salts
and toxic metals makes the treatment and reuse of PW very challenging and
costly. The overarching goal of this project is to explore the utilization of
low-cost dolomite filters to remove toxic metals from high salinity PW. Building
upon the results of promising preliminary results, the Principal Investigators
(PIs) propose to investigate the mechanisms and process variables that control
the removal of toxic metal ions and their mixtures from PW by dolomite over a
range of aqueous phase salinity, temperature, and compositions. The successful
completion of this project will benefit society through the generation of
fundamental knowledge to advance the development and implementation of low-cost
dolomite filtration technology to remove toxic metals from PW and other high-
salinity waste streams. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through
outreach and educational activities including the mentoring of two graduate
students at Oklahoma State University and a graduate student at Missouri
University of Science and Technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately, 10
gallons of water are generated by oil and gas wells for each barrel of oil
produced in the United States (US). This produced water (PW) contains high
concentrations of salts and toxic metals and therefore must be treated to enable
its reuse. However, due to high treatment costs, most of the PW in the US is
disposed of via deep injection into subsurface formations where it can
potentially contaminate freshwater resources and/or induce seismicity. The goal
of this project is to investigate the removal of toxic metals and their mixtures
from model PW by lower-cost dolomite filters using barium (Ba), strontium (Sr),
arsenic (As), and cadmium (Cd) as model toxic metal ions. To advance this goal,
the Principal Investigators (PIs) propose to carry out an integrated
experimental and modeling research program structured around four objectives.
Objective 1 will investigate the effects of aqueous phase (PW) salinity,
composition, and temperature on toxic metal ion removal by dolomite using batch
and flow through column experiments. Objective 2 will evaluate the effects of
changes in dolomite surface morphology and composition on toxic metal ion
removal using a combination of imaging and analytical tools including scanning
electron microscopy (SEM), x-ray diffraction (XRD), x-ray fluorescence (XRF)
spectroscopy, and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectroscopy.
Objective 3 will determine the intrinsic stability constants of toxic metal ion
complexation with dolomite over a range of aqueous phase compositions,
salinities, and temperatures using a combination of surface titration and
electrokinetic measurements. Objective 4 will explore the development and
validation of surface complexation and reactive transport models to simulate the
removal of metals from PW by dolomite filtration. The successful completion of
this research has the potential for transformative impact through the generation
of new fundamental knowledge and modeling tools to advance the design and
implementation of dolomite filtrations as an efficient and cost-effective
technology to remove toxic metal ions from high salinity PW. To implement the
education and outreach activities of the project, the PIs plan to integrate the
findings from this research into existing and relevant course modules at both
Oklahoma State University (OSU) and Missouri University of Science and
Technology (Missouri S&amp;T). In addition, the PIs propose to leverage existing
programs at their respective institutions to recruit graduate/undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups to work on this project including the
Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation at OSU and the Summer
Engineering Research Academy at Missouri S&amp;T.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.