* 2200706
* ECR Core Research: Investigating Computer Science Departmental Diversity Efforts to Identify Levers for Change
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Wendy DuBow, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 06/30/2025
* USD 319,319.00

This study addresses the longstanding problem of the lack of diversity among
persons studying and working in the field of computer science (CS). The
statistics describing the gender and race/ethnicity of those who earn CS degrees
tell a story of a discipline that has been slow to change. The percentage of CS
undergraduate degrees that have been earned by women has barely risen in nearly
two decades. The lack of representation of Hispanic, African American, and
Native American students in computing over the past few decades is even direr.
And yet many CS departments have undertaken a wide variety of efforts to broaden
participation in computing (BPC). While BPC efforts have been studied, the
research until now has not examined a key lever that helps or hinders progress:
faculty members’ attitudes toward diversity and their department’s BPC efforts.
This project will seek to understand more about these faculty attitudes,
supports, and obstacles to provide research-based recommendations to those who
wish to diversify the students graduating with computing degrees. This
diversification is important because today’s students are society’s future
technologists, so they should reflect the society they will soon
serve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research study will take a phenomenological
qualitative approach to explore faculty attitudes, conceptions, and beliefs
about broadening participation in computing (BPC) initiatives. The researchers
will collect interview data from faculty and administrators in three different
computer science departments chosen from among the top 25 undergraduate CS
degree producers in the US. Each institution in the sample has been
significantly involved in diversity efforts at the departmental level, with some
successes, but with a notable lack of success in certain areas. The study’s main
research question will be: What organizational conditions support or hinder
faculty uptake of BPC efforts in high undergraduate-degree producing computing
departments? Because faculty work within organizational systems that help or
hinder their ability to produce and sustain change in their departments, the
study draws upon neo-institutional theory. This theory helps clarify the role
that faculty beliefs and actions play in responding to and co-creating
departmental culture, including fostering inclusive departmental climates for
non-majority populations. The study’s goal is to build a knowledge base of what
supports and hinders departmental diversity efforts, and what organizational
conditions are necessary for change to take hold. This knowledge base can lead
to new interventions relative to BPC and CS faculty, as well as related research
in other disciplines or other higher education institution
types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research
(ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research
that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in
critical areas that are essential, broad, and enduring: STEM learning and STEM
learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform
efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest interventions and
innovations to address persistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.