* 2200610
* Deep Teaching Residency: A Faculty Development Program for Design and Implementation of Inclusive Undergraduate STEM Teaching Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Bryan Dewsbury, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 11/30/2024
* USD 299,906.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in excellent undergraduate STEM
education. It will do so by engaging undergraduate STEM instructors in
cultivating inclusive climates in their STEM classrooms. Specifically, the
project intends to address the need for a more relationship-oriented approach to
STEM teaching. Such an approach can increase students' academic performance and
sense of belonging, particularly for students from historically disenfranchised
backgrounds. To support these changes, the project will engage two cohorts of 24
undergraduate STEM instructors in a year-long residency. These STEM instructors
will be selected from across the nation and from different institutional types.
The residency will be based on the Deep Teaching conceptual model developed by
the primary investigator. Deep Teaching emphasizes self-awareness, empathy, and
reflective teaching. The residency model also will apply the philosophy that
developing inclusive curricula is difficult, ongoing, and successful only when
done in the context of a supportive community. The residency will begin with
preparatory reading and reflection, followed by an immersive five-day workshop
during the summer. At the workshop, the STEM instructors will explore the role
of self-awareness in inclusive practices, design context-specific projects to
complete in the following academic year, and design a structure to support
implementation of the projects during that time. In the academic year following
each workshop, the project will continue to provide the instructor cohort with
community support and accountability via a virtual Deep Teaching mentoring
network. Ultimately, the project seeks to create a community of scholars who
engage deeply in ongoing, intentional work to transform STEM courses toward more
inclusive teaching practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the
project are to: 1) Build a community of scholar-educators committed to
developing and evaluating their inclusive teaching practices; 2) Meaningfully
transform faculty participant mindsets in the direction of equity-based
pedagogies; 3) Assist faculty participants in expanding knowledge and requisite
skills pertaining to inclusive teaching practices; and 4) Support participants
in the design, implementation, and assessment of an inclusive pedagogy project
in their own classrooms and the dissemination of their findings to a broader
academic audience. The research aspect of the project will incorporate a
cognitive frames approach to investigate the ways in which faculty mindsets
migrate from diversity, to deficit, to equity-minded pedagogies. This research
will take a qualitative analysis approach using data gathered from reflective
journals and course artifacts. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.