* 2200815
* Exploring the Integration of Systems Thinking in Biology in Participatory Professional Development
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Michael Cassidy, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2025
* USD 681,543.00

The project will develop a teacher professional learning (PL) model that focuses
on middle-school biological sciences in addressing real world problems. Systems
thinking is central to understanding biology systems. Game design has been shown
to help develop systems thinking in teachers and students. Students will
participate in PL to illustrate the value of distributed expertise by sharing
their knowledge of computer. Teachers will adapt their existing curriculum and
will co-design games with students to experience participatory practices. The PL
model includes 36 hours of synchronous in-person and online activities,
including four consecutive six-hour days in the summer and four three-hour
sessions throughout the school year. The project will work with 14 teachers with
multiple implementations over three years, involving approximately 1,900
students. Participatory classrooms will enhance the capacity of all students to
see themselves as skilled and persistent learners. Through the PL, teachers will
become knowledgeable about applying systems thinking to interpret and understand
the functioning of biology systems, integrating game design in their existing
lessons to enhance student application of systems thinking skills to learning
about biological systems, and engaging in participatory practices. The model
expands opportunities for students to be involved in the PL process, resulting
in a better understanding of their impact on teacher pedagogy when using
computational tools. Project research has the potential for developing new
knowledge on our understanding of NGSS-aligned teaching and learning, science
content understanding (specifically related to biodiversity), and ultimately
student learning, agency, and action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
research how the PL contributes to teacher learning and how teachers’ pedagogy
changes as they take up and use project tools to support student learning about
biological systems, and how students learn about biology systems and improve
systems thinking skills. The theoretical and research framework for this PL
model is grounded in: (1) how systems in biology and game design are
synergistic, (2) the importance of students’ presence in Pl, and (3) enacting
participatory practices. This mixed methods study will include design-based
research (DBR) to iteratively test and revise a PL model that identifies
relationships between structural support elements, including tools, task
structures, participant structures, and discursive practices, in a teacher
learning environment. Conjecture mapping approach will be used in cycles of DBR
to test the hypothesis that a participatory PD learning environment supports
teachers in integrating game design as a constructionist learning opportunity
for students to engage with and learn from systems. Project research will be
guided by the following questions: (1) How do the elements of the PL learning
environment contribute to teacher learning? (2) How do teachers use the tools
provided by the project (game, design, and participatory practices) to support
student learning about biological systems and how does this change their
pedagogy? and (3) How does designing a game help students learn about biology
systems and develop skills in systems thinking? Qualitative and quantitative
data will be triangulated to address each research question and to provide a
reliability check on findings. Qualitative data, such as fieldnotes, audio and
video recordings, interviews, teacher and student artifacts, logs, and open-
ended survey and assessment questions will be analyzed through codes that
represent expected themes and patterns related to student and teacher
experiences in PL and in the classroom. Quantitative data, including teacher
survey Likert scale questions, implementation logs, and student assessment and
game rubrics, will be analyzed using repeated measure ANOVA to examine pre-post
changes in teachers and students. Research findings and practices from the
project will be widely disseminated to teachers, administrators, and researchers
through conference presentations and publications. The project will also create
a “playbook” that will enable educators to freely draw on and modify the tools
and processes utilized in the project for their local contexts and community
needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.