* 2200506
* Excellence in Research: Building an Equitable and Sustainable Logistics System in Rural Areas with Drones
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kofi Nyarko, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2025
* USD 423,102.00

This Excellence in Research (EiR) award supports research to enhance the equity
of smart logistics systems in rural areas and to engineer next-generation smart
technology to improve farm-to-table food management of microgreen crops. Drone
technology offers promise for delivery of needed goods to rural communities, but
adoption by commercial operations has been slow due to low population density.
Using a systems approach, this project aims to design incentive mechanisms for
the integration of drone technology into rural logistics systems that explicitly
take equity into consideration. The project will develop a set of tools aimed to
quantify, analyze, and thereby enhance the equity of intelligent logistics
systems in rural areas. In addition, the project will build research capacity at
Morgan State University, a historically black university, and engage graduate
students in interdisciplinary research to enhance their academic and
professional opportunities. The educational efforts will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in information science and engineering
in alignment with the nationâ€™s efforts to foster a STEM-capable workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide the design foundation for
sustainable economic incentive mechanisms to promote equity in the integration
of innovative transportation modes, optimal resource allocation, and intelligent
multi-level decision-making models. The project will develop mathematical models
for maximizing the equity in drone-based logistics systems. An extensive drone
delivery cost structure analysis will be constructed with a comprehensive demand
study in a representative rural area. This research will also integrate
innovative algorithmic techniques to enhance solution efficiency and robustness
in intelligent solution approaches. Research findings will form cross-
disciplinary research foundations and raise diverse research opportunities,
which will also be integrated into course materials and class
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.