* 2200536
* Excellence in Research of dietary blueberry delays aging and reverses aging-induced physical dysfunctions by regulating PPAR pathway
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Hongwei Si, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 591,161.00

This study aims to understand how the dietary intake of blueberries, which have
been shown to have positive effects on health, might work to do so, particularly
with regards to people over 65 years of age. Using mice, the project will focus
on blueberryâ€™s anti-aging mechanisms at the level of molecules, cells, and
tissues. If the preliminary results hold true in the planned longer-term
experiments on mice, then the research may lead to work in humans to promote
health and extend lifespan by consuming natural blueberry products. With novel
experiments examining molecular pathways that impact muscle and blood vessels,
two important ideas will be tested: (1) dietary intake of blueberry can extend a
healthy lifespan, even starting from advanced age, and (2) dietary intake of
blueberry can delay the normal aging process. In addition to the clear societal
benefits of understanding how some types of food work to promote health, this
project will also provide in-depth research training to minority students (6
graduate students and 6 undergraduates) at a Historically Black
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the exact mechanisms underlying the aging
process are not well understood, delaying the aging-induced physical
dysfunctions and related disease development is an essential and effective
strategy to promote healthy aging. The PI recently reported that dietary intake
of epicatechin (EC), a bioactive component of various foods, including
blueberries, reversed aging-induced skeletal muscle (SkM) dysfunction and
promoted the survival rate of aged mice. Rabbiteye blueberries contain the
highest EC of all fresh fruits. The project will test the hypothesis that
dietary blueberry EC reverses the aging-induced dysfunctions of SkM and vascular
endothelium by regulating PPAR/NF-kB pathways in aged mice. Two primary
objectives structure the experimental work. Objective 1: Test the effects of
dietary blueberry and EC in a dose-dependent lifespan protocol. Freeze-dried
powders of rabbiteye blueberry (high EC), highbush blueberry (low EC), or pure
EC will be administrated to 20-month-old C57BL/6 mice (7 groups, 30 male, 30
female mice/group) until the natural end of lifespan. Complete Kaplan-Meier
survival curves and DNA methylation clocks will be used to monitor the aging
process. Objective 2: Test that PPAR/NF-kB pathways mediate blueberry EC anti-
aging effect in skeletal muscle and vasculature. The whole powder of rabbiteye
blueberry, pure EC with/out PPAR specific antagonist GW9662, will be fed to
20-month-old mice for 15 weeks while treadmill performance and ex vivo assays
are conducted in parallel. Tissues including SkM, aorta, and serum and in vitro
cultured cells will be used to determine the roles of PPAR/NF-kB pathways and
other mechanisms of the anti-aging effect by conducting transcriptome and
metabolome analyses. As an experimental study of the impact of diet on
biochemical pathways, this study will help advance the methodologies for this
type of human-health research, in general, and to establish, in particular, the
mechanisms by which blueberry intake delays aging-induced dysfunction of
skeletal muscle and vasculature and then extends the lifespan in
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.