* 2200397
* Excellence in Research: Dynamic All-Solid-State Hybrid Electro-Thermo Chromic Solar Radiation Modulator for Smart Windows Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Messaoud Bahoura, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 09/30/2025
* USD 499,989.00

Buildings and building construction sectors are responsible for almost one-third
of total global energy consumption. More than 30% of the total energy
consumption in buildings could be attributed to heat loss through windows in
cold conditions and heat gain when cooling the building in warm conditions.
Therefore, managing heat exchange through windows can prove to be an effective
approach to decreasing building energy consumption and improving overall energy
efficiency. This project will explore the practical challenges of implementing a
hybrid coating structure for windows to provide a dynamic solar modulator. In
the hot season, the coating will block the transmission of the solar infrared
radiation and in the cold season, the coating will allow solar infrared
radiation to transmit through the window and heat the space inside, to the
desired level of comfort. In both seasons the coating will allow gradual dimming
of the transmission of visible light. Graduate and undergraduate students will
be offered unique multidisciplinary learning experiences across fields of
materials synthesis and characterization, heat transport mechanism, and
simulation. Educational programs will be established for K-12 and
underrepresented minority outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goal of this
research is to combine the effects of electrochromism and thermochromism into
one hybrid thin-film structure. Such structure would control the solar
transmission in response to electric or thermal stimuli change allowing for
selective modulation of light in the visible and infrared regions simultaneously
or independently. The research approach includes: (1) investigating the
fundamental factors influencing the optical and metal-to-insulator transition
properties in the thermochromic film; (2) exploring the material properties
contributing to the transparency and joule heating in transparent conducting
oxide film; (3) studying the influence of polymer chain length and doping
parameters on the electrical and optical properties of the electrochromic film,
and (4) elucidating the ion transport mechanism in the electrochromic film.
Outcomes of this research will lead to smart window coatings with the ability to
reduce energy consumption in all types of climates, providing cost savings on
heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning systems. In this project, the PIs
will provide educational research activities to undergraduate and high school
students from groups under-represented in STEM. These hands-on experiences will
enhance the students' critical thinking, inquiring, problem- solving, and
teamwork skills. These activities will also stimulate the students' interest in
science and prepare them for choosing STEM career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.