* 2200356
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of genetically modified sterile insects for biocontrol
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Siba Das, NOVOCLADE, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,003,941.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II
project will be to improve insect control with minimal chemical impact. Due to
their impact on human health and losses to agriculture, insects pose threats
upwards of $10 billion/year to the world economy. Current methods of insect
control using chemical insecticides are somewhat effective but pose a grave
threat to the environment. The company is developing a genetic-based insect
control technology. This approach can be very effective, have minimal
environmental impact and be cost effective to implement. The technology is
broadly applicable to any sexually reproducing organism, which could enable
applications beyond the first intended target of spotted wing drosophila. Likely
future applications include control of insects important for public health, such
as mosquitoes or ticks, other agricultural pests, and invasive species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is designed to use genetics to solve
issues posed by chemical insecticides and issues associated with broad adoption
of sterile insect techniques: (i) sorting of male only insects, (ii) laborious
release processes and (iii) non-scalable operation. The objective of this
project is to create a prototype and verify its ability to control the initial
target insect, spotted wing drosophila. The project will also investigate the
robustness of the developed genetic system for commercial production. This
research project will expand scientific knowledge of insect transgenesis and
their use for biocontrol.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.