* 2200835
* Welding Education Smart Technology Program
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* David Thrasher, College of the Canyons
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 04/30/2025
* USD 646,354.00

This project will contribute to the national need for a highly skilled workforce
by producing qualified welding technicians that meet the needs in today’s
Advanced Manufacturing Industry sectors. According to the Bureau of Labor and
Statistics, the need for welders is expected to grow 8 percent from 2020 to
2030. This project will address this workforce need by incorporating significant
improvements to an existing Welding Technology Associates of Science degree
program. Improvements include incorporating advanced technologies and
certification requirements across the program curriculum, use of nontraditional
instructional deliveries (virtual reality and hybrid flexible, or HyFlex),
performance assessments, faculty professional development, and program outreach.
These improvements are projected to increase the number of students who
successfully complete the program by 7 percent each year of the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to provide a model for two-
year colleges to integrate smart welding technologies into their certificate and
degree programs so students are prepared to build successful careers in advanced
manufacturing sectors. The project will modernize two existing instructional
labs to facilitate use of smart technologies inside each welding booth and into
each robotic cell. These smart technologies involve use of live weld process
control and monitoring software and virtual reality systems. This creates a
platform from which students can gauge their own progress in addition to
providing instructors valuable data analytics to identify and assess students’
progress. This assessment-driven approach is expected to contribute to the
development of standardized welding education practices. Faculty teaching in the
welding technology program will earn certifications offered by the National
Coalition of Certification Centers to facilitate administering the required
performance exams. Students earning these certifications will be prepared to
enter the workforce upon completion of the program. This project will consist of
significant outreach by hosting live events at local junior and high schools
using the program’s existing welding roadshow trailer. The project will also
leverage existing agreements with secondary education to build a K-14 pipeline
of skilled technicians using conventional and HyFlex instructional deliveries.
Summer manufacturing camps will be offered that focus on providing
entrepreneurial skills training along with hands-on project-based activities in
the welding and metal fabrication labs. The project will develop partnerships
with area welding companies to collaboratively design course offerings and
curriculum with input from an Industry and Business Team. These efforts are
designed to result in a robust program that facilitates hands-on learning
experiences centered on aligning student ability with employment opportunities
in the field. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.