* 2200112
* PIPP Phase I: Computational Theory of the Co-evolution of Pandemics, (Mis)information, and Human Mindsets and Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Peter Pirolli, Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2024
* USD 999,955.00

Epidemiological models are used to predict the spread of highly contagious and
lethal diseases such as COVID-19. Public health officials use such models to
inform pandemic response policies and advisories. Yet these models require a
rigorous scientific foundation about human psychology to better predict people’s
responses to information and policies about pandemics. The recent COVID-19
pandemic illustrates the central role of human decision making and behavior in
the spread of such a transmissible disease. People’s decisions regarding social
isolation, social distancing, mask wearing, hand washing, and vaccination are
correlated with the rate at which the COVID-19 virus spreads or the seriousness
of getting infected. People have different individual mindsets, and these can
vary across different regions and subgroups, so different groups of people
respond differently to messaging and mandates and those responses change over
time. There is also an ongoing scientific debate about the degree to which
pandemic information or misinformation, or the perceived credibility of
information sources, influences the degree to which people change their
behavior. To address these scientific needs, this project involves activities to
develop a multidisciplinary research core and agenda and to develop a strong
plan for a cohesive research center for Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic
Prevention. The activities include exploratory research on computational models
of human psychology, information flow and influence, and resulting pandemic
transmission. The project will also support the training and mentoring of
graduate students who represent the next generation of researchers tackling
these global challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses computational
theories and models to examine the fundamental interdependent evolution of
infection, behavior, and information at multiple levels and drawing upon
multiple disciplines in order to support improved pandemic intelligence,
prediction, explanation, and countermeasures. The project is organized into (1)
interdisciplinary, strategic research thrusts to Accelerate Convergent Science
towards the Grand Challenge, (2) three invitational meetings to draw in diverse
researchers to address focal research topics and research questions, to fill in
gaps in the Research Challenges, and develop a strong research and education
agenda for a cohesive PIPP center, and (3) Pilot Studies to Demonstrate
Feasibility of integrated computational models of information, human psychology,
and pandemic transmission. For the pilot research, a multidisciplinary team
combines empirical assessments with computational cognitive models in an agent-
based modeling system. For data the investigators draw on vaccination
discussions in mass media, Twitter, geolocated timeseries data on vaccination
rates, infection, death and recovery rates, state and national mandates
regarding COVID-19 policies about vaccination and mask wearing from February
2020 through December 2021 in the United States. These data will be segmented by
state and major cities within those states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
supported by the cross-directorate Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic
Prevention Phase I (PIPP) program, which is jointly funded by the Directorates
for Biological Sciences (BIO), Computer Information Science and Engineering
(CISE), Engineering (ENG) and Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
(SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.