* 2200058
* STTR Phase II:  Developing a novel drug delivery system to enable an oral peptide-based drug for kidney stones
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Altayeb Alshaikh, OXALO THERAPEUTICS, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2024
* USD 999,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is a novel drug delivery system composed of
peptide-loaded nanoparticles (NPs) for targeted and sustained release of
therapeutic peptides to the intestine. The drug resulting from this project will
be first-in-class comprehensive treatment for hyperoxaluria (high urine
oxalate), hyperoxalemia (high blood oxalate), and related calcium oxalate kidney
stones (COKS). Millions of patients suffering from COKS will finally be able to
prevent this painful and damaging disease and preserve their long-term kidney
health. Since a single kidney stone increases the risk of kidney failure, payers
will not only appreciate the annual savings on treatment, but also the economic
benefits of preventing chronic kidney disease (CKD) and kidney failure requiring
permanent dialysis, affecting ~45 M and ~500 K patients in the US, respectively.
Importantly, it will also impact the outcome of other disorders potentially
affected by oxalate, including CKD and its progression, progression of cyst
growth in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease, kidney disease-
associated cardiovascular diseases, and poor renal transplant survival.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase II project aims to develop the oral route
component of an innovative drug delivery system using peptide-loaded NPs for
localized and sustained delivery of novel therapeutic peptides to the intestinal
mucosa to address oxalate-related disorders. This project will: (1) Develop and
characterize multiple NPs formulations. (2) Ensure that the peptide-loaded NPs
are largely delivered to the small and large intestines, but not to the stomach.
(3) Confirm that the NPs have no cellular toxicity in vitro. (4) Confirm that
NPs significantly reduce plasma and urinary oxalate levels in hyperoxalemia and
hyperoxaluric mice without causing significant in vivo toxicity, and achieving
no or minimal systemic absorption. (5) Obtain initial safety data for the
peptide-loaded NP via an exploratory preclinical toxicology study. At least one
of the developed NP formulations should deliver the peptides to the small and
large intestines, present no significant cellular toxicity in vitro, and reduce
plasma and urinary oxalate levels without causing significant in vivo
toxicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.