* 2200867
* Three-Dimensional Mirror Symmetry for Characteristic Classes on Bow Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Richard Rimanyi, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2025
* USD 130,000.00

The geometric manifestation of solving systems of polynomial equations involves
studying the "shape" of all solutions of such a system, which is called an
algebraic variety. Most of the points of an algebraic variety are smooth in the
sense that their neighborhoods look like n-dimensional linear spaces. However,
certain points called “singularities” do not have this smooth property, for
example the vertex of a cone. There is a plethora of complicated possible
singularities, and their understanding has applications in physics, robotics,
and economics. A key tool to study singularities is assigning calculable
discrete invariants (for example numbers or sequences of numbers) to them in
such a way that the discrete invariant encodes some of the geometric properties
of the singularity. On type of these discrete invariants are what are called
"characteristic classes," which come in many variants and flavors. Remarkably, a
recently discovered characteristic class of singularities, called a "stable
envelope," also appears in string theory in theoretical physics. The relation to
string theory suggests a so-far hidden symmetry of characteristic classes.
Namely, it predicts that there are pairs of seemingly unrelated algebraic
varieties whose stable envelopes of singularities coincide. The main goal of the
project is to prove this statement in its mathematical setting and derive
geometric applications. The project will provide research training opportunities
for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PI will generalize the concept
of stable envelopes from Nakajima quiver varieties to a broader class of
varieties called Cherkis bow varieties. The algebraic combinatorics underlying
the geometric study of bow varieties are NS5-D5 brane configurations, which are
more complete than that of quiver varieties or homogeneous spaces. This fact
gives rise to new operations on bow varieties: Hanany-Witten transition and
combinatorial 3d mirror symmetry. The PI will utilize these operations to build
a Hall algebra structure on the elliptic cohomology of bow varieties,
generalizing cohomological and K theoretic Hall algebras of quivers. The
elliptic Hall algebra structure complements the geometric study of
singularities, and the two together will be used to organize an inductive proof
of a three-dimensional mirror symmetry statement. The cohomological and
K-theoretic limits provide coincidences among motivic invariants of
singularities. Dimension count arguments of the same elliptic Hall algebra
promise Donaldson-Thomas invariants, as well as identities among elliptic
functions that generalize quantum dilogarithm
identities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.