* 2200426
* Excellence in Research: Lanthanide doped nanoparticles for sensitive photodetectors of short-wave radiation
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Darayas Patel, Oakwood College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2025
* USD 385,588.00

Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;Compact, rugged, and sensitive detectors of short
wavelength radiation (ultraviolet and X-rays) are critical to advance a variety
of applications, including imaging, monitoring atmospheric gases, medical
applications, and and homeland security. Existing UV detectors use vacuum
photomultiplier tubes, which are neither rugged nor durable, whereas compact and
rugged photodiodes are blind to UV and X-rays. This research project addresses
this need by focusing on lanthanide-doped perovskite nanoparticles that capture
UV and X-ray photons and convert them into easily-detected visible and near
infrared photons. The combination of lanthanide-doped perovskite nanoparticles
with silicon avalanche photodetectors is expected to work as sensitive short-
wavelength photodetectors capable of sensing a few photons with a speed as high
as one photon in 10 nanoseconds. Engaging and retaining women and
underrepresented minorities (URMs) in the sciences is a systemic challenge the
team addresses through a variety of complementary efforts. The project
encompasses pre-college outreach programs targeting K-12 students and the
broader community, fostering exposure and excitement about the science
conducted. Undergraduates will obtain research experience preparing them for
graduate school through a set of initiatives, especially focusing on URM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop
lanthanide-doped metal halide perovskite nanocrystals capable of serving as
efficient scintillators that down-convert short wavelength (SWL) radiation to
visible and near-IR radiation and enable sensitive detection of SWL radiation by
compact and rugged means. The primary goal of the project is to investigate the
feasibility of the approach based on integrating such scintillators with silicon
avalance photodiodes (APDs) and to demonstrate functioning of the proposed
sensitive SWL photodetector. The technical objectives are to synthesize and
characterize perovskite nanoparticles doped with lanthanides, integrate
nanocomposite films into SWL photodetectors. The project will provide guidance
and training for female and underrepresented minority undergraduate students
through their participation in the project. Efficient down conversion will be
acehived due to the excellent ability of perovskite nanoparticles to capture UV
and X-ray photons, and transfer radiationlessly the energy of their exciton
states to the embedded Ln ions that re-emit in visible and NIR. Strong
scintillation induced by X-rays will be due to short stopping range of the X-ray
photons resulting from combined action of lead and lanthanide ions. The plan for
conducting the proposed activities includes all the steps from synthesis of the
NPs to integration with silicon APDs and testing the SWL sensors under exposure
to UV and X-ray sources. The plan rationale is based on the approaches presented
in the literature and from the PI’s own research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.