* 2200515
* Research Initiation Award: A Boltzmann Model for Multi-Scale and Multi-Physics/Chemistry Transport Phenomena in Porous Media
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Leitao Chen, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 04/30/2025
* USD 298,715.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) who are building new
research programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Tennessee State University (TSU) facilitates the development of a
revolutionary simulation model for some of the most challenging fluid transport
problems that are ubiquitous in many scientific and engineering fields, and,
therefore, has tremendous potential impacts on technology, the environment,
health, and economy. This project is also dedicated to the involvement of
undergraduate students in the research in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) fields with a unique mentoring plan. In addition, this
project promotes the education on scientific computing for undergraduate
students at TSU and other HBCUs by merging math, coding, and engineering, in
order to improve their math and coding literacy which is essential for them to
pursue a STEM career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on a challenging
research problem, which is a special type of fluid transport phenomena,
characterized by three unique features: multi-scale, porous media, and multi-
physics/multi-chemistry. A representative problem is the transport of
electrolytes in the porous electrodes of redox flow batteries, which is utilized
as a case study to benchmark the developed simulation model as well as to
demonstrate its potential. The goal of this project is to develop a specialized
simulation model with the high-performance computing capability based on a new
methodology that solves the Boltzmann equation with the finite volume method,
which allows a convenient adoption of fully unstructured grids to precisely
reconstruct the complex three-dimensional boundaries rendered by porous media.
The novelty of this project is that it provides a specifically tailored
simulation model that demonstrates a superiority in computational performance
(defined as accuracy normalized by associated computational cost) over existing
methodologies for the multi-scale and multi-physics/multi-chemistry fluid
transport phenomena in porous media. This new model can accelerate the
understanding of the selected research problem. With further development, it can
become a general simulation tool for the modeling of any transport phenomenon
beyond fluid transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.