* 2200648
* Multigenerational Persistence of Environmental Exposure
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Huan Li, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2024
* USD 443,186.00

Air quality in the United States has improved substantially over time, yet there
remains a systematic pattern where the most polluted neighborhoods are racial
minority or low-income neighborhoods. This differential exposure to pollution
persists from one generation to another. Using four decades of individual-level
data and modern economic theory, this project will: document the persistence of
racial gaps in exposure to air pollution, examine whether and to what extent the
disproportionate exposure of socio-economically disadvantaged populations
transmits across generations, and analyze the sources of this intergenerational
differences in pollution exposure and how these differences affect racial
differences in adulthood economic decisions and outcomes. In addition, the study
will also collect oral histories from those who have lived in polluted
neighborhoods to document their experiences. The results of this study will
inform public policy and suggest a way out of the low environmental quality trap
that underprivileged communities face. The results of this research project will
also provide important inputs into environmental policy generally, thus
improving the health of U.S. citizens, especially those at the lower end of the
socio-economic ladder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project extends the canonical
spatial sorting model to study the observed intergenerational persistence of
differences in racial exposure to environment pollution. As an extension of the
theoretical and empirical analysis, the project will collect oral history of
people in African American communities with lived experiences in areas of
environmental pollution and how these experiences have affected their lives.
This part of the project will be implemented in 14 North Carolina counties that
are associated with the 1982 North Carolina Polychlorinated Biphenyl (PCB)
Protest. The PIs will qualitatively analyze these oral histories to inform the
empirical specification of the model as well as to motivate alternative policy
simulations. This project contributes to the extensive literature on
intergenerational mobility, as several economic and epidemiological studies have
suggested that elevated pollution exposure can translate into health,
educational, and eventually income inequality. The results of this research
project will provide important inputs into environmental policy, thus improving
the health of U.S. citizens, especially those at the lower end of the socio-
economic ladder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.