* 2200844
* Finite Group Actions on Free Resolutions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Federico Galetto, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2025
* USD 123,410.00

Solving systems of polynomial equations is a central problem in algebra with
many practical applications. The solutions of a system can be regarded as a
geometric object, called a variety, leading to a fruitful interplay between
algebra and geometry. Varieties can be described by means of numerical
parameters, such as their dimension, a measure of size, their degree, a measure
of complexity, and more generally their so-called Betti numbers, which provide
additional information of algebraic and geometric significance. In this project,
the PI aims to describe as explicitly as possible the Betti numbers of some
well-known systems of polynomial equations by making use of the inherent
symmetries of the underlying varieties. The study will rely on computer
algorithms previously developed by the PI for this specific purpose. The grant
provides support for graduate students, who will be involved in collecting and
analyzing of data, thus providing newer generations of scientists with a diverse
background an opportunity to experience hands-on research in addition to
learning some advanced mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to describe the minimal free resolutions of two families of ideals in
polynomial rings stable under finite group actions. The first family contains
toric ideals of complete graphs and is relevant in the context of combinatorial
commutative algebra. The second family contains De Concini-Procesi ideals, which
arise in algebraic topology and geometric representation theory. These two
families of ideals have, for various reasons, generated significant interest in
the literature, and share some traits that will make this research program more
relevant. First, their minimal free resolutions and Betti numbers are not fully
understood, and this project will make use of novel computational techniques
along with representation theory to further current understanding. Second, both
are families of non-monomial ideals; this is significant because current
techniques for minimal free resolutions with finite group actions are limited to
monomial ideals with the action of a symmetric group permuting the variables. In
summary, this project will provide new insight into specific families of ideals,
while offering an opportunity to develop more widely applicable techniques for
constructing resolutions with finite group actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.