* 2200589
* Excellence in Research: Optimal Transport and Freeform Refractive Surfaces in Geometric Optics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Henok Mawi, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2025
* USD 247,328.00

The project aims to study mathematical models to design freeform (asymmetric)
optical surfaces (lenses) that direct light intensity distribution in a
controlled and efficient way. This project has vast applications in the design
of optical components in antennas, solar panels, medical devices, military
equipment, and many other related areas. The research will help reduce the
amount and size of optical components required in optical devices, thereby
improving the manufacturing of lighter, more compact, and more efficient optical
systems. The project will enhance the research infrastructure at Howard
University and provide training opportunities for students from underrepresented
groups in interdisciplinary research activities that intertwine mathematics,
physics, and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to study
geometric optics problems that formulate relationships between the intensities
of light before and after transport via reflection or refraction. This research
will introduce new numerical approaches and further discuss analytical aspects
of solutions to problems related to refractive optical surfaces in both
isotropic and anisotropic media. The numerical techniques will be developed by
exploiting entropic optimal transport, which involves adding a penalty term to
make the problem convex and also by using Minkowski-type arguments. The
analytical investigation will be conducted by using the intrinsic geometric
properties of the redirecting surfaces. Additionally, techniques from the
closely related nonlinear partial differential equations known as generated
Jacobian equations, one of which is the Monge-Ampere equation, will be used for
further analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.