* 2200882
* Colloid dynamics in porous media induced by fluid flow and solute transport
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Sangwoo Shin, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 10/31/2023
* USD 125,977.00

The goal of this proposal is to identify how the motion of colloidal particles
in a porous medium is affected by fluid flow and the presence of dissolved
solutes in the fluid. Variations in solute concentrations can influence the
motion of the colloidal particles through a random network of pores or channels.
This project will use microfluidic experiments to explore the mechanisms by
which solute concentration gradients affect the motion of colloidal particles,
which can lead to accumulation of the particles and blockage of certain channels
within the porous matrix. The results of this research will be directly relevant
to important industrial and naturally-occurring processes such as chemical
enhanced oil recovery (EOR). Chemical EOR processes, including surfactant
flooding, polymer flooding, and low-salinity water flooding, have significantly
enhanced production from oil reservoirs in the US. EOR often involves flow of
colloidal suspensions through a porous subsurface containing variations in
chemical concentrations of various solutes. The non-uniform chemical environment
in the porous medium may cause the colloidal particles to undergo a strong
directed motion, which may lead to unexpected colloid dynamics and may influence
EOR performance and efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two aims of the project
are to characterize quantitatively colloid diffusiophoresis in flow junctions
and to investigate diffusiophoresis and Marangoni propulsion of oil drops in
porous media for chemical EOR processes. The project will include experimental
studies of the solute-gradient-induced colloid motion for various parameters.
Microfluidic tools will be used to precisely control experimental conditions,
and fluorescence microscopy combined with 3D high-speed imaging will be used to
measure colloid motion. The experiments will mimic realistic conditions for
chemical EOR processes so that results elucidate effects of solute transport on
the motion of hard and soft colloids in random porous media. Numerical
simulations and reduced-order analytical models will complement the experimental
observations and provide further insights into the solute-gradient-induced
colloid dynamics. The combination of microfluidics experiments and numerical
modeling provides a compelling opportunity for interdisciplinary research and
education in transport phenomena. The research activities will be integrated
into an educational effort directed toward engineering students as well as an
outreach effort aimed at encouraging under-represented minority students,
especially native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders, to study microfluidics and
transport phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.