* 2200319
* Collaborative Research: Comparative genomics and physiology to discover integrated mechanisms that support phenotypic plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Fernando Galvez, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 504,339.00

Most species are adapted to live in relatively stable environments. Rare are
those species that tolerate environments that fluctuate rapidly and severely.
Little is known about what drives the physiological flexibility needed for
species to survive and thrive in highly variable environments. This research
will use genetic and physiological tools and approaches developed for North
American killifish to gain an integrative understanding of how extreme
physiological flexibility is assembled and how it works. Within the Fundulus
genus, some species of fish are highly flexible and can adjust to huge extremes
in environmental salinity, but others are much less flexible. High-flexibility
species are compared to closely-related low-flexibility species, for multiple
pairs of species. This comparative approach is powerful for distinguishing what
makes high-flexibility species unique. Results should provide new insights into
how features of the genome (variation in gene sequences, variation in genetic
control elements, variation in gene content) may enable or disable physiological
adjustments to extreme environmental change. One hallmark of global climate
change is an increase in the frequency and severity of environmental
variability, and this variability is posing yet another threat to the global
biodiversity crisis. This research should provide insights into what makes some
species more or less likely to do well in the face of environmental variability.
This project is jointly funded by Integrative Ecological Physiology and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genomic infrastructure that supports
physiological flexibility, an important form of phenotypic plasticity, is likely
complex and multigenic but is poorly understood. Most aquatic species live in
osmotically stable fresh or salty (marine) waters which vary little in salinity,
where residents exhibit narrow limits for accommodating salinity changes and are
considered “stenohaline”. In contrast, euryhaline species can adjust their
physiology to accommodate large changes in salinity; they survive and thrive in
osmotically dynamic environments such as estuaries. Euryhalinity is an
extraordinary and important form of phenotypic plasticity. Comparative
experiments that integrate physiological, transcriptomic, and structural genomic
information, will be used to reveal the mechanistic infrastructure that supports
euryhalinity. The Fundulus genus of killifish includes many species of
euryhaline estuarine specialists. Multiple independent radiations into fresh
water have also resulted in repeated losses of euryhalinity. Physiological
challenge experiments will be used, within a phylogenetic-comparative framework
where independently evolved losses of plasticity in three clades provide
replicated opportunities to infer the mechanisms that support plasticity that is
ancestrally retained. Experiments will test the hypothesis that euryhalinity is
underpinned by gene regulatory flexibility maintained and constrained by natural
selection. This work will illuminate the mechanistic basis of a trait that is
both physiologically important, and important in the history of vertebrate
diversification. Since euryhalinity is also a compelling example of phenotypic
plasticity, findings will contribute to the elaboration of a growing general
theory of the mechanistic and molecular-genetic basis of phenotypic plasticity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Integrative Ecological
Physiology and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.