* 2200640
* Excellence in Research: Artificial Intelligence Aided Metasurface Design and Application in Next Generation of Cellular Communication Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Imtiaz Ahmed, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 423,293.00

The radio propagation environment is typically viewed as an uncontrolled and
unpredictable aspect in the current wireless communication system paradigm.
Because of the unpredictable changes in the radio environment, signal
transmission encounters reflections, diffractions, and scattering before
arriving at the receiver with numerous copies of attenuated and delayed
components. This project will explore how to design an intelligent reflecting
surface (IRS) comprised of metamaterials to deploy in the next generation of
cellular communication systems to tune the wireless environment and hence
achieve intelligent and reconfigurable wireless channels to increase network
throughput and energy efficiencies. IRS is typically a flat surface made of a
large number of passive reflecting elements (PREs), each of which can generate a
regulated change in the amplitude and phase of the incoming signal separately.
As a result, electromagnetic waves emanating from the transmitter nodes can be
reflected by IRS in a manner that allows them to take advantage of a more
favorable propagation environment en route to the reception nodes. By densely
deploying IRSs in wireless networks and intelligently coordinating their
reflections, wireless systems can increase the likelihood of achieving a line-
of-sight (LOS) propagation path between transmitter and receiver nodes while
minimizing the impact of co-channel and inter-cell interference and optimizing
the energy efficiency of the communication system. However, a successful
accomplishment of an IRS-aided communication system requires considering
coherent design factors jointly from wireless communications and electromagnetic
modeling of devices. The results and analysis conducted in this project will
allow electromagnetics, multiphysics, and wireless communication researchers to
extend the developed idea to application scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will design, develop, and analyze artificial intelligence (AI) driven
innovative approaches to address fundamental challenges inherent to baseband
signal processing at transmitter and receiver for IRS-aided communication
systems. The capability of reconfigurable technologies and novel metasurfaces
will be integrated to design and apply new IRS devices by developing a
comprehensive and innovative numerical modeling and simulation framework. To
enhance the network throughput for an IRS-aided next-generation cellular
communication system, cross-functional resource allocation schemes will be
proposed by considering design constraints from wireless communications and
device physics. Both narrowband and wideband channels will be regarded to
conduct this systematic investigation, and novel design approaches will be
proposed that perform close to theoretical performance while addressing
practical design constraints. The proposed methods will be implemented in a
simulation framework and compared with the state-of-the-art approaches to show
their effectiveness in wireless communication systems. These research works will
encourage efficient system design and algorithm development for the next
generation of cellular communication systems and assist product and algorithm
engineers and researchers utilizing IRS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.