* 2200130
* Algebraic Structures in Topology Conference, San Juan, Puerto Rico
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Manuel Rivera, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 03/31/2023
* USD 42,951.00

This award provides support for the conference “Algebraic structures in
topology” in San Juan, Puerto Rico, to be held on May 30th-June 3rd, 2022. The
conference will focus on recent developments in algebraic topology and its
applications to geometric topology, mathematical physics, and algebraic
geometry. This event aims to bring together mathematicians from diverse
subfields in algebraic topology, who use similar techniques to achieve different
goals and foster new ideas and perspectives. The conference will feature plenary
talks, mini-courses, contributed talks, and time for informal interactions.
Another major goal of the conference is outreach to mathematicians from
unrepresented racial and ethnic groups who may feel isolated from the larger
mathematical community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The guiding theme of the
conference is the use of algebraic and categorical techniques to better
understand the homotopy theory of spaces, the algebraic topology of manifolds,
and algebro-geometric objects. The following are among the topics that will be
highlighted at the conference: the theory of operads, equivariant homotopy
theory, higher category theory and derived algebra, Hochschild homology theory
of structured algebras, and algebraic K-theory. More information is available at
the conference website
https://sites.google.com/view/algebraicstructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.