* 2200377
* Research Initiation Award: Implementing the Next-Generation IoT Ecosystem with AI Capabilities
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Ahmed Ahmed, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 06/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career
faculty at Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new
research programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It
is expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness and improve research and teaching at the home
institution. This award to Prairie View A &amp; M University supports faculty
and student research to re-design and advance the architectures of innovative
Internet of Things (IoT) ecosystems by integrating Artificial Intelligence (AI)
to enhance their capabilities and effectiveness in dealing with complex real-
world scenarios. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will perform fundamental
research to enable the creative design and implementation of intelligent sensing
ecosystem architectures. Specifically, this project will examine key properties
of IoT ecosystems, and develop a runtime environment and sensing platform with
AI capabilities to better collect, transfer, aggregate and analyze the
tremendous amount of sensor data generated daily. There are three main
challenges to be addressed by this project: (1) Understanding and representing
the fundamental mechanisms underlying IoT ecosystems; (2) Enhancing the
programmability and deployment of such systems by using a unified platform that
can be rapidly extended and customized for a range of different sensors; and (3)
Collecting and analyzing sensor data from different sensors deployed remotely
for automated AI-enabled decision-making based on analyzed/observed data. This
project will create new opportunities for STEM students at Prairie View A &amp;
M University to engage in research, equipping them with interdisciplinary
knowledge, thereby enhancing their competitiveness for the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.