* 2200438
* Collaborative Research: Adapted Measure of Math Engagement: Modifying a self-report measure of Black and Latina/o middle school students’ math engagement
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2022,09/30/2022
* Rachel Gordon, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 09/30/2022
* USD 0.00

Mathematics is a critical gatekeeper for access and success in STEM; thus,
failing to engage Black and Latina/o students in mathematics classes cascades
into limited individual mobility and widened societal inequity. To date,
research and measures of Black and Latina/o student engagement are often based
on deficit-based perspectives, which fail to capture the many important ways
that mathematics can be engaging for these students. For example, most measures
of math engagement do not highlight how Black and Latina/o students often
overcome racially/ethnically-rooted stereotypes and discrimination in
mathematics, nor do the measures acknowledge Black and Latina/o students’
culturally-rooted funds of knowledge. To address these concerns, this project
focuses on developing the Adapted Measure of Math Engagement (AM-ME), a
culturally sustaining self-report measure of Black and Latina/o middle school
students’ mathematics engagement. By developing a measure of mathematics
engagement that centers Black and Latina/o students’ experiences, this project
offers insight into creating inclusive mathematics learning environments and
culturally sustaining understandings of what it means to be engaged in
mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is guided by
interdisciplinary, strengths-based and equity perspectives, and is being
conducted in deep partnership with practitioners and Black and Latina/o students
in six racially diverse, urban middle schools. The project will (1)
qualitatively investigate the experiences of Black and Latina/o middle school
students’ engagement in mathematics, and (2) develop and produce evidence of
validity and reliability for a multi-dimensional measure of Black and Latina/o
student mathematics engagement. It is anticipated that that the measure and
results will have broader impact as they may transfer to other contexts,
particularly other urban schools. Additionally, the critical participatory
action research design has a direct impact on promoting diversity in the field
of STEM research as Black and Latina/o students gain experience conducting
research and practitioners grow in their capacity to authentically listen to and
uplift Black and Latina/o voices. By prioritizing and uplifting the voices of
Black and Latina/o students through collaborative meaning-making and using
rigorous strategies from modern measurement theory, the project advances
knowledge about equitable mathematics learning experiences for Black and
Latina/o middle-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by
the Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) which seeks to significantly
enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12
program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.