* 2200622
* EIR: A Unified Theoretical Framework for Zero Trust Architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Onyema Osuagwu, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Zero Trust, has generally been explained as a network in which capabilities and
access among all of the participating systems are highly regulated or require a
sufficiently high level of proof before permissions are granted for any period
of time. As reassuring as these words are for many in this space, the
implementation of such networks and architecture lags due to the lack of an
rigorous ground truth for success. In other words, if you ask any number of
people to show you how they ”implemented” their Zero Trust environment with the
same initial specifications you will get at a minimum number of responses with
varying levels of verifiable security. The multiple responses are not the
problem in this case as much as the variability in the level of security due to
the ill-posed question of trust in these systems. The failure to develop true
resilience is strongly related to the lack of a unified theoretical framework
born out of fundamental cybersecurity experiments and results. This work will
first frame and identify the appropriate scale for the question of trust in the
cybersecurity domain. The education and research goals of this project are
designed to strongly support the engagement in the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research task is to do the research
and development of the mathematical rules and bounds, e.g., first-order logic,
formal methods, etc. to accurately encapsulate all the requirements needed to
achieve a “True Zero Trust” architecture for a networked environment. The second
research challenge is to prototype, build, test and attack these “True Zero-
Trust” networks and compare them to other standards. These research tasks
require accurate, detailed, and reproducible testbed construction and validation
paired with the architecture. They will use Amazon Web Services to design and
test initial architectures across four phases. The third research challenge is
to verify the “True Zero-Trust” architecture at scale during varied attack
scenarios under high utilization stress. The fourth research challenge is to
develop an “Equation of State” for these systems that provides a “Figure of
Merit” when judging the security of these systems. This work is strongly aligned
with the CISE directorate’s mission in particular the CCF program’s Foundations
of Emerging Technology thrust and the SaTC program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.