* 2200448
* New constraints on 14C reservoirs around the Antarctic Peninsula and the Southern Ocean based on historically-harvested whale bones
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Alexander Simms, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 58,915.00

Much of our understanding of ice sheet behavior due to warming temperatures is
based on how past ice sheets responded to warming associated with the end of the
last ice age, 20,000 years ago. These studies rely on accurate dating of
features left behind by the past ice sheets. The most commonly used method for
determining the age of these features over the last ~40,000 years is radiocarbon
dating. However, radiocarbon dating is not without its nuances, which are
particularly pronounced around Antarctica. One of these nuances is determining
the offset between the materials measured radiocarbon age and its true age. The
purpose of this research is to use historically harvested whale bones from the
Antarctic Peninsula, whose age is independently known, to determine that offset.
A better understanding of that offset will allow more accurate estimates of past
rates of ice sheet and sea-level changes across the Antarctic Peninsula over the
last ~40,000 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of our understanding of how the
Antarctic Ice Sheet will respond to future climate changes is based on studies
of its past behavior. Those studies often rely on reconstructing its evolution
since the Last Glacial Maximum, 20,000 years ago. Radiocarbon dating is the most
commonly used method of dating Quaternary deposits for these reconstructions.
However, the use of radiocarbon in Antarctica is hampered by some of the largest
and least constrained radiocarbon reservoirs on the planet. The purpose of this
research is to determine the radiocarbon reservoir for whale bones. This
research will leverage an existing collection of 25 whale bones used for prior
DNA research to determine the late Holocene radiocarbon reservoir for the
Antarctic Peninsula. The whale bones are from specimens harvested at the turn of
the 20th century prior to nuclear testing in the 1950s. Thus, their radiocarbon
age will provide valuable new constraints on the radiocarbon reservoir for
shallow waters around Antarctica. An added benefit of this approach is that
given the DNA determination, we will also be able to determine if that
radiocarbon reservoir varies across three species of whales, thus testing the
common assumption that the radiocarbon reservoir does not vary significantly
across different species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.