* 2200695
* Developing a Framework for Assessing Identity Development, Retention and Success of STEM Social and Behavioral Scientists (STEM-SBS): The Case of Sociology
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Catherine Mobley, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 06/30/2025
* USD 592,430.00

The project examines STEM social and behavioral scientistsâ€™ identity formation
to produce results that can be used in designing programs to attract a larger
and more diverse pool of students to these disciplines. The study investigates
factors that influence the development of STEM social scientists who will engage
in transdisciplinary scholarship, whether some programs do so more extensively
and more effectively than others, and in what ways and why. It provides a
qualitative focus on student identity narratives and the experiences of
practicing sociologists employed in a variety of STEM social and behavioral
science (STEM-SBS) research careers. The research on identity development of
STEM-SBS students and professionals can inform career development models and
practices for this student population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will explore the following research questions: (1) Why do sociology students and
professionals choose to pursue a sociology degree and career? (2) How do
sociology students and practicing sociologists conceptualize their professional
and science identity? (3) What factors contribute to or hinder retention,
success, and identity development in sociology? (4) How do other social
identities (e.g., race, ethnicity, gender, etc.,) intersect with and influence
the development and enactment of professional and science identities? (5) How do
competing demands and differential access to opportunities shape entry and
retention of a diverse student population into sociology? They will investigate
the research questions through theoretical triangulation and employ a
qualitative cross-sectional research design to explore identity formation of
sociology undergraduate and graduate students and sociologists employed in
diverse research settings. The study will enhance knowledge about the temporal
nature of identity formation and broaden understanding of the institutional and
societal context of STEM-SBS education and professional
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the EHR Core Research
(ECR) program that supports fundamental research that addresses STEM learning
and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.