* 2200681
* Excellence in Research: Improving the Integrity and Security of Integrated Circuits Through Effective Detection of Malicious Alterations
* CSE,CNS
* 11/15/2022,10/31/2025
* Mohamed Chouikha, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 10/31/2025
* USD 515,208.00

In todayâ€™s information age every aspect of our lives depends on technology. In
the core of the hardware that runs this technology is the integrated circuit
(IC). While integrated circuits (ICs) are ubiquitously deployed in modern
electronic/information systems that process critical data in our daily lives,
the design and fabrication of these ICs however are becoming increasingly
vulnerable to malicious activities and alterations due to the globalization of
electronic design supply chain (i.e., most of the ICs used in electronic systems
are now fabricated outside the United States). An adversary (untrusted foundry)
could potentially subvert the fabrication process itself by implanting a
hardware Trojan into the IC mask to disable and/or destroy a system at some
future time or the Trojan may serve to leak confidential/sensitive information
covertly to the adversary. Today, Trojans can be cleverly hidden by the
adversary to make it extremely difficult for chip test/validation processes
(since the adversary has complete access to test information as manufacturing
tests are typically performed at the chip fabrication site). These
vulnerabilities have raised serious concerns regarding possible threats to many
critical systems including military, financial, telecommunications, energy, and
transportation infrastructures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project
is to define a post-manufacturing test step (prior to electronics system
integration) to increase trustworthiness of the ICs fabricated at offshore
facilities to validate the conformance of the chip with its original
functionality and performance specification. Specifically, this project will
analyze circuit delays as a method to detect and locate hardware Trojans and
develop novel methods such as clock frequency sweeping for targeting Trojans in
presence of process variations. To increase efficiency, the planned research
activity will be to develop an on-chip measurement technique to target paths
missed or short paths not testable by the clock sweeping method to detect
Trojans. This proposed two complementary approaches will effectively detect and
localize all types of hardware Trojans. Other planned research activities
include implementation of different types of hardware Trojans on field
programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) and development of statistical analysis methods
for the collected silicon data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.