* 2200673
* Excellence in Research: Privacy preserved data fusion for personalized recommendation in an Edge-assisted IoT smart health network
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Madhuri Siddula, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 08/31/2024
* USD 271,557.00

Remote patient health monitoring systems have been around for quite a while but
only recently did the concept of smart health monitoring systems gain
popularity. With the deterioration in people's health and increase in mortality
rate, researchers are always looking for ways to provide more support to the
patients by improving critical delays in responding to a life-threatening event,
incorrect medications, and day-to-day improvements that can be done to elongate
patient's health. Given that the numbers of devices connected to the internet by
the people are growing rapidly, health insurance companies see this as an
opportunity to help people with their care. The rise of wearable and implantable
devices in healthcare provides patients and providers with remote diagnostic
tools, further reducing the need for expensive care. This project will focus on
combining data from various sources, often referred to as data fusion, to
provide patients with more accurate prescriptions, treatment, and suggestions to
improve their health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
investigate and develop a framework that collects and merges data from various
smart health sensors to predict user behavior and alert concerned authorities
for emergencies. This framework allows the server to collect the context of the
user health without violating user privacy. Researchers would use not only
user's health sensors that are used on a daily basis but also appropriate data
from hospitals, labs, and pharmacies to benefit the smart prediction system. The
specific objectives are to do the following:&lt;br/&gt;1. Design and develop an
application to collect sensor data and merge external databases&lt;br/&gt;2.
Design and develop framework to address missing values in the data&lt;br/&gt;3.
Design and develop framework to input context information in a privacy enhanced
fusion&lt;br/&gt;4. Investigate the trade-off between context-aware fusion Vs
non-context-aware fusion&lt;br/&gt;5. Design and develop framework to address
data dependencies for user behavior and generate personalized
results.&lt;br/&gt;The project also heavily depends on the involvement of
undergraduate and graduate students. Project-based learning approach will be
followed to integrate research and education for the students. Courses taught in
the department, including machine learning and big data, and development of new
courses, including mobile application development and Introduction to IoT, will
serve as significant contributors towards students
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.