* 2200907
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Implementation: Medium: Establishing Sustainable Ecosystem for Computational Molecular Science Training and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2021,01/31/2026
* Sapna Sarupria, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 01/31/2026
* USD 105,000.00

Computational research in molecular sciences increasingly involves electronic
structure theory, advanced sampling algorithms in molecular dynamics/Monte
Carlo, and data science and machine learning using increasingly high-end and
complex software and hardware resources. The lack of well-curated training
materials and hands-on training opportunities significantly inhibits the
progress of the next generation of computational molecular science
cyberinfrastructure (CI) users. This project will establish an institute focused
on serving the advanced cybertraining needs of the communities engaged in
computational molecular science and engineering (CMSE). To do so, this project
will bring together molecular sciences and engineering experts to address this
cybertraining challenge through a core committee, invited instructors, advisory
board, and community participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
establish an Institute for Computational Molecular Science Education, which will
be designed to create a sustainable ecosystem for training the next generation
of research workforce in molecular simulation CI. This project will include
educational modules for training in advanced computational tools while
bolstering fundamental understanding of underlying theoretical concepts. The
project will encompass summer/winter schools for hands-on training on advanced
computational techniques and enhancing peer networking for early-stage
researchers, web-based content to support training at a larger scale, and
curriculum and instructional materials for undergraduate and graduate courses to
support course development in CMSE. This project will train the next generation
of professionals in chemical engineering, molecular and materials science,
chemistry, and biophysics by providing critical tools in computational and data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.