* 2200366
* Synthesis and Assembly 2D Heterostructured Hybrid Stacks
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Vladimir Tsukruk, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 520,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Vladimir Tsukruk and Zhiqun Lin
of Georgia Institute of Technology will develop novel synthetic approaches to
two-dimensional nanosheets and study the assembly and properties of the
nanosheet stacks. Due to special Lego-like staggering of metal atoms and organic
molecular species with controlled gaps between individual layers, these 2D
stacks may possess useful ion transport, charge storage, and interfacial
chemical properties for energy storage applications as for example might find
application in lightweight battery technology. The research project will provide
interdisciplinary research training to graduate and undergraduate students,
including students from underserved groups. A life and career mini-workshop
series will be established to provide opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students to interact with and learn from the experience of
Professor Tsukrukâ€™s former students and post-docs working in industry, national
laboratories, and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
collaborative research project by the Tsukruk and Lin laboratories will focus on
the study of nanosheets of MXenes (with a general formula of Mn+1XnTx, where M
is a transition metal, X is carbon and/or nitrogen, Tx is the surface functional
group (e.g., OH, O or F), and n=1, 2 or 3) and metal oxides (V2O5, SnO2 and
NiO). The research team will develop synthetic approaches to MXene/MOx
nanosheets supported by organized reactive templates with oxidation stability,
gap control, and assembly abilities. The integration of polymers and organic
species with inorganic nanosheets may result in a controllable interlayer space
and increased ion accessibility and structural stability. Three major research
task of this project include: 1) synthesis of functionalized MXenes with
tailored surface chemistry, symmetry, and dimensions by focusing on the rational
design of heterostructured 2D MX/MOx binary and ternary stacks with
functionalized nanosheets as pre-programmed reactive templates; 2) assembly and
fabrication of both horizontal stacks and vertically aligned stacks composed of
organic-inorganic composite nanosheets; and 3) real-time monitoring of ion
transport by utilizing unique methods for in-situ neutron reflectivity and
grazing-angle wide-angle X-ray scattering with in-situ high-resolution scanning
probe microscopy for understanding fundamental characteristics of interfacial
chemistry, confined ion transport, ion-walls interactions, and organization-
transport relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.