* 2200484
* Research Initiation Award: Designing Synthetic Polyglycidol-based Polymeric Networks to Influence Cellular Behavior
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Dain Beezer, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 05/31/2025
* USD 299,997.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improve research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
interdisciplinary research proposed at Fisk University has the potential to
advance our understanding of the interactions between biological systems and
polymeric materials. Additionally, this project involves undergraduate students
from underrepresented minority groups in the Science Technology Engineering and
Mathematics fields. The interdisciplinary nature of this research will provide
integrated research training to undergraduate students from multiple
backgrounds, thereby exposing them to the multidisciplinary nature of state-of-
the art polymer chemistry research. The broader impact extends nationwide as
student participation in this project will further prepare them for
matriculation to top-ranked graduate degree programs and to careers in polymer
science and engineering or related fields, thereby diversifying the nationâ€™s
Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strategic engineering of biochemical and
biophysical properties into current hydrogel technologies has been met with
limited success, due in part to the scarcity of functional biocompatible
polymers and facile synthetic methodologies needed for the development of next-
generation synthetic biomaterials. The goal of this research is to test the
hypothesis that the chemical composition and network topology of polyglycidol-
based hydrogels can be easily tuned to present multiple biophysical and
biochemical cues simultaneously, which can then be used to regulate mesenchymal
stem cells attachment, proliferation, and differentiation. To accomplish this
goal, this project combines a selection of established synthetic protocols to
produce a new facile methodology for the synthesis of topologically and
compositionally unique polyglycidol-based hydrogels, unattainable with current
poly(ethylene glycol)-based methodologies. The research team first investigates
the influence of crosslink kinetics, network topology, and composition on the
viscoelastic properties of the hydrogel network, then access the behavior of
mesenchymal stem cells when incorporated into these polymeric networks, as a
function of polymer topology and composition, using molecular and cell biology
approaches. This approach allows the research team to establish structure-
property-activity relationships between the biochemical and biophysical
properties of the polymeric network and cellular responses. The facile
modification of polyether-based networks to include multiple biophysical and
biochemical properties represents a significant advance towards designing cell-
scaffolds that can be used to gain fundamental understanding of the synergistic
effects of these properties on cellular behavior, advancing the knowledge needed
to influence cellular processes with synthetic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.