* 2200163
* SBIR Phase II: A Blockchain Ecosystem for Encrypting Real World Data and Developing Artificial Intelligence to Optimize Pharmacy Prior Authorization
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Mark Stephenson, RED OAK STRATEGIC, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to significantly reduce administrative
inefficiency in pharmaceutical benefit management processing. The specific focus
is on prior authorization processing, where payers and prescribers must reach a
consensus on medical necessity. The project delivers a solution to optimize
prescription authorization and provide more comprehensive patient histories for
clinical authorization criteria fulfillment than other available products on the
current health technology market. Lack of efficient access to reliable patient
histories is the principal reason for delayed authorizations, resulting in
delayed care access. A 2022 survey showed 93% of physicians reported that prior
authorization often or always creates care delays; 82% reported delays that led
to treatment abandonment. A secure yet progressively decentralized patient data
transfer protocol would heighten transparency of clinical decision-making
processes and also increase opportunities for patient engagement during prior
authorization of medical prescriptions. Further, since administrative costs
increase the cost of benefits, which in turn increases the cost of care access,
the potential commercial impact is that payers who lower administrative costs
will be better positioned to offer higher reimbursement rates for a greater
range of quality treatment options, at increasingly lower
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to deliver a
distributed ledger with smart contracts specific to the domain of pharmaceutical
benefits. Since the cause of processing inefficiency lies with siloed and
incomplete patient histories, this protocol resolves administrative
inefficiencies through distributed ledger technology supporting fast and
compliant encrypted health data sharing among prescribers, payers, and patients.
Research objectives include: 1) automating criteria fulfillment to reduce
administrative waste; 2) leveraging machine learning to automate simpler case
reviews; and 3) designing a shared interorganizational processing protocol
capable of adapting to an introduction of revised clinical standards. Smart
contracts will be deployed to a distributed ledger infrastructure to formalize
and enforce clinical standards as well as contractually specified financial
rules and actuarial analyses at an interorganizational level. With smart
contracts embedded in the authorization process to automatically curate more
robust clinical histories over each prescription lifecycle, available real world
data meeting contractually specified quality standards for clinical review will
increase. Historical authorization data will feed back into incrementally
complex cases, advancing artificial intelligence for authorization decision
support. The expected result is improved real-time insight into clinical risk,
affording payers the ability to financially and strategically adapt to patient
needs with increasing precision and agility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.