* 2200423
* Research Initiation Award: Investigating the Kinetics of Vitrification and Crystallization of Electrospun Nanofibrous Carrier for Improved Stability and Drug Loading Capacity
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Nabila Shamim, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Research Initiation Awards support junior and mid-career faculty at Historically
Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research programs or
redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is expected that the
award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The research initiation
award to Prairie View A&amp;M University (PVAMU) supports research in the
Chemical Engineering department. The project aims to gain an in-depth knowledge
of crystallization at the nanoscale and develop new processing strategies to
make stable forms of nanofibers to deliver drugs. It enhances the research
capabilities of PVAMU and educates and trains new generations of minority and
women STEM professionals. In addition, this project has broader significance by
supporting hands-on research training and career development opportunities for
underrepresented minority students through strong mentor-mentee interactions and
advancing the chemical engineering research capability.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental knowledge of the research relates to the
crystallization process from the glassy state to understand the structural
transformation of nanofibers. The release pattern of the loaded drug from the
nanofibrous scaffold depends on the crystalline and amorphous arrangement of the
matrix. The challenge to understanding the nanoconfinement influence on
crystallization lies in the varying roles of kinetics and thermodynamics of
materials. The goal is to gain in-depth knowledge of the kinetics of
crystallization of electrospun nanofibers and obtain quantitative measurements
of the thermal properties such as glass transition temperature, crystallization
temperature, and melting temperature of polymeric scaffolds using Flash
Differential Scanning Calorimetry (FDSC). The project will (1) investigate the
influence of the vitrification path on cold crystallization above the glass
transition temperature and crystallization from the glassy state and (2)
characterize the crystallization process from the heat-flow curves and evaluate
the onset time (beginning of crystallization) and the peak time of the
crystallization (maximum crystallization rate) as a function of temperature. The
crystallization, or devitrification, from the glassy state uses the time-
temperature-transformation diagram as a framework for crystallizing materials
and glass transition temperature for amorphous materials. The successful
completion of project goals will contribute to loading a wide variety of soluble
drugs into the nanofibers for improving their bioavailability and attaining
their controlled release.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.