* 2200757
* Evaluating Effects of Automatic Feedback Aligned to a Learning Progression to Promote Knowledge-In-Use
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Leonora Kaldaras, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,054,480.00

This project examines the effect of an assessment system that automatically
generates feedback based on students’ open-ended assessment responses in
chemistry and physics consistent with a previously-developed learning
progression that describes the successively more complex understandings students
can develop about electrical interactions. The researchers will design and test
an automated assessment scoring system using machine learning. The scoring
system will provide individualized feedback to students and class summaries to
their teachers. This could then serve as a formative assessment to match an
existing high school physical science curriculum designed to meet performance
expectations in the Next Generation Science Standards. The project will then
examine whether the automatic feedback supports students’ learning outcomes and
their development with respect to the learning progression on electrical
interactions. The project promotes students’ knowledge of science by engaging
them in scientific practices, like modeling, with key disciplinary ideas and
using crosscutting concepts to make sense of compelling phenomena and by
providing real-time feedback to students. Deepening students’ knowledge of
science requires that they have opportunities to solve ill-structured, complex
problems and to create models of real-world phenomena. This project serves the
national interest by examining how to assess and support students in responding
to such problems in science through timely and productive feedback about their
performances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two research questions: 1)
What is the effect of automatic feedback on student performance along a
previously validated learning progression for physical science aligned with the
Next Generation Science Standards? 2) What is the effect of automatic feedback
on how students connect ideas to advance in learning progression levels? To
address these questions the project uses a curriculum aligned with the Next
Generation Science Standards and a validated learning progression for student
learning about how electrical interactions allow materials to stick together or
be repelled. The project has an automatic scoring tool that applies natural
language processing, image recognition, and supervised machine learning to score
students’ explanations and modeling responses. The project embeds the scoring
tool in a newly designed and developed web-portal to allow the integration of
curriculum materials, assessments, and automatic scoring with real-time
feedback. Students respond to formative assessment items embedded in the
curriculum; a subset of these are automatically scored by machine learning
algorithms. Students receive automatic feedback on their responses based on the
computer classification of their responses. Student learning, as defined by
advancement on learning progression levels, is measured using item response
theory on student performance on the summative assessments given at the start
and end of the curriculum units. The project also uses network and cluster
analyses for student responses to formative items to identify ways that students
respond to feedback and advance along the learning progression. Outcomes from
this project will provide guidance on how to provide appropriate feedback to
students on science performance assessment items and a machine learning based
tool for scoring model representations and explanations. The project will refine
an online curriculum for high school physical science composed of learning
materials, activities and assessment items, and produce an associated automatic
scoring process and individualized feedback. The Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.