* 2200447
* Research Initiation Award: Establishing the Fundamentals of Spin-Crossover Behavior and Catalysis in Single-Chain Nanoparticle Metallopolymers
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Daniel Ashley, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 287,605.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improve research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. Black
women are a significantly under-represented group in STEM, and one important way
to remedy this is to provide training and research opportunities to Black women
early in their academic careers. The research projects proposed here are carried
out by undergraduates at Spelman College: Black women who are working to
establish themselves in STEM. In addition to providing them with valuable
scientific training in the fields of computational science, inorganic chemistry,
and polymer chemistry, this research provides them with networking and
professional development opportunities as well. This research is focused on
using computational chemistry to model and better understand the behavior of
certain metal-containing polymers. The results of the research itself can also
have significantly beneficial impacts on human society by leading to the design
of improved catalysts and new multifunctional materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the overarching goals of polymer science is to
develop materials that have the functions and capabilities of proteins but are
not limited by their fragility or complex synthesis. A class of materials that
can potentially fulfill these criteria are single-chain nanoparticle (SCNP)
metallopolymers. It has been found that metal containing SCNPs can act as
effective catalysts for numerous reactions, suggesting that they could be
potential “artificial enzymes”. Using modern computational chemistry techniques
(chiefly density functional theory and QM/MM simulations) the mechanisms of
several catalytically active SCNP metallopolymers are being computed to help
elucidate the atomistic details of their reaction pathways and how these are
influenced by their polymeric features. Spin-state is also known to be an
important feature in metalloenzyme reactivity and could also affect the
mechanistic and catalytic behavior of SCNP enzyme mimics as well. Therefore,
systematic modeling of SCNP model systems is being performed to determine the
underlying principles that govern spin-state energetics in SCNP metallopolymers.
The goal of this work is to develop molecular design strategies for rationally
incorporating spin-crossover (SCO) behavior into SCNPs. By establishing a
roadmap for combining the inherently quantum mechanical state-switching
properties of SCO with the dynamic and modular behavior of SCNP systems, novel,
soft, multifunctional materials with protein-like characteristics can be
developed in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.