* 2200991
* EAGER: Magnetothermal Control of Cell Fates and Function
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Christopher Contag, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,999.00

The potential to guide cellular functions from a distance and direct the
regeneration of aged or damaged cells and tissues will have broad impacts in
biomedicine. Cells are the basic building blocks of life, and have incredible
capacity; developing the ability to control cellular functions will enable
rebuilding diseased and damaged tissues, replacing aged organs or directing
cells to hunt and eliminate cancer. As individuals, cells have tremendous
capability, and cells also have a natural ability to work together such that
with proper control of this team effort the abilities of cells can be amplified;
think of all 100 million single cells of your liver working together to help you
digest food, distribute nutrients to the body, store energy and purify your
blood. The functions of cells are regulated by circuits comprised of genes and
proteins that can be controlled with biological switches. However, to date, a
means of transferring a number of switches to cells and controlling them from a
distance has not been described. This project seeks to develop biological remote
controls with multiple switches that can be used to direct cells to perform
functions and work together. These remote control modules that are called,
“engineered organelles”, can be operated with magnetic fields. With magnetically
controlled engineered organelles, rapid flashes of magnetic fields can warm the
engineered organelle and turn on or off biological switches that control the
cells function. The switches are designed with multiplexing capability so
multiple functions can be controlled remotely. Engineered organelles are
similarly designed for controlling multiple biological functions within a cell
and direct them to work together. The multidisciplinary nature of the project
offers unique training opportunities for the next generation of STEM researchers
in the fields of bioengineering, physical sciences, synthetic biology and
regenerative medicine. The research team invites students from underrepresented
groups to participate in summer research via the successful ENSURE (EngiNeering
Summer Undergraduate Research Experience) program at Michigan State University
(MSU). In addition, the team develops workshops on engineered biological remote
controls for high school science teachers to enable them to update their
knowledge and refresh their curricula with state-of-the-art research. To enhance
public understanding and appreciation of what engineered organelles can
accomplish, the research team participates in the MSU Science Festival which
caters to the greater Lansing area. Results from the project will be integrated
into undergraduate course curricula and be incorporated into graduate courses in
bioengineering and synthetic biology to teach the new principle of using
engineered organelles to guide biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
at mimicking endosymbiogenesis and modify prokaryotic cells to create engineered
magnetoendosymbionts (eMEs) that can be controlled using alternating magnetic
fields (AMF). This involves engineering iron particle-coated or iron-containing
prokaryotes, magnetotactic bacteria (MTB), to act as magnetothermally regulated
pseudo-organelles. Magnetothermal control will activate eME to express mammalian
transcription (txn) factors directed to host cell nuclei for controlling host
gene expression. Genetic thermal switches will be engineered into MTB using
optical reporter genes as a readout, and deliver reporters from eME in the
cytoplasm to the nucleus of the host cell. The use of reporter genes will help
guide development of eME that encode mammalian txn factors to enable
reprogramming of differentiated macrophages into iPSCs and then into
hepatocytes. A chemically (mannose) regulated iPSC-generating operon will be
engineered expressing Oct3/4, Sox2, KLF4, c-Myc, txn factors for cellular
reprogramming and a thermally regulated hepatocyte-generating operon expressing
txn factors HNF4A, HNF1A. FoxA1 and FoxA3. Once demonstrated in the EES the
operons will be transferred to MTB and used these eMEs to program macrophages to
iPSCs and then to hepatocytes with magnetothermal
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Systems
and Synthetic Biology Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and the Engineering Biology and Health Cluster in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.