* 2200852
* Endoscopy in the Relative Langlands Program
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Winston Leslie, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 08/31/2025
* USD 161,716.00

The Langlands program of mathematics, at its core, is a vast collection of
conjectures which posits that two seemingly distinct areas of mathematics,
number theory and representation theory, are connected in deep ways via the
study of arithmetically rich functions known as L-functions. These functions
arise both in the study of solutions to polynomial equations and in the study of
highly-symmetric functions known as automorphic forms. A central insight is that
the symmetry properties of automorphic forms may be used to prove properties of
L-functions. The so-called relative Langlands program now gives us a conjectural
framework describing the relationship between L-functions and certain invariants
of automorphic forms known as periods. Analyzing these objects has combined
tools from harmonic analysis, algebraic geometry, representation theory, and
mathematical physics. In this project, the PI will develop and generalize a
novel theory, known as endoscopy, to further study these period integrals of
automorphic forms. The project will also support the PI as he mentors graduate
and undergraduate students, organizes conferences and workshops, and contributes
to the Automorphic Project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The relative trace formula is
a central tool in the relative Langlands program for studying automorphic
periods. Despite this, its theory has not yet been developed to meet the needs
of the broader theory, and it has largely been used in contexts with strong
multiplicity-one properties. This project will develop a novel theory of
endoscopy and stabilization for relative trace formulae. This can be seen as a
generalization of the Langlands-Shelstad-Kottwitz program of stabilization of
the Arthur-Selberg trace formula, and will open the technique of comparison of
trace formulas to periods where local multiplicity one may fail. The main goals
of the project are: (1) to pre-stabilize the elliptic part of the relative trace
formula associated to a large family of periods, (2) to develop a robust local
and global theory of endoscopy in this setting and consider the stabilization of
the relative analogues of the Hitchin fibration following the work of Ngo, (3)
establish the central harmonic-analytic conjectures to affect new global
comparisons of relative trace formulae in several cases of interest to
arithmetic applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.