* 2200387
* Excellence in Research: Structure and Dynamics of Exciplexes in Thermally Activated Delayed Fluorescence
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Seyhan Salman, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 07/31/2025
* USD 320,000.00

In this project, jointly funded by the Office of Integrative Activities (OIA),
the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A) program in the
Division of Chemistry, and the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) program
in the Division of Materials Research, Seyhan Salman and her research group at
Clark Atlanta University are using theoretical models and computational tools to
investigate the electronic structure and optical properties of organic light-
emitting diode (OLED) materials that exhibit thermally activated delayed
fluorescence (TADF). The project seeks to significantly advance the
understanding of excited-state complexes (exciplexes) that are responsible for
TADF based on their electronic structures and optical properties, as well as the
various transition processes associated with the excited complexes. Better
understanding of the fundamental structure and dynamics of such species will
help guide the development of efficient new materials for applications in
optical and electronic devices, including OLEDs, solar cells, field-effect
transistors, (bio)chemical sensors and storage devices. The project also
provides students from groups that are underrepresented in science with a
challenging research experience and professional training in computational
materials chemistry that will help prepare them for the STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics) workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main goal of this project is to elucidate the excited-state dynamics of
thermally activated delayed fluorescence (TADF) in exciplex-based OLED
materials. Such systems represent one of the most promising classes of materials
for realizing highly efficient OLEDs using organic molecules and could lead to a
significant reduction in fabrication costs associated with this technology. The
electronic structure and properties of exciplexes are influenced by the
intermolecular interactions in the exciplex state, which are markedly different
than that in the ground state and are relatively weak, leading to various
structural conformations. Further studies of exciplexes, including their
electronic structures, properties, and dynamics of charge and energy transfer
processes, are needed for their application in OLEDs. This project uses state-
of-the-art computational approaches with the goal of quantifying microscopic
parameters and establishing structure-property relationships in these materials.
The research team uses an integrated approach combining all-atom molecular
dynamics (AA-MD) simulations with density functional theory (DFT) calculations
to study the effect of the solid matrix environment on the emissive properties
of exciplexes. They are also examining the impact of energetic disorder (static
and dynamic components) on the efficiency of radiative decay processes. The
impacts of host-guest interactions and the dynamics of charge- and energy-
transfer processes are also included in the modeling scheme in order to account
for intersystem crossing and other radiative and non-radiative
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.