* 2200200
* EAGER: Investigating plant thermomorphogenesis using innovative miniature devices
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Yiwei Han, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,717.00

Global climate change has generated significant fluctuations in ambient growth
temperature, which profoundly influences diverse developmental, physiological,
and morphological responses in plants, including rapid stem and root elongation,
enhanced leafstalk growth and upward leaf bending, and early flowering.
Understanding how plants adjust their developmental programs in response to
temperature variations is central to improve plant fitness and sustain crop
productivity. Most temperature signaling mechanisms were revealed at the whole-
plant level, which averages distinct organ and cell types and thus inadvertently
creates a one-size-fits-all illusion of proposed thermal sensing and response
mechanisms. The proposed experiments are aimed at developing a novel miniature
device to study thermal sensing and responses at the organ and cell levels. This
new technology allows accurate induction and monitoring of thermal changes in a
specific organ, tissue, or cell, making it possible to differentiate distinct
thermal responses in various organs and cell types, and unveil the communication
mechanisms between different organs and cell layers during coordinated thermal
responses. The technology, not yet developed so is potentially risky in
execution, is expected to be high reward because it will revolutionize research
on thermal sensing and responses in various multicellular organisms and
unicellular colonials. This knowledge can be used to advance our understanding
of how global warming affects plant growth and development and provide the
knowledge basis that may facilitate scientists to generate climate-smart crops.
The project also offers opportunities in interdisciplinary research training for
students of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators of
this collaborative project plan to use thermoresponsive hypocotyl (the embryonic
stem) and root growth in the dicotyledonous plant Arabidopsis thaliana as a
model to establish the Miniature heater-assisted thermomorphogenetic study
(Miheats). The project comprises three components. First, a novel manufacturing
technique will be developed to produce low-cost, self-designed miniature heaters
that are scalable, durable, and flexible. Next, Miheats will be implemented in
planta and a series of phenotypic and genetic analyses of Arabidopsis seedlings
will be performed to evaluate the technical outcomes of Miheats. Finally,
transcriptomic and proteomic analyses will be employed to identify co-regulated
gene and protein modules in different organs/cells and unveil the homogeneity
and heterogeneity of organ- and cell-specific thermomorphogenetic signaling.
Therefore, the project addresses Understanding the Rules of Life and grows
Convergence Research by infusing advances in micro/nanofabrication and minimally
invasive approaches to create a new solver for investigating organ/cell-
autonomous and -nonautonomous reactions as well as interorgan and intercellular
communications in response to temperature fluctuations in multi-cellular
organisms. Further, this high risk / high reward project will improve the Vision
and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education core competencies, especially the
ability to tap into the interdisciplinary nature of science and the ability to
communicate and collaborate with other disciplines, of underrepresented minority
students at the University of Mississippi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.