* 2200857
* WoU-MMA: Studying Extreme Particle Accelerators with VERITAS and CTA
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Jordan Goodman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 10/31/2023
* USD 726,779.00

Gamma-ray astronomy impacts a broad range of key science questions, including
indirect dark matter detection, tests of fundamental physical laws, cosmological
studies, the jet physics associated with active galactic nuclei, gamma-ray
bursts, and micro-quasars, and galactic particle acceleration. This award
supports the gamma-ray group at Columbia University and Nevis Labs to focus
specifically on: (1) operating and optimizing the prototype Schwarzschild-Couder
Telescope (pSCT); (2) coordinating deployment of advanced analysis and
simulations development work for the imaging atmospheric Cherenkov telescope
array VERITAS; (3) studying the physics of central engines, their environments,
and relativistic jets; (4) understanding the acceleration and propagation of
Galactic cosmic rays; and (5) seeking out further time-domain opportunities for
VERITAS and in preparation for the next generation Cherenkov Telescope Array,
CTA. The mixture of fundamentally important questions and extreme physical
environments makes this field fascinating to the public. The Columbia and
Barnard groups share that excitement via public lectures, and mentoring area
high school students. They also provide vital research experiences to their
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These questions cut across high-energy
astrophysics, cosmology, and particle physics, studying the nature of dark
matter, the sources of the highest-energy cosmic rays, the interactions of
matter in the most extreme environments, and the cosmic history of star
formation. This project includes integrating pSCT into the VERITAS array, and
extending the advanced shower reconstruction and background discrimination
methods to low energy, short-time-scale exposures for GRBs and for large-zenith-
angle observations of transients and the Galactic Center (GC). VERITAS, being in
southern Arizona, is ideally sited to follow up events from LIGO/Virgo and
IceCube, and to study multi-TeV emission from the GC. The planned analysis
developments benefit all VERITAS science, but will be especially impactful for
multi-messenger astronomy and the physics of the GC. As the international
community works towards CTA, currently undergoing critical optimization,
demonstrating the pSCT's performance will maximize the impact of CTA on particle
astrophysics in the years to come. This project advances the goals of the NSF
Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.