* 2200607
* Excellence in Research: Elucidation of Conserved Eukaryotic Nucleolar and Ribosomal Stress Mechanisms
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Raphyel Rosby, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2025
* USD 574,385.00

This HBCU Excellence in Research award will be used to investigate the
biomolecular pathways that link cell growth to the cell cycle and subsequent
stress responses that occur when cell growth is arrested in both unicellular and
multicellular eukaryotes. Scientific data suggests that unicellular and
multicellular eukaryotes utilize different mechanisms to link those processes.
Our long-term goal is to elucidate unique and conserved pathways between these
species. The yeast data will offer a glimpse into the ancestral stress response
mechanisms, and by comparing those data with Drosophila data we will be able to
identify conserved as well as modern alterations and evolutionary changes that
have occurred since the rise of multicellularity. Our primary scientific
question is, “Do unicellular and multicellular eukaryotes harbor similar
pathways for coupling cell growth to the cell cycle”, and if so, “What are these
pathways?” This basic question has implications in understanding all eukaryote
respond to stalled growth arrest and the underlying mechanisms couple that
arrest to the cell cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ribosome biogenesis is an
essential universal cellular process. Though our knowledge of ribosome
biogenesis is quite extensive, there are several unanswered questions regarding
stalled or aberrant ribosome biogenesis and how it affects the cell cycle. There
is currently a significant contrast between nucleolar and ribosomal stress
(NARS) phenotypes in unicellular eukaryotes and metazoans. However, the most
frequently observed NARS phenotype is cell cycle arrest. This observation
highlights the intimate link between cell growth and the cell cycle and suggest
the existence of a common mechanism for this arrest. Our aim is to elucidate the
mechanism that cells employ to halt the cell cycle upon repression of ribosome
biogenesis. Our experimental design is to replace endogenous yeast ribosomal
protein promoters with an inducible GAL1 promoter. With these yeast strains we
will systematically express and the repress each of six ribosomal proteins that
when repressed lead to a G1 cell-cycle arrest. Using RNA-Seq, we will identify
the common differentially expressed genes (DEGS) for each repressed ribosomal
protein. In Drosophila, we will use the Tet-on system to systematically express
siRNAs that target the same set of ribosomal proteins as described for yeast. As
in yeast, we will use RNA-Seq before and after repression of the Drosophila
ribosomal proteins and identify the DEGs . We will compare the yeast and
Drosophila data and determine the common DEGs within both organisms. This will
allow us to identify conserved mechanisms for NARS phenotypes encompassing both
unicellular and multicellular eukaryotes. The proposed research will identify
novel NARS pathways and significantly advance our understanding of NARS
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.