* 2200721
* Southwest Conference on Arithmetic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Anthony Varilly-Alvarado, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2025
* USD 220,000.00

With support from this award, the Southwest Center for Arithmetic Geometry will
continue its series of annual "Winter Schools" from 2023 to 2025 at the
University of Arizona in Tucson, AZ, the first taking place March 4-8, 2023.
Since its founding in 1997, the primary activity of the Southwest Center is the
Arizona Winter School (AWS), an annual meeting which has become a prominent
national event and provides high-level training and research experience for
graduate students in arithmetic geometry and related areas. The AWS is organized
around a different central topic each year and features a set of courses and
accompanying research projects carefully designed and delivered by leading and
emerging experts. The result is a unique fusion of traditional mathematics
conference and intensive research workshop: the speakers organize courses of
four or five lectures and propose research projects for graduate students to
work on during the meeting. Nightly working sessions on these projects and on
separate problem sets are run by the speakers and postdoctoral fellows. On the
last day, students present their findings to the participants of the meeting.
The result is a particularly intense and focused five days of mathematical
activity for everyone involved. This cycle the Southwest Center will expand its
programming to include Preliminary Arizona Winter School (PAWS). This virtual
program aimed at advanced undergraduates and junior graduate students from
underrepresented groups will feature two six-week-long courses during the fall
semester organized around the same topic as the AWS. Participants will engage in
weekly problem sessions run by advanced graduate students and participate in
community building and mentorship activities. At both AWS and PAWS, connections
among peers are formed, and mentoring relationships between students and senior
researchers are developed. Subsequent collaborations between participants at all
levels are the norm. Students make concrete strides toward becoming research
mathematicians, post-doctoral assistants gain valuable mentoring experience in
their academic careers, and faculty develop new interests and see new
connections that lead to important published results. The Southwest Center
website shares reusable content from both AWS and PAWS, including lecture notes,
project descriptions, and audio and video of lectures. Through these thorough
records, the efforts of the Southwest Center participants are made freely
available to all. More information about the upcoming and past Arizona Winter
School programs can be found at the Southwest Center's website:
http://swc.math.arizona.edu/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2022-2023, PAWS and AWS
will be on "Unlikely Intersections." This topic concerns the expected finiteness
of certain rare arithmetically or geometrically interesting intersections. For
example, given a curve and a countable collection of "special" points in its
ambient space, one expects the intersection of the curve with this set of points
to be finite unless the curve is also "special." There has been substantial
recent progress on the main conjectures and complementary problems of this
field, especially on the Andr√©-Oort/Lang-Manin-Mumford/Zilber-Pink conjectures
and analogues from arithmetic dynamics. This work draws together not just
classical tools from algebraic and arithmetic geometry, but also tools from
logic, heights, analytic number theory, dynamics, and p-adic geometry. The
program will introduce students to the central problems, applications, and
unique tools of this flourishing field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.