* 2200926
* Large Database to Explore Rise of Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Stephen Kowalewski, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 89,825.00

For over a decade archaeologists have been developing empirically based models
and explanations for complex, multiple-cause-and-consequence, real-world
processes. This project will advance understanding of the origins of the state
and urbanism by testing an innovative model that employs recently developed
analytical tools and an unusually rich and large dataset. Instead of focusing
exclusively on one state or city, this new approach 1) tracks multiple important
institutions—states, cities, districts, local communities, temple organizations,
markets, and agricultural institutions—as these varied and developed over a span
of millenia; and 2) simultaneously tracks these institutional changes across
multiple, neighboring societies that had differing cultures, languages, and
natural environments yet are known to have maintained a high level of inter-
societal interaction. The investigators will assemble newer and older
archaeological data on more than 6000 archaeological sites from over 150
municipalities. The sites are from multiple time periods and include hunter-
gatherer rock art, early villages, towns, cities, fortifications, houses, public
architecture, and irrigation canals, and agricultural terraces. This information
was originally gathered by multiple research groups. The studies had the same
basic underlying methodology, permitting a high degree of comparability. This
project will build and make publicly available one the most comprehensive
archaeological datasets in the world useful for a variety of topics including
demography, cultural ecology, craft specialization and economic practices,
warfare, the Neolithic Revolution, communities, urbanism, agriculture,
resilience, political evolution, collapse, ordinary lives, wealth inequality,
and the development of religious institutions. The project will archive and
curate the information in useable formats so that it will be available not just
to researchers but to teachers, students, local communities, cultural heritage
stakeholders, etc., for years to come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central research
hypothesis is that 1) urbanism, the state, and other important social
institutions developed concordantly over time because of inter-societal
interaction, but 2) differently in each regional society because of variation in
the key agricultural variables of soil and water and differences in the way
these resources were socially managed. Model construction will use a multiscalar
(site, local, regional, multiregional) method, and recent archaeological
applications of institutional analysis and collective action theory. Assembling
and curating the information archive requires bringing older data (over 100,000
pages of field notes, artifact descriptions, maps, and photographs) up to modern
standards, especially in the area of georeferencing, to enhance its
availability, accessibility, utility, and value for scientific research,
educational, and management purposes. The online archive created by this project
will benefit instruction at K-12 and University levels, by providing datasets
and modules of real-world situations for use in teaching basic concepts such as
number, scientific method, spatial and temporal scales, and continuity and
change over time, and more advanced applications in statistics, demography, GIS,
and ecology. Finally, this work will engage scholars, graduate students, and
undergraduates in training, creation of the archive, and use of these resources,
particularly those from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.