* 2200221
* PIPP Phase I: Transdisciplinary Innovation in Predictive Science for Emerging Infectious Disease and Spillover
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Urbashi Mitra, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 01/31/2024
* USD 999,844.00

The scale and impact of epidemics and pandemics are expected to increase
substantively in future years given global trends in environmental change.
Pandemics are most often caused by spillover events in which viruses from wild
animals jump to people and spread, quickly outpacing containment efforts.
Pandemics are best contained at the earliest stages of emergence, yet major
hurdles have stood in the way of early detection of pandemic threats at the
scale that is needed. We set forth an ambitious scientific agenda to overcome
technological limitations impeding detection and characterization of emerging
pandemic threats. Our team spanning engineering, computer science, social
science, epidemiology, and virology with stakeholders from public health,
wildlife health, and industry is first-of-a-kind to advance predictive
intelligence for potential pandemics. We will develop new disease surveillance
technologies that incorporate innovative sensing, epidemiological insights, and
artificial intelligence strategies, to detect what animals are present and what
viruses they carry - all remotely with little human intervention. We seek to
develop diverse, inclusive, and highly functional transdisciplinary research
teams and trainees, to move beyond the state of the art in predictive
intelligence for pandemics to inform national and global health security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We address the grand challenge of generating actionable
intelligence for early detection of pandemic threats at the point of disease
spillover from animals to people. We are planning a transdisciplinary center and
associated research to advance our ability to characterize environmental change
and animal-human interactions that facilitate the emergence of pandemic threats,
and develop predictive capabilities in forecasting pandemic risk, to enable an
evidence-base that can inform pandemic prevention. Research advances will be
focused on 1) characterizing environmental conditions and the human dimensions
of disease emergence, especially the animal and human movements, networks, and
social systems that facilitate spillover at the animal-human interface, 2)
inventing broad-spectrum sensor technologies for rapid, accurate, safe, and
scalable pathogen detection tailored to a range of animals in diverse
environments, and 3) improving forecasting by integration of epidemiologic and
landscape data with machine learning to advance predictive intelligence. Our
team will foster the convergence of creative ideas, novel approaches and
technologies, transdisciplinary collaboration and communication, participatory
community science, and cross-training for innovation for a profoundly diverse
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the cross-directorate
Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I (PIPP) program, which is
jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological Sciences (BIO); Computer,
Information Science and Engineering (CISE); Engineering (ENG) and Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.