* 2200760
* Applications of Analytic Uniformity in Arithmetic Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Robert Lemke Oliver, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 08/31/2025
* USD 145,260.00

This project will investigate questions in arithmetic statistics, an area of
mathematics concerned with determining the "typical" properties of objects in
number theory. In practice, many questions in arithmetic statistics can be
fruitfully understood by studying how the underlying objects decompose into
simpler objects. Much of the research in this project will be aimed at studying
these kinds of decompositions and, particularly, the process of assembling
properties of these simpler objects to provide answers to complex questions. The
PI will also continue his established record of undergraduate and graduate
mentorship. He will also organize special sessions and workshops aimed at
bringing together early career researchers in both analytic and algebraic number
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, this project will focus on the
development of uniform bounds (both upper and lower) on number fields and class
groups. It will consider the applications of these bounds to central problems in
arithmetic statistics, like Malle's conjecture on the number of fields with a
given Galois group and the ell-torsion conjecture on the size of the class
group. Another focus will be the development of zero density estimates for Artin
L-functions. These density estimates will play a role in the proofs of the
uniform bounds and will have other applications, for example, to irreducibility
in certain families of random polynomials, which the PI will
explore.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.