* 2200269
* PIPP Phase I:  BEHIVE - BEHavioral Interaction and Viral Evolution for Pandemic Prevention and Prediction
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* B Aditya Prakash, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted human vulnerability to infectious disease
outbreaks and reinforced the need for improved data-driven response and
preparedness. The BEHIVE (BEHavioral Interaction and Viral Evolution) research
team for Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention (PIPP) aims to tackle a
fundamental challenge in disease outbreak prevention by integrating the study of
human behavior using a computational data-driven lens. The impact of human
behavior and social interactions remain underutilized in efforts spanning
scenario development, forecasting, and epidemic mitigation. Proposed educational
and outreach activities will train early career researchers and practitioners in
PIPP. The trans-disciplinary nature of the project including connections with
the humanities will encourage diverse cohorts of researchers to engage in this
public-facing field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several accelerating trends, such as
widening data collection, new Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning
(ML) techniques, high fidelity computational modeling and recent surge in
social/behavioral knowledge due to COVID-19, create an opportunity to tackle the
challenge of integrating human behavior into epidemic response using a
synergistic team-science approach. Project will develop methods incorporating
behavioral feedback to bridge mechanistic and AI models, to provide specificity
and context needed via genomic surveillance and robust predictions, and to
empower coordinated decision making by building strategic portfolios. These
efforts will lead to novel AI/ML frameworks, new modeling/decision-making
paradigms, facilitate early warning systems and inform mitigation efforts to
prevent pandemics and reduce risk of outbreaks in the first place. The diverse
interdisciplinary team consists of computer scientists, biologists, engineers,
and behavioral scientists, along with experts in medicine and public health
(from Georgia Tech, MIT, Michigan, UGA and Mayo Clinic) with broad and
significant expertise in epidemic research spanning foundational research and
intervention-focused work during the COVID-19 pandemic. The project team will
also partner with multiple academic, industrial, government public health and
non-profit setups, which will help enlarge the impact of the proposed research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the cross-directorate
Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention Phase I (PIPP) program, which is
jointly funded by the Directorates for Biological Sciences (BIO); Computer,
Information Science and Engineering (CISE); Engineering (ENG) and Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.