* 2200793
* I-Corps:  Antibiotic susceptibility test kits
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,06/30/2023
* M Siegrist, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a tool that enables rapid bacterial detection and antibiotic
susceptibility testing. There is a critical unmet need for faster, sensitive,
and affordable diagnostic tools to detect bacterial sepsis and identify
appropriate antibiotics. The ability to customize antibiotic treatment within
hours is particularly critical when treating sepsis. Each year, sepsis impacts
1-3 million U.S. patients, leads to 270,000 deaths, and costs over $60 billion.
Most sepsis associated deaths are preventable with rapid diagnosis and early,
effective treatment. Current standard of care involves an average 3-day
turnaround. Shortening the time to diagnosis and initiation of effective
treatment has the potential to dramatically improve patient outcomes, reduce
hospital costs, and promote antimicrobial stewardship. Competing technologies
require pathogen identification and growing bacteria to a detectable density,
both adding to the overall diagnostic timeline. Furthermore, competitors are
instrument-based, making them financially inaccessible to many hospitals. The
proposed technology does not require pre-test steps and relies on standard
clinical lab equipment. In addition, sepsis mortality is higher in low-income
areas, and the proposed technology may improve outcomes for all sepsis patients,
including the most vulnerable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a novel tool for bacterial growth detection and
antibiotic susceptibility profiling. The proposed technology pairs probes that
mimic bacterial cell surface building blocks with an amplifiable colorimetric
assay to create a solution to detect bacterial sepsis and identify appropriate
antibiotics. The proof-of-concept data suggest that the proposed assay may
rapidly detect bacterial growth and distinguish growing from nongrowing
bacteria, including antibiotic susceptibility profiling, in less than 4.5 hours.
In addition, the data also show that detection is dose-, bacterial density-, and
time-dependent, and compatible with common sepsis-causing bacteria regardless of
their cell surface architecture. Further, the assay may be performed using
equipment found in standard clinical labs. While the current focus is on
developing a kit for rapid detection and drug susceptibility profiling of blood-
borne pathogenic bacteria, the technology may be adapted to detect the growth of
bacteria in a variety of settings such as food and biomedical manufacturing
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.