* 2200634
* Experiments in teacher professional learning: Testing design features that accelerate instructional improvement in mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Heather Hill, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,568,067.00

Teacher professional learning is a critical part of the mathematics education
landscape. For decades, professional learning has been the primary strategy for
developing the skills of the teaching workforce and changing how teachers
interact with students in classrooms around academic content. Professional
learning also can be expensive for districts, both financially and in terms of
teacher time. Given these investments, most school leaders wish to spend their
professional development dollars efficiently, making decisions about
professional learning design that maximize teacher and student learning.
However, despite more than two decades of rigorous research on professional
learning programs, practitioners have little causal evidence on which
professional learning design features work to accelerate teacher learning. This
project seeks to identify features of teacher professional learning experiences
that lead to better mathematics outcomes for both teachers and students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores this central question through a
series of randomized experiments in a range of districts across the country. The
project leverages a research-practice partnership known as the Research
Partnership for Professional Learning (RPPL) that brings together large-scale
providers of math curriculum-focused professional development with researchers
at Brown and Harvard Universities. Together, researchers and RPPL collaborators
will conduct experimental A/B tests of professional learning features indicated
as promising by both theory and, where available, prior evidence. Because these
experiments will be housed within RPPL providers’ regularly-provided services to
districts, experiments can be conducted efficiently and generate knowledge
quickly. The project seeks to explore three critical topics and whether they
make a difference in the efficacy of the teacher professional learning: whether
to emphasize conceptual or concrete approaches to teacher change; ways to
enhance teacher agency in professional learning settings; and ways to increase
the persistence—or “stickiness”—of teacher learning. The project will model
changes using data sources that include measures of teacher instructional
practice, student learning, and artifacts from the professional learning
enactments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.