* 2200928
* Empowering Students with Choice through Equitable and Interactive Mathematical Modeling (EIM2)
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Corey Brady, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 06/30/2026
* USD 829,263.00

This project aims to create and study an Equitable and Interactive Mathematical
Modeling (EIM2) program that positions students as decision makers in their own
learning. Despite the value of connecting students’ life experiences with their
mathematical learning, the practical implementation of this strategy has proven
challenging in a classroom setting. EIM2 addresses this issue by supporting
students to engage in equitable mathematical modeling, a process of using
mathematics to analyze and quantify scenarios through a lens of equity. The EIM2
program involves collaborations with sixth and seventh grade students, a
professional learning community series with their mathematics teachers, and the
creation of the dynamic, online platform that hosts EIM2 modules. The EIM2
dynamic online platform allows students to easily select scenarios based on
their interests; experience the scenarios with visuals and animations; and
compare, synthesize, and refine their mathematical
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program development will be guided by design
principles and hypothesized learning processes that support students’ cultural
competence, their evaluations of multiple mathematical solutions, and their
mathematical identity development. Using multi-tier design-based research and a
mixed-methods approach, the EIM2 program will be continuously evaluated and
refined through multiple iterations to ensure usability and efficacy. Over the
four-year project span, this project will (1) explore the nature and impact of
the EIM2 program, assessing how it promotes a shared vision for the learning of
all students, including racially and ethnically minoritized students, in
classroom settings; (2) examine whether and how students’ engagement in EIM2
supports their achievement and identity development in mathematics; and (3)
understand how teachers enact EIM2 and whether they change their attitudes
toward modeling over time and across contexts. The proposed project fills a
theoretical gap related to scalable design models for interactive mathematical
modeling curricula that are culturally sustaining for students. Our model
improves upon current practices of mathematical modeling by transforming
existing curricula to reflect students’ lived experiences and to foster their
active learning, leveraging the interactive nature of digital curricula. Our
proposed work has the potential to be transformative for STEM education through
the co-creation of asset-based instructional materials built on a deep
understanding of students, which can be applicable for other STEM education
fields of study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program
(DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.