* 2201121
* Integrating the statistical investigation process, data visualization, and simulation into high school statistics
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Soma Roy, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 05/31/2025
* USD 449,984.00

This project is developing curricular materials that utilize best teaching
practices in improving student understanding of statistics and data science for
use in high school Algebra I, Algebra II, and Geometry courses. Although
teachers are encouraged to integrate statistics and data science in these kinds
of high school courses, teachers do not have sufficient access to resources to
accomplish this effectively. As a result, many high school students do not
understand statistics for its relevance and importance in a data-driven world.
This has created a significant need for curricular materials that use best
teaching practices with documented impact on student learning. This project’s
approach is to focus on meaning and interpretation rather than formulaic
algorithms, which from students’ perspectives hide what matters. This project
will develop curricular materials for high school students, with collaborative
high school teachers for “how-to” manuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The distinctive
feature of these curricular materials is the use of simulation-based inference
(SBI) methods, data visualization (DV), and the entire statistical investigation
process (6STEPS) to improve students’ understanding of the relevance and power
of statistics because these approaches are central to statistical thinking and
practice. These approaches (as advocated by the American Statistical
Association’s Guidelines for Assessment and Instruction in Statistics Education)
focus more on meaning and less on mechanics. This project enacts a pilot set of
instructor training and student materials tailored to the HS level which use
best pedagogical practices (e.g., designed with multiple learning styles in
mind, effective use of technology, data visualizations) which seek to improve
students’ statistics education at the high school level, while also providing
detailed assessment data exploring the effectiveness of SBI, DV, and 6STEPS
approaches to statistical education in high school. The project provides
critical information about the ability of these teaching approaches to have a
positive impact in the HS classroom. The project directly enrolls 60 HS teachers
and about 1,800 students. The data collected is providing information about
conceptual learning outcomes, student attitudes, teacher confidence, and
learning trajectories using the SBI, DV and 6STEPS approaches. The research
question that guides the project is: To what extent are newly developed, high
school student-facing curricular materials, which leverage SBI, DV, and the
6STEPS, along with an active-learning pedagogy, able to integrate into existing
high school courses (e.g., Algebra I, II, Geometry) and lead to improved student
learning outcomes? The project supports a website that shares 24 freely
available student-facing and instructor-facing modules, as well as professional
development resources. The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.