* 2201478
* CC* Planning: Fostering Data Driven STEM Research and Education Through Cyberinfrastructure at Illinois State University
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Yongning Tang, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,939.00

Illinois State University (ISU) is creating a comprehensive blueprint for
improving its cyberinfrastructure (CI) to foster data-driven research and
education. The goal of this planning project is to design a logical,
reproducible, and defensible Science DMZ for ISU via a systematic approach
called Analysis-Architecture-Design. The partnership and structure between
campus IT staff and the research community, especially faculty in computer
networking discipline, presents a model for consolidating the ecosystem of CI
and integrating new network technologies into an existing framework. The design
and prototype of an Intent-based Software Defined Science DMZ with high
performance computing clusters are a novel extension of capabilities that are
not commonly in place today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning project produces
a profound impact on the STEM community at ISU to increase their awareness of
the availability and scales of computation, data, and the related data analytic
tools and expertise. The increased awareness is emitted from ISU as a hub to the
local community, the region, and many connected institutions nationally. The
adopted Analysis-Architecture-Design methodology is beneficial to many similar
institutions that want to revitalize their campus
cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.