* 2201083
* Supporting Consequential Learning in Middle School STEM through Rightful Familial Presence
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Angela Calabrese Barton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 08/31/2025
* USD 742,731.00

Familial presence in school supports children’s learning. However, few models
exist that illustrate forms of familial presence in STEM learning that center
familial cultural knowledge and practice. The project will produce a model for
familial engagement in STEM along with instructional tools and illustrative
case-studies that can be used by teachers and school districts nationally in
support of increasing students’ STEM learning. This three-year study
investigates new instructional practices that support rightful familial presence
in STEM as a mechanism to address the continued racial and class gaps in STEM
achievement for historically marginalized students. Rightful familial presence
is a powerful form of authentic family engagement that legitimizes families’
community cultural capital. It fosters capital movement between families and
schools, especially when these forms of capital have historically been
marginalized within STEM learning. This awarded is funded by the Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) which seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the Rightful Familial Presence in
STEM project are 1) to collaborate with 6th grade teachers and family members to
produce a model for familial engagement, and 2) to study whether and how the
model supports opportunities for equitable and consequential student learning in
two different STEM content areas among middle school students from
underrepresented backgrounds. The project seeks to advance theory by developing
practice-based, theory-driven empirical understandings of how rightful familial
presence supports STEM teaching and learning. Over three years and using cycles
of participatory design-based intervention research, the Rightful Familial
Presence in STEM intervention will be designed, tested and refined. Teachers and
family members will collaboratively engage in new activity systems that will
yield insights into STEM-specific curricular and instructional practices for
equitable middle school STEM education. This project brings together teachers
from two large urban public school districts, community leaders, parents and
family members and researchers at the University of Michigan and the University
of North Carolina at Greensboro. The project seeks to yield a) new knowledge on
how instructional practices may foster new forms of rightful familial presence
in support of student learning, and how teachers make sense of and take up these
practices; and b) a practice framework with fleshed out teacher and familial
roles to systemically increase rightful familial presence in middle school STEM
learning, to be shared as explained in our communication
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.