* 2201993
* Developing Cybersecurity Technicians through Expanded Pathways in Rural and Underserved Communities
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Douglas Hamm, Lakeshore Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2025
* USD 332,076.00

Cybersecurity is critical to the protection of computer systems and networks.
Many businesses and organizations need to hire cybersecurity professionals to
protect their cyberinfrastructure from persistent and increasingly sophisticated
cyberattacks. The demand for cybersecurity technicians in Wisconsin is unmet
with only eight of the 16 Wisconsin Technical College System districts in the
State offering the “IT – Cybersecurity Specialist” credential degree program.
The goal of this project is to create a Cybersecurity associate degree program
at Lakeshore Technical College that will establish a cybersecurity educational
pipeline and will recruit and prepare women, low-income, and racial and ethnic
minority students underrepresented as Cybersecurity Technicians. The project
will stimulate interest from rural high schools and underrepresented students
through a Cyber summer camp, sponsorship of a Cyber Patriot Team, and
participation in the National Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition. First-term
college classes will be delivered free of charge via distance learning by
faculty as well as through trained high school instructors, providing high
school students a means to complete a Cybersecurity associate degree in as
little as eighteen months after graduating high school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed Cybersecurity associate degree program will focus on attaining the
skills required for entry-level cybersecurity technicians. Eight cybersecurity
employers, including large regional employers like Kohler and Johnsonville, will
partner with the project to lead program design, create a scholarship
initiative, and assist with recruitment efforts through the Business and
Industry Leadership Team (BILT). At least five BILT members will represent
underrepresented groups, serve as mentors to high school students, and provide
representation at classroom visits and recruitment events in district high
schools leading to enrollments in first-term college classes conducted in
partnering high schools. The development of this talent pipeline will support
the rural and manufacturing dominant economy in east-central Wisconsin by
increasing skilled cybersecurity technicians to protect local IT infrastructure
from nefarious attacks on data and systems. The educational systems developed
provide a transferable model, suitable for many community or technical colleges,
and leading to better national representation of women, racial and ethnic
minorities, and people from low-income backgrounds in the high paying
cybersecurity technician workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.