* 2201796
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Gender Differences in Digital Learning Games with Educational Data Mining
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Bruce McLaren, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 06/30/2025
* USD 706,303.00

Despite evidence that gender differences in math achievement have narrowed or
disappeared in recent decades, stereotypes about men being better than women at
math emerge early in childhood and persist through adulthood. These perceptions
appear to influence female students’ interest and performance in math, as well
as their pursuit of STEM careers. Given the potential motivational benefits of
digital learning games, games might provide a pathway for reducing math anxiety
for female students while increasing their self-efficacy and interest in math.
This project will explore whether digital learning games can lead to less math
anxiety and better learning in female students, while not hurting male student
learning. It will study learning with two existing digital learning games:
Decimal Point, which teaches foundational math concepts (decimal numbers and
operations) to 5th and 6th grade students; and Angle Jungle, which targets a
similar age range (4th and 5th graders) and has a similar thematic design (i.e.,
a game map, cartoon characters), but with different game mechanics, content
(angles), and instructional approach. The study will explore how and why Decimal
Point has, over the course of several experiments spanning multiple years,
consistently produced a learning advantage for female students. In doing so,
investigators will identify principles regarding the relationship between gender
and game features that can be shared with game developers and used in other
games, starting with Angle Jungle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will go beyond
the traditional gender binary of male and female, analyzing multiple dimensions
of gender, including gender identity (e.g., how much students feel like a boy, a
girl, both, neither), gender typicality (e.g., How much students like to do the
same things as other girls [boys], How much students feel they look like boys
[girls]), and gender-typed interests, activities, and traits (e.g., how much a
student feels affectionate or adventurous). The study will also investigate two
pathways hypothesized to lead to gender differences: first, that the playful
features of the games reduce the saliency of the math content, making it less
likely to cue math stereotype threat (the stereotype threat hypothesis); and
second, that the games’ thematic details are more appealing to learners who
identify (more) as females, making the games more engaging for them compared to
learners who identify (more) as boys (the engagement hypothesis). In Year 1,
educational data mining will be used to infer students’ cognitive and affective
processes while playing Decimal Point and compare data to the distinct processes
predicted by these two pathways. In Year 2, investigators will assess whether
the hypothesized pathways and gender differences replicate in the context of
Angle Jungle. In Year 3, hypotheses will be further tested by manipulating
Decimal Point’s emphasis on math content in one version of the game and
enjoyment and playful features in another. The project will compare learning
outcomes between the two versions to more deeply explore the stereotype threat
and engagement hypotheses. The ultimate aim of this work is to provide insights
into gender-based differences in learning from digital games, providing
principles and guidance for other researchers and game designers in developing
and revising digital learning games. Thus, the project has the potential to
transfer Decimal Point’s success with girls’ learning outcomes to other digital
learning games and advance knowledge on the multidimensionality of gender.
Furthermore, findings will allow investigators to revise both games and make
them available to thousands of late elementary and middle school students across
the country. Even during this project, approximately 1,950 students—including
many from districts with diverse populations and low math proficiency¬—will
benefit from learning with Decimal Point and Angle
Jungle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform
efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and
innovations to address persistent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.