* 2201863
* Investigating Pre-College Predictors and Post-Secondary Effects of Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experiences in Texas
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Levi Johnson, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 05/31/2025
* USD 330,123.00

The project aims to serve the national need to develop a diverse workforce in
STEM careers. To address this need, institutions have developed course-based
undergraduate research experiences in STEM to attract students to STEM careers.
These research activities will produce evidence and insights about how course-
based undergraduate research experiences in STEM are related to post-graduate
workforce outcomes. Additionally, the research will identify pre-college student
characteristics that predict student participation in course-based undergraduate
STEM research experiences. The project will investigate short- and long-term
outcomes of student participation in course-based undergraduate research
experiences in STEM, which could provide insights to institutions and
policymakers about how course-based undergraduate research experiences in STEM
could address STEM workforce needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research efforts
from scholars at Texas Tech University aims to conduct longitudinal analyses on
the short- and long-term impact of STEM Course-based Undergraduate Research
(CUR) on the development of future STEM professionals in Texas. Addressing a gap
in the CUR literature, the studies will examine associations between pre-college
student characteristics and participation in an undergraduate CURs, as well as
the extent to which CUR participation is associated with positive academic
outcomes and post-graduate careers in STEM fields. Research analyses will be
conducted using existing database information from the University of Houston’s
Education Research Center (UH-ERC). Specifically, the Texas Statewide
Longitudinal Data System contains data on students from public Kindergarten
through higher education to the workforce that will be used in the research.
Further, text analysis methods will be used to systematically identify CURs from
publicly available syllabi across Texas institutions of higher education. The
project team will use multiple, established modelling methods to investigate
pre-college student characteristics that predict CUR participation, as well as
long-term post-graduate and employment outcomes associated with participation of
CURs as an undergraduate student. The project team has prior experience
analyzing large data sets and will be guided by an external advisory board with
expertise in CURs, large datasets, and program evaluation. Proposed
dissemination efforts, which include both research publications and policy
briefs, could allow the research to serve as a model for similar analyses in
other states. This research is potentially transformative for understanding
student populations served by CURs and the role that a CUR may play in STEM
employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform
efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and
innovations to address persistent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.