* 2201442
* CC* Regional: Campus Research &amp; Education Multiple Organization Regional OneOklahoma Friction Free Network (CaRE-MORe-OFFN)
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Brian Burkhart, OKLAHOMA STATE REGENTS FOR HIGHER EDUCATION
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 942,263.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to connect two
Oklahoma universities and to upgrade the OneOklahoma Friction Free Network
(OFFN) connections of two other universities (all at 10 Gbps) to the existing
Regional OneOklahoma Friction Free Network, OneNet’s separate ultra-high-speed
regional Science DMZ. The College of the Muscogee Nation (CMN) and Murray State
College (MSC) will be the new connections and Oklahoma State University
Institute of Technology (OSUIT) and Rogers State University (RSU) will obtain
upgraded connections. The project will also engage the four institutions to
drive workloads. The Campus Research &amp; Education Multiple Organization
Regional OneOklahoma Friction Free Network (CaRE-MORe-OFFN) will support
research and education drivers in cybersecurity, distance learning, natural
resources and agriculture. Access to enhanced cyberinfrastructure resources will
provide a foundation to build new and diverse research opportunities for faculty
and students. CaRE-MORe-OFFN has the potential to strengthen state network
partnerships by fostering broader collaboration pathways through exposure to
leading researchers and cyberinfrastructure practitioners. As a result, a
diverse population of Native American and first-generation students will have
access to these cyberinfrastructure resources, increasing gateways to academic
content that will facilitate their abilities to develop 21st century workforce
skills that benefit their communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CaRE-MORe-OFFN
extends the OneOklahoma Friction Free Network to under-resourced campuses by
implementing Science DMZs, Data Transfer Nodes, and network performance
monitoring capabilities in support of science application drivers, integrating
these capabilities with similar capabilities at other institutions across
Oklahoma. The project also upgrades bandwidth and OFFN connectivity for two
campuses to 10Gbps. CaRE-MORe-OFFN offers technical personnel at each campus the
opportunity to improve skill sets and facilitates cross-campus collaborations
through shared uses of computing tools, scientific equipment, and educational
materials by engaging faculty and students in the larger OneOklahoma
CyberInfrastructure Initiative (OneOCII). OFFN is managed by OneNet, Oklahoma’s
research and education network, and scientific leadership is provided by the
University of Oklahoma. The project has potential to improve access to high-
speed networking for a new group of four under-resourced institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the collaborative efforts
of the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (OAC) and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.