* 2201495
* Exploring Student Service Member/Veteran STEM Career Persistence Longitudinally and in Military-Centric Contexts
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* You-Geon Lee, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 06/30/2026
* USD 777,221.00

The project expands a prior study by examining the links between social support
networks and persistence along STEM career pathways among “student service
members/veterans,” defined as undergraduate students who are retired/discharged
military veterans. Building on current surveys in the State of Wisconsin, the
study extends the data collection along three dimensions. First is
longitudinally along the population’s academic trajectories encompassing several
data collection points over five years. Second is contextually by adding a new
cohort of student service members/veterans (SSM/Vs) from diverse geographically
dispersed military institutions. Third is comparatively by examining STEM and
non-STEM career pathways and social support characteristics among student
service members/veterans in Wisconsin and in military-centric institutions, as
well as between SSM/Vs and non SSM/V undergraduates. The research focuses on an
understudied nontraditional student population and has the potential to broaden
and strengthen the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators frame
the study conceptually with the theory of social capital supplemented with
asset-based concepts to model the support students receive through their social
networks as empirically measured resources. The study will answer three sets of
research questions. First: How do SSM/W social support networks change as
Wisconsin SSW/Vs move further along STEM career pathways; how do network
patterns and changes influence STEM career pathway persistence; and how do
SSM/Vs perceive these changes over time? Second: How do SSM/V networks change as
those in military-centric contexts traverse STEM career pathways; how do network
patterns and changes influence STEM career pathway persistence; and how do they
perceive these changes over time? Third: How do social support networks, career
pathways, and links between the two over time compare among Wisconsin SSM/Vs,
SSM/Vs in military-centric contexts, and non-SSM/Vs in STEM and non-STEM fields?
The project advances equity-oriented scholarship in STEM education and career
development concerning the ways temporal, institutional, geographic, and
experiential factors influence nontraditional student pathways in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR)
program that supports fundamental research focused on STEM education learning
and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM education, and STEM
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.