* 2201859
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Equity Goals in Secondary Classrooms by Incorporating Mathematical Justification in Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Kristen Bieda, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 236,107.00

Creating and justifying mathematical claims is an essential learning goal and
valued outcome of a mathematics education. To advance equitable learning
outcomes, it is essential that teachers pursue this goal in ways that ensure
every student has opportunities to develop and share justifications in their
classrooms. The intended outcomes of this pilot study are: (1) practice-
grounded, foundational knowledge about how students’ participation in
mathematical justification can advance equity outcomes, and (2) an initial
framework for design principles and teaching moves that engage students in
mathematical justification to advance equity goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
fundamental contribution of this project is bringing together research about
mathematical justification and equitable learning in mathematics classrooms.
Students’ engagement in mathematics depends on their sense of agency and access
to complex mathematics. Discussions of mathematical justification can provide a
context for students to develop agency and for teachers to provide students with
access to understanding mathematical ideas. The project explores two research
questions. First, in what ways is the practice of mathematical justification an
affordance for teachers to promote access and agency? Second, how do teachers
engage students in justification in their classroom to advance toward more
equitable instructional outcomes? There are two research sites at high schools
in Connecticut and Michigan. Teachers will work in study groups to explore
mathematical justification and equity. Data collection includes recordings of
study group meetings, interviews, and video-recorded lesson observations. Data
analysis will include creating an annotated timeline to document the progress of
teachers’ conversations about equity and mathematical justification. A framework
will be developed to document teacher moves that support students’ access and
agency in mathematical justification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and
enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation
of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and
suggest intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.