* 2201667
* Access to Careers in Advanced Building Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Rafat Elsharef, Milwaukee Area Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2025
* USD 649,740.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by connecting underserved
populations with education and careers in advanced building technology. The
project brings together a collaboration of community-based organizations, the
City of Milwaukee, local industry partners and Milwaukee Area Technical College
(MATC) to support the technical career advancement of students from underserved
areas of the city. The project addresses the need for advanced technology
education and improved career opportunities for underserved communities and will
address the urgent employment needs of local industry. The building sector faces
numerous challenges including increased health concerns, energy efficiency
goals, management of new technologies and high workforce attrition. The project
seeks to increase the pool of skilled technicians ready to maintain the ever-
changing and complex technology in buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
has two fundamental goals: (1) meet the industry need for skilled advanced
building technicians and (2) increase the recruitment and retention of students
from underserved communities. Industry has supported MATC in the development of
a diploma program, four digital badges, a pre-apprenticeship and an
apprenticeship program to provide students with the skills needed and multiple
pathways into employment. The digital badges are stepping stones to the diploma,
and the pre-apprenticeship creates a separate pathway. Both provide a pathway to
associate degrees such as the Individualized Technical Studies degree. To
address the needs of underserved communities and improve retention, local
industry has committed to hiring these students in paid internships as they
continue in the program. The project will combine community-based outreach and
case management efforts with local government funded support for child care,
transportation and subsistence. The project will provide workshops in the
community to expose participants to career opportunities in advanced building
technologies through hands-on lab activities, career information and job
prospects. As underserved participants enter the program at MATC they will
benefit from support services provided by the City of Milwaukee, community based
organizations, local employers, and MATC’s success coaches and other services.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the Nation's economy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.