* 2201259
* Deeper Understanding of Factors that Fine-tune Redox Potentials of Metalloproteins
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Yi Lu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 05/31/2022
* USD 29,317.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Yi Lu from the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign (UIUC) to investigate the factors that fine-tune the energies of
metal-containing proteins (metalloproteins). Many chemical and biological
processes involve reactions where electrons are transferred from one molecule to
another. Nature is known to use metalloproteins to control these electron
transfers so that they occur within specific pairs of molecules. This research
synthesizes mimics of biological metalloproteins that have use in very specific
electron transfers. These metalloproteins are also used in catalytic processes
involved in solar energy conversion and fuel cells. The research projects
educate graduate and undergraduate students as the next generation of
scientists. The knowledge and skills acquired from multiple fields are preparing
students to tackle difficult problems facing science and society. The Yi group
includes students from diverse demographics. The UIUC campus infrastructure is
enhanced by developing lecture and lab modules to integrate the
multidisciplinary research results of the project into graduate and
undergraduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks an enhanced
quantitative understanding of the factors that fine-tune metalloprotein redox
potentials (Eº´) and applies the knowledge gained to design systems with
modulated functional properties. Many studies have identified which factors are
important for tuning the Eº´. Much less information is available on how these
features quantitatively contribute to Eº´ tuning. To achieve this goal,
unnatural amino acids are engineered in both primary and secondary coordination
spheres of the metal to isolate one factor (e.g., steric) from another (e.g.,
electronic). In this approach, Eº´ tuning becomes more predictable and
quantitative. Previously, Professor Yi's lab demonstrated that tuning of a type
1 copper azurin is sufficient to span the entire 2 volt physiological range. In
order to advance knowledge beyond cupredoxins, loop-directed mutagenesis is used
to incorporate a type 1 copper center into ephrin-B2, a protein that does not
contain a redox center. Redox tuning and secondary coordination effects through
mutations are used to control reversible Sulfur-nitrosylation catalyzed by a red
copper azurin. The success of the project is assessed by a) the range of Eº´
achieved through natural and unnatural amino acid incorporation; b) the
predictability of Eº´ resulting from mutations; and c) the degree of control
achieved in reversible NO binding.