* 2201075
* Collaborative Research: Evaluation Codes, Duals, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Gretchen Matthews, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2025
* USD 415,117.00

Coding theory supports reliable, robust communication even while using imperfect
channels, which distort messages. It has evolved since its emergence in the
1940s to support various applications ranging from secure communications to data
storage. Bespoke codes and customized error correction or erasure recovery
algorithms satisfy ever-changing technological needs. Evaluation codes employ
tools and underlying structures from algebraic geometry and commutative algebra
to provide flexible constructions that address various scenarios. They build on
the heavily utilized Reed-Solomon and Reed-Muller codes which depend on
polynomial structures. This project focuses on designing codes and algorithms
which recover erased data or correct errors using less information than
traditional methods, building frameworks for use in practical settings, and
employing them in quantum error correction. The impact of this proposed research
expands beyond the immediate scientific applications to serve as a platform for
student and postdoctoral training and efforts to diversify the discipline. The
PIs have a history of providing research engagement opportunities and amplifying
them via other outreach such as Cleveland State University's STEM Peer Teachers
and Association of Latin Professionals for America as well as Virginia Tech's
Broadening Engagement and Participation in Undergraduate Research, SWIMM:
Supporting Women in Mathematics through Mentoring, and Virginia's Commonwealth
Cyber Initiative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluation codes are a large family of
error-correcting codes, encompassing algebraic geometry codes and polynomial
codes, such as Reed-Solomon and Reed-Muller codes. This project advances their
utility by investigating their duals, focusing on the hull of a code, meaning
the intersection of the code and its dual. The hull plays a role in the
complexity of several algorithms in code-based cryptography, protection against
side-channel and fault injection attacks, and quantum error correction. Tools
from algebraic geometry and commutative algebra will be employed to determine
duals and hulls of evaluation codes, including multivariate Goppa codes and
codes from curves, and provide explicit constructions for codes with controlled
duals. Objectives include designing evaluation codes and algorithms which
utilize less information in erasure recovery (via linear exact repair) and error
correction (via fractional decoding); extending the framework for polar coding
via evaluation codes to channels with memory; and constructing new codes for
quantum error correction. The proposed research serves as an ideal training
ground for students and postdoctoral researchers due to multiple points of entry
and the opportunity for computation, allowing for increased opportunities to
diversify the discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.