* 2201148
* Cultivating Relationships: Partnering with Teachers and Tribes to Integrate Indigenous and School STEM Knowledge
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Karla Bradley Eitel, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,468,564.00

Teachers rarely come into K-12 classrooms with an understanding of Indigenous
peoples, nations, or a sense of how Indigenous peoples practice their ways of
knowing in relationship to land and landscapes. This knowledge gap acutely
impacts Indigenous youth who experience persistent disparities in educational
opportunities, completion outcomes, and STEM representation. To address this
knowledge gap, it is imperative to develop teacher professional learning that
privileges tribal leadership and Indigenous knowledge in STEM education. This
project connects interdisciplinary researchers and experts from four tribal
nation partners to develop and implement an in-service teacher professional
certificate program that integrates Indigenous Knowledge into STEM teaching.
This multi-sited teacher professional development model will enroll K-12
teachers in four different Native-serving regions of the rural West into a
12-month certificate program that combines Indigenous science, Coupled Human and
Natural Systems, and Land education concepts into an experiential learning cycle
with local and broad study of learning with the Land. Participating teachers
will gain critical knowledge to address epistemological diversity and
experiential tools central to addressing complex issues of land and lifeway
changes in Indigenous and rural communities. The project will add knowledge
about the transferability of local epistemologies and practices and national
science standards within four specific Indigenous contexts and expand space for
tribal-lead professional development to transform teacher classroom practice.
This award is funded by the Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) which
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
follow a qualitative multi-site case study approach to answer these questions:
How do teachers make sense of multiple STEM epistemologies during an Indigenous,
place-based, land education certificate program? What types of teacher
development activities support the inclusion of Indigenous epistemologies in
STEM school-based practices? In what ways do teachers apply learning from
Indigenous STEM into their curricular and pedagogical choices? Three main
objectives will support the projectâ€™s central research questions: 1) Development
of cross-site Partnership Teams to guide design of teacher professional
development with unifying and site-specific content; 2) Implementation of site-
specific immersive STEM learning opportunities for teachers and a wrap-around
professional development certificate program to support pedagogical
understanding; 3) Research into the impact of curriculum for teachers, i.e., on
trajectories of learning and pedagogical choices in the classroom. Collected
data will include pre- and post-surveys, symbol-based reflections, group
interviews and talking circles with teachers, and classroom observations of
teacher practice. The research will contribute to innovations in teacher
education programs and professional practice and create more equitable and
inclusive Land-based STEM education models for K-12.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.