* 2201192
* Restructuring Middle School Science around Grand Challenges
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Troy Sadler, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 08/31/2026
* USD 984,704.00

This project aims to restructure middle school science education around Grand
Challenges (GCs) such as pandemics, climate events, and diminishing
biodiversity. The grand challenges affect people's lives and can impact the
future of the next generations across the globe. Anchoring science education
around grand challenges can motivate students learning and provide a meaningful
context for science curriculum and assessment. By engaging in the units around
GCs, middle school science teachers and students will have opportunities to work
with real data, engage in argumentation based on evidence, and take part in
solutions to the grand challenges. In addition, aligned assessments developed
with these GC units will help educators and researchers to close the gap between
assessment and instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create new
knowledge about how GC-oriented learning experiences impact middle school
students' interest in science, motivation to engage with science, and their
learning of science ideas and competencies. As a comparative study with the
Israeli school context, the project will also create knowledge about how
national assessment contexts and teacher experience shape the enactment of and
result from GC-oriented learning experiences. The project will pursue the
following three goals: 1) Develop four GC units (each lasting 3-4 weeks) with
associated assessments to be interspersed throughout 7th-grade science. 2)
Collaborate with middle school science teachers to enact, study, and revise the
GC units. 3) Research student outcomes associated with the GC units and factors
that impact the feasibility and quality of GC-oriented learning experiences in
middle school science. A mixed methods research design will be employed to
couple quantitative comparisons of student outcomes with case studies of
classroom enactments and teacher and student perspectives. Because of Israel's
unique national assessment context, which has recently adopted assessments that
align with GC-oriented teaching, research will take place in both the US and
Israel. The GC framework and curriculum will incorporate principles from
culturally responsive and sustaining pedagogies to support learning among
diverse learners. The project would also create a new, global network for
reconsidering and restructuring science education to better meet the needs of
teachers and students in a rapidly changing world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.â€¯&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.