* 2201020
* Collaborative Research: Using Artificial Intelligence to Transform Online Video Lectures into Effective and Inclusive Agent-Based Presentations
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Richard Mayer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 04/30/2025
* USD 301,709.00

Students in introductory STEM courses frequently encounter video lectures that
include an instructor standing next to a progression of slides. A challenge with
these video lectures is that students may lose interest in science when they see
the instructors as unhelpful (e.g., when they portray negative emotions while
teaching) or unwelcoming (e.g., when they do not reflect the gender, ethnic, and
racial diversity of the audience). This project aims to develop, validate,
study, and make publicly available an artificial-intelligence (AI)-based
framework that takes existing online instructional video lectures on
introductory STEM topics created by human instructors and transforms them into
instructionally effective and inclusive agent-based presentations. This work is
intended to help improve science instruction and attract students from under-
represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will apply artificial
intelligence methods to extract gesture and voice from instructional videos with
human instructors and transform them into instruction delivered by a diverse set
of emotionally and socially sensitive onscreen animated embodied agents.
Experimental research studies will investigate: 1) whether students learn better
from an AI-transformed version of a video lecture than the original instructor-
made video lecture; and 2) which features of onscreen agents in AI-transformed
video lectures produce improved learning outcomes and processes, comparing
delivery from an onscreen agent who does or does not match the student's gender,
ethnicity, or race. Overall, results from the project will impact access to
high-quality inclusive STEM learning experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.