* 2201516
* Accel-Net Implementation: Accel-Net Implementation for Quantum Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Piers Coleman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 06/30/2026
* USD 2,000,000.00

Research in quantum mechanics - the physics of matter at the atomic scale –
fosters the discovery of new materials with extraordinary properties. The new
classes of "quantum materials" have functionalities of great interest to
society. They fuel the next generation of quantum technologies. New high-
temperature superconductors are used for the energy transmission and the
development of ultra-powerful magnets. New metal and semiconductors allow for
new kinds of electronics, sustainable energy storage, and the next generation of
computers. The discovery of these materials requires a new phase of exploration
of the periodic table of elements. This is a challenging task because the
parameter space of materials with complex chemistry is vast; and materials with
the desired properties lie hidden in far corners of this space. This project
brings together ten networks of experimental, computational, and theoretical
scientists from across the globe. The researchers combine their expertise and
knowledge to address this challenge. Working together, they can explore a much
larger parameter space. By sharing knowhow while avoiding duplication, they
accelerate the quest for new quantum materials. This Project also promotes the
training of a new generation of scientists with broader, practical materials-
discovery oriented research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AccelNet teams bring
together quantum-material communities from across the globe to synergistically
work on new families of materials. They seek to explore, along new tracts of the
periodic table, the deep links between materials phenomena, quantum
entanglement, topology, and emergence. This AccelNet network of networks
includes complimentary networks from the USA, Canada, the UK, Japan, and the
European Union. Advances in the science of quantum materials are driven by
progress in synthesis and characterization techniques and the discovery of new
families of superconductors, insulators, strange metals, and quantum
criticality. Yet, the field is hindered by a lack of coordination, which results
in a tendency to cluster around the same subset of materials. This project is
organized along three parallel tracks: (i) a synthesis track, (ii) a
spectroscopy track, and (iii) an extreme conditions track. International
collaborative teams work on synthesizing new quantum materials. They study them
by a variety of spectroscopic tools. They subject them to extreme conditions
such as high pressures or magnetic fields. This new level of cooperation
accelerates discoveries in the field and leads to a materials database of
successes and failures, a roadmap for future research. This project is funded by
the Office of International Science and Engineering
(OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.