* 2201310
* Collaborative Research: Drivers and effects of latent phage activation in marine SAR11
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Robert Morris, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 05/31/2025
* USD 693,701.00

Viruses are the most abundant biological entities in the ocean. When they infect
plankton, they can alter food webs, induce shifts in nutrient cycles, and
enhance genetic exchange. However, the mechanisms that control these important
processes are largely unknown, which has limited our ability to predict
infection outcomes in nature. The primary goal of this study is to identify key
chemical, physical, and biological factors that influence host-virus
interactions in cultured bacterioplankton and to use this information to build
mathematical models that predict infection dynamics in diverse marine
ecosystems. Most of the marine viruses available for detailed study kill
bacteria following infection. This novel study focuses on SAR11, the most
abundant marine bacteria, which harbor dormant viruses called prophages, to
determine what causes prophage activation and host death. Specifically, the
research team uses field surveys and laboratory experiments with SAR11-prophage
pairs to generate data and mathematical models to predict the outcomes of viral
infections in SAR11 and other marine microbes.&lt;br/&gt;The conditions that
trigger prophage activation and their corresponding contributions to ecosystem
processes are largely hypothetical, due primarily to difficulties identifying
and culturing host cells with prophages. It is becoming increasingly clear that
the impact and importance of these infections are under-characterized and under-
estimated. The proposed research revises estimates of prophage activation in
globally-important SAR11 by quantifying infection occurrence, identifying
prophage activation inducers, and testing the effects of maintaining virus DNA
in the host genomes. The frequency of prophage infections is determined by
analyzing bacterial metagenomes generated with long-read sequencing technology.
Controlled growth experiments under a range of conditions that cause stress
(physical, chemical, and biological) and evaluation of shifts in gene expression
are employed to identify drivers of prophage activation. The outcomes of
prophage infections in culture serve to parameterize key interactions in
numerical models that can then predict outcomes in nature. This study fills
critical gaps in knowledge about the mechanisms that maintain the large and
genetically diverse populations of bacteria and viruses in the ocean and has the
potential to change our understanding and capacity to predict host-virus
interactions under changing environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.