* 2201701
* Collaborative Research: Researching Early Access to Computing and Higher Education (REACH): Understanding CS pathways with a focus on Black women
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Celeste Lee, Spelman College
* Continuing Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 06/30/2025
* USD 146,516.00

This research project seeks to examine longstanding inequities in access to and
participation in computer science (CS) education. Decades of research have shown
that certain subgroups (e.g., women, students with disabilities,
underrepresented minority students) tend to face substantial barriers to
participating in CS courses and programs. As computing education continues to
expand in K-12 education systems, it is important to understand how early
experiences in computing education relate to enrollment in computing courses and
programs in college. By combining quantitative analyses of large-scale
enrollment data and student surveys with qualitative data from focus groups and
interviews, this project aims to inform efforts to broaden and diversify
participation in computing education. Specifically, this project seeks to
systematically answer how K-12 computing experiences influence students as they
pursue higher education and whether and how that influence differs for distinct
subpopulations of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this mixed-methods
project is to examine equity in computer science (CS) education by investigating
the relationship between students’ computing experiences in K-12 and higher
education with a focus on the experiences of Black women. The theoretical
frameworks guiding this research are Black Feminist Thought, specifically
intersectionality, and social capital theory. The project spans three levels of
data collection and analysis: state, institution, and individual experience.
These levels have reference not to the unit of analysis (all three levels
utilize student-level data) but rather to the way the data are organized.
Cluster analysis of statewide education data will be used to identify computer
science course taking patterns in middle and high school. Multilevel modeling
will then be employed to investigate how these course taking patterns are
related to participation in computing courses and programs in college. Focus
will be placed on understanding how these relationships differ for distinct
groups of students. Findings from these analyses will be coupled with analyses
of college student surveys to better understand how students’ experiences in
K-12 influenced their opportunities, challenges, and decisions regarding
computing education in college. Finally, Black women who are majoring in CS will
be engaged in data interpretation, focus groups, and interviews to better
understand their unique experiences within the CS ecosystem. These analyses will
help conceptualize broadening participation in computing along the K-16 pathway
in a way that supports students, particularly Black women, in applying computing
skills and knowledge to solve problems in a variety of
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad, and enduring: STEM learning
and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM
workforce development. The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence
to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest
interventions and innovations to address persistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.