* 2201638
* I-Corps:  Functional carbon additives derived from upcycled plastic waste
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Zhe Qiang, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a practical and generalizable technology for manufacturing carbon
products from polyolefins and their waste. While polyolefins represent the most
widely produced and used category of polymers, they also contribute to the
majority of plastic waste that imposes serious risks to the sustainable
development of the environment and society. Current waste management strategies
associated with polyolefins include landfilling, incineration, and conversion to
products with less value. This project will focus on commercializing a simple,
scalable process to provide an efficient solution for plastic upcycling. The
associated technology may significantly increase the value of polyolefin waste
through converting them to functional carbon products. These carbons may be used
as additives for conventional plastic manufacturing as property modifiers and
enhancers. In addition, remediating plastic pollution represents a strong
societal demand, exemplified by explosive growth in the corresponding recycling
industry. Also, this project provides great opportunities to stimulate plastic
recycling and upcycling infrastructure in the surrounding regions, promoting
local economic development of the corresponding
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a platform for upcycling polyolefin-derived plastic waste into
functional, value-added carbon materials. The core technology in this project
combines an acid-enhanced crosslinking chemistry with optimized reaction
conditions to thermally stabilize polyolefin materials, enabling them to become
efficient carbon precursors with at least 65% yield after high temperature
pyrolysis under nitrogen atmosphere. This process is cost-effective and
potentially may be scaled to produce carbons with high degree of graphitization,
high porosity, and heteroatom-doped framework. Moreover, the simplicity of this
process allows for efficient transformation towards industrially relevant scales
through careful system design. Building upon the understanding of the
fundamental relationship between processing conditions and resulting material
properties, this technology also enables easy control over thermal and
electrical conductivity, adsorption performance, and mechanical properties of
resulting carbon additives by manipulating processing conditions. Successful
commercialization and timely distribution of this technology would lead to an
economically feasible solution to address at least millions of tons of plastic
waste, which directly tackles one of the most pressing environmental and
societal challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.