* 2201828
* EAGER: A Vertical Wind Tunnel for Determination of Scavenging Efficacy and Hydrometeor Physics
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Andrew Dickerson, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 01/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

Below-cloud scavenging by raindrops plays a critical role in removing natural
and anthropogenic aerosols, those which contribute to climate change, from the
atmosphere. However, scavenging of aerosols by rainfall events remains the most
uncertain constituent in climate models, largely due to current experimental
limitations to provide direct evidence of aerosol collection by falling
raindrops. This project will construct a vertical wind tunnel capable of
levitating water drops while exposing the drops to a wide range of aerosol
types. Integrated into the wind tunnel will be modern aerosol generation and
characterization equipment that permits the precise delivery of aerosols to the
drop. The experimental facility will have the ability of measuring aerosol
collection by a drop of prescribed size for a large range of aerosol sizes,
while the drop resides in the tunnel. The experimental facility will deliver
atmospherically relevant flow conditions to the drop by controlling temperature
and humidity, and levitate drops in calm and turbulent wind conditions. High-
speed cameras will capture the shape and oscillation of drops in simulated free
fall as drops collect particles, grow, and evaporate. The establishment of such
a facility will foster greater cooperation between US-based atmospheric
scientists and the international community, the future exchange of students, and
be a platform for STEM outreach to local high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building a Z-type vertical wind tunnel capable of direct
scavenging measurements will transform how atmospheric scientists approach
fundamental experimental efforts in raindrop and scavenging physics. There are
very few problems of the importance to atmospheric science and as poorly
constrained as aerosol scavenging. This project is an effort to create a
facility that can unravel longstanding questions in impaction scavenging,
particularly for particles within the Greenfield Gap. Mono- and polydisperse
aerosols will be delivered to drops levitating in sheath flow, created by
upstream laminarizers. Turbulence will be introduced by placing small bodies
upstream of the drop. Flow internal and external to the drop will be visualized
by laser illumination of particles and high-speed cameras. Validation
experiments of drop physics will be compared with those performed at the Mainz
vertical wind tunnel at project inception, and scavenging validation data
compared to measurements garnered from existing, limited data in literature. A
vertical wind tunnel provides the ability to study a number of other atmospheric
problems dealing with falling objects such as chemical species absorption in
free fall, melting of snowflakes and graupels, riming, and drop coalescence and
breakup.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.