* 2201992
* I-Corps:  Development of an Antimicrobial Enzyme-Imbedded Bandage for Wound Care
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Mitchell Hudson, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a material that may be activated by the wound and continuously
produce a natural antimicrobial, hydrogen peroxide, until the clotting of the
wound. Compared with existing products, this technology has an enhanced
sterilization strength, does not use traditional antibiotics (no resistance
concern), and could broadly kill pathogens. An example group of users is medical
professionals or personnel that seek sterilization and protection to treat mild
to moderate abrasions, cuts, and burns. Potential customers include physicians
treating burns, skin surgeons, primary care doctors, and general populations.
Besides wound applications, the technology may be adapted for other medical
products for sterilization, e.g., incorporation into the membranes of face
masks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
a material that may inhibit bacterial growth on the surface of the skin using
the enzyme glucose oxidase (GOx). This technology may confirm the viability of
GOx alone or in conjunction with other materials such as silver nanoparticles
(AgNP) as an alternative to antibiotics in preventing bacterial growth on
wounds. This proposed approach of preventing wound infections using GOx shows
continued efficacy in acidic environments, and greatly improves growth reduction
in gram-positive bacteria and gram-negative bacteria. Preliminary data shows a
significant reduction in bacterial colony forming units (CFU) using GOx that has
been fixed to a paper membrane. It is expected that the GOx paper membrane or
GOx alone could be easily added to bandages or other materials to form
antimicrobial wound care products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.