* 2201428
* CC* Compute: Koa - A High Performance and Flexible Research Computing Resource
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Jason Leigh, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 416,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Hawaii (UH) aims
to establish the CC* Compute: Koa - A High Performance and Flexible Research
Computing Resource to support computationally intensive research, education and
practice across the UH ten-campus system. The project aims to install a compute
cluster Koa, which is architected in response to current resource constraints,
particularly scratch storage. The cluster hardware includes scratch storage of
750TB, 2 Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) nodes comprising 10x Nvidia A4000 cards,
and a total of 384 CPU cores across 8 compute nodes. Koa provides UH faculty,
researchers and students state-of-the-art computational resources focused
towards machine learning, artificial intelligence and large scale simulation.
The Koa computing cluster is a shared inter-campus resource available to all UH
researchers. Koa focuses to support researchers in the specialties of astronomy,
atmospheric science, ocean science, microbiome science, and computer &amp; data
science, across UH's ten-campus system. Koa resources enable researchers to
scale up research to process larger datasets and models in addition to
accelerating existing workflows through the new advanced architecture that ties
extremely fast storage to the compute resources over a high-speed network, which
enables a shorter time to result. The strategic partnership with the Open
Science Grid allows for efficient usage of unused Koa resources by the national
research community as well as a gateway to a national compute platform for Koa
users. Additionally, the Koa resource aids hands-on training in data science and
computational science for the next generation of researchers and data scientists
through partnership with the Hawaii data science institute and local community
for workshops and classroom access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Koa enables a larger
scope and scale of analysis by providing 750TB of high-speed Lustre parallel
scratch storage capacity accessible from all compute and GPU accelerated
resources. Koa’s 200Gb HDR infiniband network enables Koa’s Lustre to achieve
I/O speeds up to 96Gb/s and provide increased computational throughput for I/O
heavy workflows. Koa’s external network connections increase data transfer
speeds to national, commercial cloud and academic resources via the combination
of 100Gb/s data transfer node connection and high-speed parallel file system,
enhancing end-to-end big data workflows. Koa also provides virtualized
infrastructure to support specialized computational use cases such as: immersive
analytics and science gateways. The strategic partnership with the Open Science
Grid allows for harvesting unused cycles on Koa by the national research
community as well as a gateway to national compute platform for Koa users. The
integration of Koa’s high speed file system with the regional Jestream2 NSF
Cloud infrastructure hosted at UH allows researchers to easily span computing
environments and modalities between the cloud and local Koa computing resources
to support new deep learning and artificial intelligence workflows,
visualizations and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded
through the collaborative efforts of the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure
(OAC) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.