* 2201962
* Collaborative Research: A Multi-Lab Investigation of the Conceptual Foundations of Early Number Development
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Sara Cordes, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 06/30/2026
* USD 554,710.00

Preschool numeracy is a crucial foundation for STEM learning and long-term
academic success. Previous research suggests that the development of strong
numeracy skills depends on a combination of perceptual, cognitive, and language
skills. However, most past studies have focused on a relatively small and
homogeneous groups of children in US urban areas. As a result, current
understanding of early numeracy may not&lt;br/&gt;generalize to diverse groups
of learners. It is likely that home language background, socio-economic status,
and geographic and cross-cultural differences could also influence numeracy
development. To address this, and to probe what factors drive early numeracy in
a representative sample, this first-of-its-kind project investigates how
toddlers and preschool-aged children perceive, reason, and talk about numbers in
a massive multi-lab collaboration involving over 130 research sites
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate early numeracy, this
collaborative project includes two foundational studies. The first study focuses
on how 2- to 5-year-old children perceive quantity, learn number words, and how
to accurately count groups of objects. The study examines variability in how
children learn about number and quantity while exploring the underlying
perceptual, cognitive and linguistic mechanisms that drive their learning. The
second foundational study focuses on toddler’s abilities to keep track of small
groups of objects, which researchers have argued may play an especially
important role in early numerical learning. This study examines variability
across larger and more diverse groups of participants than previously studied.
The study also asks whether limits to children’s object tracking abilities
change when they begin to learn number words. In addition to these foundational
studies, the project supports the creation of multiple exploratory studies,
allowing for novel, ground-breaking collaborations between researchers
worldwide. These exploratory studies examine how numerical abilities are related
to diverse phenomena including but not limited to social cognition, linguistic
diversity, cognitive abilities like executive function, and cross-cultural
differences in mathematics education and attitudes. Collectively, these studies
will test over 3000 children in 28 US states and 27 countries, using a
combination of cross-sectional and longitudinal behavioral assessments. Final
data will be shared with the broader scientific community, and will be presented
on a website in simplified form to make findings accessible to the broader
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the EHR Core Research
(ECR) program, which supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM
learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.