* 2201631
* CREATE Energy National Center
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Kathleen Alfano, Madison Area Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2027
* USD 7,487,597.00

Most of the current energy infrastructure in the U.S. was built in the five
decades from the 1920s to the late 1970s. The U.S. is now faced with the
challenge of replacing this aging and soon to be obsolete infrastructure, while
a tremendous opportunity exists globally to create new sustainable industries
and economies through renewable energy, energy storage, energy efficiency and
other advanced, smart, and clean energy technologies. More than 80% of all new
electrical generation added in 2020 was from renewable energy sources, largely
in the form of wind and solar power led in large part by three of the worldâ€™s
largest economies: China, Germany, and the U.S. This project will address the
rapidly changing energy landscape to develop and promote exemplary programs in
support of the education of a skilled technical workforce for the American
energy sector. The CREATE National Energy Center proposes to become the
preeminent source of faculty professional development and instructional
materials for energy educators, increase the visibility of energy careers and
broaden participation of groups historically underrepresented in these careers,
and build academic, industry, and international partnerships to advance energy
technician education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CREATE Center will empower two-
year college faculty and academic programs to champion new energy technologies
to ensure American competitiveness in this fast-changing sector. The Center
will: provide models and leadership in support of two-year colleges working with
four-year universities, secondary schools, business, industry, economic
development agencies, and government to promote a skilled technical workforce
for the energy sector; establish an effective dialogue and collaborations
between existing and new ATE projects in energy technology and related fields
across the nation; mentor faculty to broaden the impact of ATE in the energy
sector; promote energy technician careers and visibility and the public image of
advanced energy technology; address energy technician knowledge, skills, and
competencies needed for the evolving, converging, and emerging technical
workplace including re- and up-skilling of the incumbent workforce; and provide
faculty professional development opportunities in advanced energy technology and
areas of rapid growth. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.