* 2201447
* WEPPE: Wireless Edge-Computing Personal Protective Equipment for Large-Scale Health Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Mohammad Haider, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 499,574.00

The research objective of this proposal is to provide a general-purpose,
scalable edge-computing architecture critically needed to support the next
generation of personal protective equipment (PPE) technology. The proliferation
of sensors and wireless sensor networks (WSNs) results in high-volume data
generation, increases the computational burden at the central data center,
creates data transmission bottlenecks, and hinders the real-time decision-making
process. These challenges arise due to the existing limits of IoT devices on
computational power, memory, and wireless bandwidth (BW) allocation. The case
study chosen as a framework for developing such a system is motivated by the
recent and urgent need for better tracking of the spread of transmittable
diseases over large areas. The WEPPE project will resort to two-phase approaches
to address the challenges mentioned earlier. In the first phase, the project
will investigate a low-cost inkjet-printable nonlinear-element and develop a
machine-learning platform on a flexible substrate for low-level sensor data
processing or in-situ computation. In the second phase, the project will
integrate an efficient analog pulse-based data encoding and decoding scheme to
wirelessly relay the processed sensor data from the first phase to a data center
without requiring extended network bandwidth. The proposed WEPPE project is
expected to produce a unique machine learning framework that hinges on the
fundamentals of reservoir computing, novel inkjet-printed sensors and nonlinear
elements, and wireless data telemetry scheme with secure communication.
Customized hardware and low-level computing will enable in situ edge computing
while maintaining quality data abstraction for real-time network-level or big
data processing for rapid decision-making. The education goal is to broaden the
participation of female, minority, and African-American students and train and
educate them for the next era of engineering
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed project will investigate how edge
computing via hardware-based machine learning and data encryption/decryption
schemes may effectively resolve the IoT problems of limited bandwidth, secure
data transmission, high-density data throughput, and power-efficient in-situ
computation. The project has targeted mainly four research goals - (i) Research
on Reservoir Computing Architectures for Sensor Network Analysis, (ii) Research
on Inkjet-Printed Devices for Sensing and Physical Computing, (iii) Investigate
Energy-Efficient Orthogonal Pulses and Multi-bit Data Mapping, and (iv) Research
on Orthogonal Analog Pulse Based Data Compression and Decompression. A reservoir
computing architecture-based machine learning platform, especially the Echo
State Network (ESN), will be investigated for its simplicity, less training time
with relatively reduced training data volume, and ease of deployment. As an
integral part of this effort, the project will also investigate an inkjet-
printed low-cost nonlinear element, which will be a core building block for
developing a machine-learning platform on a flexible substrate. The reservoir
will generate a state vector, which is a hyper-dimensionalized encrypted
representation of the raw data, and as a result, will provide data compression
and security. Fault detection and sensor fusion will occur by training the
reservoir and merging the state vectors. The state vectors from the reservoirs
will then be further encrypted and spectrally compressed in the "Wearable Hub"
by a k-bit encoding scheme using analog orthogonal pulses (AOP). At the "Local
Server," the encoded AOPs from all the wearable hubs will be compressed by an
n-pulse compression technique and transmitted to the "Data Center." The secured
receiver at the "Data Center" will decode the state vectors using secured read-
out neurons, providing predictions to be sent back to the end users for
monitoring or large-scale processing by deep learning and other machine learning
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.