* 2201312
* Collaborative Research: Empowering Educators to Create Customized, Culturally-Responsive Instructional Materials from Scratch Encore Harmonized with the Interest of Students
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* David Weintrop, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2026
* USD 341,381.00

Research shows that instruction is more effective when content is situated in
contexts familiar to learners. This project builds on a successful introductory
computer science curriculum, called Scratch Encore, to explore ways to support
teachers in bringing together - or harmonizing - existing Scratch Encore
instructional materials with themes that reflect the interests, cultures, and
experiences of their students, schools, and communities. In designing these
harmonized lessons, teachers create customized activities that resonate with
their students while retaining the structure and content of the original Scratch
Encore lesson. To understand the impact of teaching and learning with such
harmonized materials, the project is conducting a classroom study with
partnering schools. This project is broadening participation in computing both
by working directly with teachers from schools with high numbers of students
from populations historically underrepresented in computing and by providing
teachers with tools to more effectively teach diverse populations. In doing so,
this work advances our understanding of the kinds of tools and training that are
needed to support teachers in designing personalized computer science
instructional materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is conducting
foundational research that pursues two goals: (1) understanding how to support
teachers in creating localized, culturally responsive computer science
instructional materials and (2) understanding the effects of those materials on
students. To inform the design of the professional development materials and
customized curriculum development materials, participatory design sessions are
managed by experienced teachers and the materials are being iteratively revised
as part of a multi-year study. To understand the impact of the use of localized,
culturally responsive materials in the classroom, a mixed-methods study collects
data from classrooms where teacher-created culturally responsive lessons are
taught. This work is focused on two geographically distinct regions.
Subsequently, the study enrolls a national cohort of teachers to participate in
the professional development sessions to understand how culturally responsive
designs differ across more regions. Finally, wide dissemination is supported
through a platform for teachers to share and use the customized, culturally
responsive Scratch Encore materials that are developed. The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.