* 2201693
* STEM Undergraduate Education for Minoritized Students: A Longitudinal Mixed-Methods Study of the STEM Experiences of Hmong American College Students
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Matthew Wolfgram, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,707,873.00

While progress has been made to increase enrollment numbers and graduation rates
for ethnic and racial minorities in STEM, significant disparities remain. More
investigations and interventions are needed to improve the educational outcomes
for students of color in STEM. As a group, Asian American students are often
excluded from these inquiries because they have shown positive gains in STEM
education and career attainment, constituting 13% of the science and engineering
workforce. However, when the data on “Asian” subgroups is separated, it is clear
that Southeast Asian Americans (i.e., Cambodian, Lao, Vietnamese, and Hmong) are
being overlooked and underserved. Despite having one of the lowest high school
and undergraduate degree attainment rates in the nation, the struggles of
Southeast Asian populations are often erased because of a “model minority
stereotype” that views Asian Americans as a uniformly prosperous immigrant
community and obscures the reality that Asian Americans deal with structural
racism, poverty, and inadequate educational supports. This award expands on an
ongoing research project conducted by University of Wisconsin (UW)–Madison
educational researchers and Hmong student activists to investigate the STEM
college experiences of Hmong students at the 13 campuses in the UW System. This
study directly addresses NSF’s program goals by cultivating authentic, engaged
partnerships with Hmong American students, scholars, and communities, and by
centering the knowledge and voices of those impacted by the inequities caused by
systemic racism in order to advance racial equity within STEM pathways. Active
involvement of students and other stakeholders in this research will have
broader impacts on the Hmong community throughout Wisconsin and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pilot research examining the experiences of Hmong
American undergraduate students at UW–Madison identified several factors, such
as advising, gatekeeping mechanisms, and racial climate, that affectively
redirected and/or pushed out Hmong-identified students from competitive STEM
majors. In this NSF-funded project, researchers will investigate this
“redirection” phenomenon by examining the sociocultural and institutional
factors that impact the STEM pathways of Hmong American college students. A
survey will be administered to Hmong American students at all 13 UW System
universities and a longitudinal interview study will be conducted at three UW
System institutions that serve Hmong American students. The study will fill
major gaps in the literature by 1) considering the specific educational needs of
individual Asian American populations and their intersectional social
identities; 2) deepening the discussion of recruitment, retention, and
graduation pathways; and 3) engaging students in decision-making processes that
affect their higher education experiences using a participatory action research
approach. This mixed-methods, longitudinal, multi-sited study will provide
robust and complementary evidence to serve as the evidentiary basis to theorize
factors impacting the STEM pathways and attainment of Hmong and other
minoritized college students. These results will form the basis for efforts to
develop institutional practices and policies supporting more inclusive STEM
education at UW. It will also serve as the basis for similar studies in other
groups of underrepresented and underserved students in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project is funded through the Racial
Equity in STEM Education program (EHR Racial Equity). The program supports
research and practice projects that investigate how considerations of racial
equity factor into the improvement of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the
voices, knowledge, and experiences of the individuals, communities, and
institutions most impacted by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise.
This program aligns with NSF’s core value of supporting outstanding researchers
and innovative thinkers from across the Nation's diversity of demographic
groups, regions, and types of organizations. Funds for EHR Racial Equity are
pooled from programs across EHR in recognition of the alignment of its projects
with the collective research and development thrusts of the four divisions of
the directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.