* 2201466
* STEM Microclimates of Intersectional Inclusivity: Modeling Interrelated Programmatic Features and their Relationships to Racial Academic Disparities
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* William Byrd, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2025
* USD 641,684.00

Persistent racial disparities are notable across STEM fields from who receives
undergraduate degrees to the unequal opportunities and outcomes that hamper
scientists’ careers later in life. Past research shows that contact with
faculty, advising, and undergraduate research can reduce racial inequities, but
it is not clear whether and how these work in all STEM fields. This project will
explore how experiences like these create “STEM microclimates” for
undergraduates with intersecting identities including race, gender, income, and
first generation status. This research will develop models to assist
universities with creating and fine-tuning programs to better support
underrepresented and marginalized groups in STEM fields. This project will
provide an approach for universities to more effectively use data to examine and
adjust policies and practices that affect STEM racial inequities. The project
will also provide a model for how universities can do this work in close
collaboration with racially marginalized and minoritized communities who are
most affected by racial disparities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses an
innovative approach to quantitatively model intersectionality with
institutional, transcript, and survey data spanning over a decade. The research
project examines STEM microclimates centered on student experiences and outcomes
related to intersectional inclusivity, or the extent to which academic programs
support students from varied intersectional social locations in relation to the
resources and opportunities to pursue their academic degrees and future careers.
Project goals include (1) modeling and disaggregating longitudinal patterns of
ethnoracial disparities and their relationship to interrelated gender and
socioeconomic disparities in STEM fields that are connected to the everyday
interactions and academic engagement of racially marginalized and minoritized
students, (2) strengthening the conceptualization of intersectional inclusivity
as an organizationally-embedded feature identifiable in the academic structures
of STEM microclimates differentially experienced by students, and (3) addressing
past limitations of quantitative applications of intersectionality theory
through modeling of STEM microclimates with longitudinal data and latent
variables. Beyond advancing the use of critical theories and melding them with
quantitative modeling strategies to examine STEM inequities, the emphasis on
intersectional social locations of students embedded within organizational
contexts contributes to knowledge about leveraging student voices through
quantitative data that speak to the nuances of intersectionality. Research and
programmatic components of the project ensure that analyses, sense-making of
findings, and the implications are made in collaboration and partnership with
those most affected by systemic inequities in STEM fields such that scientific
and policy-relevant knowledge are generated in conjunction with institutional
transformation promoting targeted and effective strategies to make STEM fields
more racially equitable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through
the Racial Equity in STEM Education program (EHR Racial Equity). The program
supports research and practice projects that investigate how considerations of
racial equity factor into the improvement of science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center
the voices, knowledge, and experiences of the individuals, communities, and
institutions most impacted by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise.
This program aligns with NSF’s core value of supporting outstanding researchers
and innovative thinkers from across the Nation's diversity of demographic
groups, regions, and types of organizations. Funds for EHR Racial Equity are
pooled from programs across EHR in recognition of the alignment of its projects
with the collective research and development thrusts of the four divisions of
the directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.