* 2201129
* Probing the Western Antarctic Lithosphere and Asthenosphere with New Approaches to Imaging Seismic Wave Attenuation and Velocity
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Colleen Dalton, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 05/31/2025
* USD 507,287.00

The western portion of the Antarctic continent is very active in terms of plate
tectonic processes that can produce significant variations in the Earths mantle
temperature as well as partial melting of the mantle. In addition to these
internal processes, the ice sheet in western Antarctica is melting due to Earths
warming climate and adding water to the ocean. These changes in ice mass cause
adjustments in rocks within the Earth's crust, allowing the surface to rebound
in some locations and fall in others, altering the geographical pattern of sea-
level change. However, the solid Earth response depends strongly on the strength
of the rocks at a wide range of timescales which is not well-known and varies
with temperature and other rock properties. This project has three primary
goals. (1) It will assess how processes such as rifting, mantle upwelling and
lithospheric instability have altered the lithosphere and underlying
asthenosphere of western Antarctica, contributing to a planet-wide understanding
of these processes. (2) It will use new measurements of mantle and crust
properties to estimate the rate at which heat from the solid Earth flows into
the base of the ice, which is important for modeling the rates at which the ice
melts and flows. (3) It will places bounds on mantle viscosity, which is key for
modeling the interaction of the solid Earth with changing ice and water masses
and their implications for sea-level rise. To accomplish these goals, new
resolution of crust and mantle structure will be obtained by analyzing seismic
waves from distant earthquakes that have been recorded at numerous seismic
stations in Antarctica. These analyses will include new combinations of seismic
wave data that provide complementary information about mantle temperature, heat
flow and viscosity. This project will provide educational and career
opportunities to a Brown University graduate student, undergraduates from groups
underrepresented in science who will come to Brown University for a summer
research program, and other undergraduates. The project will bring together
faculty and students for a seminar at Brown that explores the connections
between the solid Earth and ice processes in Antarctica. Project research will
be incorporated in outreach to local public elementary schools and high
schools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research addresses key questions about
mantle processes and properties in western Antarctica. What are the relative
impacts of rifting, mantle plumes, and lithospheric delamination in the
evolution of the lithosphere and asthenosphere? Where is topography
isostatically compensated, and where are dynamic processes such as plate flexure
or tractions from 3-D mantle flow required? What are the bounds on heat flow and
mantle viscosity, which represent important inputs to models of ice sheet
evolution and its feedback from the solid Earth? To address these questions,
this project will measure mantle and crust properties using seismic tools that
have not yet been applied in Antarctica: regional-scale measurement of mantle
attenuation from surface waves; Sp body wave phases to image mantle velocity
gradients such as the lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary; and surface wave
amplification and ellipticity. The resulting models of seismic attenuation and
velocity will be jointly interpreted to shed new light on temperature, bulk
composition, volatile content, and partial melt, using a range of laboratory-
derived constitutive laws, while considering data from mantle xenoliths. To test
the relative roles of rifting, mantle plumes, and delamination, and to assess
isostatic support for Antarctic topography, the predictions of these processes
will be compared to the new models of crust and mantle properties. To improve
bounds on western Antarctic heat flow, seismic attenuation and velocity will be
used in empirical comparisons and in direct modeling of vertical temperature
gradients. To better measure mantle viscosity at the timescales of glacial
isostatic adjustment, frequency-dependent viscosity will be estimated from the
inferred mantle conditions. This project will contribute to the education and
career development of the following: a Brown University Ph.D. student, Brown
undergraduates, and undergraduates from outside the university will be involved
through the Department of Earth, Environmental and Planetary Sciences (DEEPS)
Leadership Alliance NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site which
focuses on geoscience summer research experiences for underrepresented students.
The project will be the basis for a seminar at Brown that explores the
connections between the solid Earth and cryosphere in Antarctica and will
contribute to outreach in local public elementary and high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.