* 2201599
* CC* Compute: Nevada Bridge to AI-enabled Scientific &amp; Engineering Computing (NvBAISEC)
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Michael Webster, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 396,237.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Nevada-Reno aims
to add a 10 node A100 Graphics Processing Unit (GPU)-based cluster to their pre-
existing Central Processing Unit (CPU) cluster with the expressed aim of
creating a more central facility to expand access across campus. The projects
aims to meet present and anticipated Artificial Intelligence (AI)/Machine
Learning (ML) workloads in various research group on campus. Twenty-first
century science and engineering is being transformed by the increasing scales of
research computing and data. Despite the increase in the demand for large-scale
and data-centric computational resources, it is still a struggle to provide
domain scientists with the necessary tools and support at campus-levels.
Specifically, decentralized computing practices not only bottleneck research
because of lack of scale and support, but also decouple computing from higher
performance and deeper storage and networks. Accordingly, shifts in
institutional cyberinfrastructure strategies are required, with the following
guiding priorities: (1) improving user friendly access; (2) removing perceived
barriers in the use of scalable infrastructure; and (3) building
multidisciplinary communities for next-generation
workflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Nevada, Reno (UNR) will add a
new A100 GPU-based cluster to its pre-existing CPU cluster to introduce a new
set of paradigms for interdisciplinary computing infrastructure and expand
access across campus. Each A100 OnDemand node is equipped with 24-core CPUs and
A100 GPU accelerators, interconnected with Infiniband switches to provide
effective access to science drivers at UNR and externally through Open Science
Grid. This cluster has potential to meet UNRâ€™s present and anticipated workloads
of various research groups on campus by addressing three main requirements: (1)
capability to support dozens to hundreds of concurrent interactive session users
through the Multi Instance GPU (MIG) capabilities of the A100 GPUs; (2) support
for modern tensor core architectures to facilitate machine learning workflows;
and (3) colocation on the UNR research perimeter network and adjacency to high
performance storage. This project is a significant step for the under-resourced
institution in computing resources and capability. The planned integration with
Open Science Grid (OSG) will open a door to on-demand access to millions of
hours of heterogeneous compute cycles for researchers on
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the collaborative
efforts of the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (OAC) and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.