* 2201536
* CC* Integration-Small: A Software-Defined Edge Infrastructure Testbed for Full-stack Data-Driven Wireless Network Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Flavio Esposito, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Interdisciplinary research advances often require devices to collect, process,
and transfer large scientific datasets over high bandwidth links. The
overarching goal of this project is to build a wireless virtual network testbed
at Saint Louis University, in collaboration with Northeastern University, to
evaluate network management solutions that integrate the use of machine learning
and artificial intelligence with programmable radios and programmable network
switches. To evaluate the proposed innovation in computer networking, the
cyberinfrastructure will be used to prototype network protocols and systems in
support of a few interdisciplinary initiatives on
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this project's contributions will be
developed around the integration of learning techniques with network mechanisms
such as medium access control, routing, and transport services. First, the team
will explore the design and implementation of effective transport and routing
protocols that integrate the network stack at different scopes using recent
advances in reinforcement learning. Second, novel network architectures will be
proposed integrating edge network mechanisms with federated and split learning
techniques. Third, cross-layer distributed learning protocols will be designed
to create self-adaptive wireless networks. Such solutions will be tested on
campus and on other network testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining
synergies from the fields of data science and network virtualization protocols
and architectures, this work will lay the foundation for further research in
adaptive resource management for (wireless) edge computing applications that can
improve the quality of life in our society. This project's results will be
valuable for other fields interested in real-time prediction, such as robotics,
medicine, anthropology, and finance. The research in this project will be
impactful also thanks to the planned industry and international collaborations.
Students from underrepresented groups will be involved with research activities
and hackathon events on campuses in Missouri and Maine.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have a web presence at:
https://cs.slu.edu/testbed/. Such website will be maintained by the Computer
Science Department at Saint Louis University, and will be active at least 5
years beyond the end date of this project. The website will contain links to
datasets collected with the testbed, technical reports, scientific publications,
and code repositories developed by students and
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.