* 2201510
* Summer School on the Langlands Program
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Ioannis Sakellaridis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

This award will fund US-based graduate students and postdocs to participate at
the Summer School on the Langlands program, to be held in July 2022 at the
Institut des hautes Ã©tudes scientifiques (IHES) in France. The Langlands program
is one of the most expansive and consequential research programs in today's
mathematics, spanning a breathtaking range of topics, from number theory to
mathematical physics, and the summer school aims to highlight connections
between various subfields, and train future researchers in this demanding and
multifaceted area. At its heart, the Langlands program aims to understand
solutions of diophantine equations (polynomial equations with integer
coefficients) by establishing connections with the frequencies of certain
higher-dimensional "drums" called "arithmetic manifolds." The modularity
conjecture, which led to the proof of Fermat's "last theorem," is one of the
instances of such connections. Many of the world's foremost experts on the
subject will be speaking in the summer school; the event is taking place 45
years after a historic summer school in Corvallis, Oregon, where the experts of
the time set the agenda of the Langlands program for several decades. Meeting
website: https://indico.math.cnrs.fr/event/6909/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
the Langlands program has expanded too much to be covered in its entirety, the
summer school will highlight connections between the representation-theoretic,
arithmetic, and geometric aspects of it. On the analytic side, there will be
updates on the status of endoscopy and beyond, trace formulas, the theory of
periods of automorphic forms and L-functions, and explicit methods for proving
functoriality. On the geometric side, developments around local and global
Shimura varieties and shtukas will be covered, together with recent
breakthroughs on the Langlands conjectures over function fields, the local
Langlands conjectures, and relations to the geometric Langlands program. On the
arithmetic side, new geometric insights on moduli spaces of Langlands parameters
and Galois representations will be discussed, together with their connections to
modularity lifting theorems and derived structures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.