* 2201273
* Geometric Insights in Noncommutative Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Manuel Reyes, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Commutative algebra studies algebraic systems for which the order of
multiplication is irrelevant, while noncommutative algebra allows for the
possibility that the two products XY and YX may not be the same. Noncommutative
algebra historically arose in the algebraic study of symmetry, in linear
algebra, and perhaps most profoundly in quantum mechanics. Since the advent of
algebraic geometry, commutative algebra has been revolutionized by geometric
ideas. In a similar way, the development of noncommutative geometry over the
past several decades has stimulated many new ideas and perspectives in
noncommutative algebra, but to date it has posed more challenges than it has
solved. For instance, many noncommutative algebras are expected to be well-
behaved due to the geometric nature of their construction, but we lack the
algebraic tools to prove that this is the case. Furthermore, noncommutative
geometry largely remains a collection of loosely related frameworks that are not
directly compatible with one another, which can make the field especially
difficult for newcomers. This project will directly address these fundamental
problems by creating new techniques to deduce good algebraic properties for
geometrically constructed noncommutative algebras and providing new tools to
represent geometric structures corresponding to noncommutative algebras. The
project will involve research and training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of this project focuses on
homological problems in noncommutative algebraic geometry. The PI and
collaborators will use methods of Koszul duality and the representations of
finite-dimensional algebras to attack a longstanding conjecture that Artin-
Schelter (AS) regular algebras are domains. Related techniques will be used to
understand when generalized AS regular algebras that are not necessarily
connected, such as graded Calabi-Yau algebras, are prime rings. The second part
of this project is focused on spectral problems in noncommutative geometry. The
PI will use a variety of approaches to understand noncommutative discrete spaces
and utilize them to construct noncommutative spectrum functors for both rings
and C*-algebras. Topics to be investigated include structure sheaves for
noncommutative spaces, methods to characterize dual coalgebras, discretization
of C*-algebras, and a projective representation theory for
rings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.