* 2201027
* Ballistic Energy Transport in Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Igor Rubtsov, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 07/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, a research team led by Professors Igor
Rubtsov and Alexander Burin at Tulane University will investigate ballistic
energy transport, a process that is responsible for unusually rapid and
efficient movement of energy in molecules. Energy, in the form of heat,
typically flows through materials through a process called thermal diffusion.
However, Professor Rubtsov and his research team previously identified systems
where energy deposited in one end of a molecule is rapidly transferred through
the molecular backbone to distant locations. This project examines the
underlying details of this anomalous transport of energy. A deeper understanding
of ballistic energy transport may help scientists design new materials with
improved thermal conductivity properties where the direction, speed, and
efficiency of energy transport are controlled. The project also provides
interdisciplinary training for graduate and undergraduate students engaged in
the research, as well as opportunities for middle school students from
underrepresented groups to participate in educational activities that promote
chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will use ultrafast dual-frequency two-
dimensional infrared spectroscopy methods in the laboratory and will implement
first-principle theoretical modeling to elucidate the efficiency, speed, and
mechanisms of energy transport in a range of oligomeric chains, potentially
providing access to a large library of molecular systems that demonstrate
efficient energy transport. The aim of the proposed research is to understand
the chemical and physical origins of the processes of formation, propagation,
and detection of the vibrational wavepackets, which represent compact bundles of
energy. One focus of the program is to access regimes of efficient wavepacket
initiation in longer molecular chains and to explore a variety of conditions for
implementing such regimes. Another focus is to investigate how electronic
conjugation in oligomeric chains affects the wavepacket initiation, transport
speed, and transport efficiency and to explore the ability of altering the
energy transport speed and efficiency by changing the degree of the electronic
conjugation by external stimuli. These studies target the development of design
principles for efficient energy transporters and energy transport switches. The
broader impacts of the project include advanced student training, research
opportunities for students from groups that are underrepresented in science, and
additional educational outreach activities for middle school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.