* 2201441
* AGS-PRF: A Theoretical Framework to Investigate the Madden Julian Oscillation-Quasi Biennial Oscillation (MJO-QBO) Relationship--Upward Wave Radiation and Thin-Cirrus Feedbacks
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Jonathan Lin, Lin, Jonathan
* Fellowship Award
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2024
* USD 190,000.00

The largest weather pattern in the world is the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO),
an area of enhanced cloudiness and rainfall that forms over the equatorial
Indian Ocean and propagates eastward over the course of a month or two. The MJO
has worldwide impacts, modulating the number of hurricanes that form in the Gulf
of Mexico, the rainy seasons of Asia, Australia, Africa, and the Americas, and
the formation of the atmospheric rivers that cause flooding along the US West
Coast. One issue that has gained prominence in recent years is how the MJO is
influenced by the winds in the stratosphere above it. In the tropics the
stratospheric wind blow from east to west or vice versa, changing direction over
the course of about two years. The wind reversal starts at the top and descends
in a progression known as the Quasi-Biennial Oscillation (QBO). Observations
since 1980 show that the MJO is more robust in the easterly phase of the QBO
(when the wind in the lower stratosphere is from the east) than in the westerly
phase, a relationship which holds during the northern winter. The MJO is also
more predictable in the easterly phase, thus the modulation of the MJO by the
QBO has implications for subseasonal prediction.

Work performed here seeks to understand why the MJO is sensitive to the phase of
the QBO. Two possibilities are explored, the first being that the MJO is damped
by the upward propagation of wave energy into the stratosphere. The work is an
extension of earlier research by the Principal Investigator (PI) showing how the
energy of convectively coupled equatorial waves can be lost through upward
propagation. The second possibility is that the wind of the QBO influences the
cirrus clouds that form at the tropopause level above convection in the MJO.
Cirrus clouds are effective at trapping outgoing longwave radiation, and their
radiative effect is thought to be important for creating the large areas of
convective clouds found in the MJO. The QBO could affect the cirrus clouds
either directly, as the QBO wind moves the clouds in one direction or the other,
or indirectly through modulating the rising motions that favor cirrus clouds.
The research is conducted through the development of an idealized theoretical
model that captures the hypothesized effects and through simulations using a
state-of-the art atmospheric model, the System for Atmospheric Modeling (SAM).

The work has societal value due to the worldwide weather and climate effects of
the MJO. The modulation of the MJO by the QBO has clear implications for
subseasonal prediction, as noted above, but the reasons for the modulation are
not known and the extent to which it can be harnessed for better predictions is
difficult to assess. In addition, the Principal Investigator serves as a mentor
to undergraduate and graduate students and participates in outreach activities
such as the Lamont Open House.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.