* 2201767
* A Statistical Study of Coronal Holes and Active Regions Producing Intense Geomagnetic Storms over Four Solar Cycles
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Steven Saar, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 03/31/2025
* USD 282,189.00

One of the most fundamental properties controlling activity on the Sun is its
magnetic field. The Sun’s magnetic field consists of closed and open field lines
that interact, snap, and reconnect, affecting the motion of plasma leaving the
Sun in coronal mass ejections (CMEs) and through the solar wind. The solar wind
can be accelerated to high speed through coronal holes (CHs), or regions with
open field lines. Active regions (ARs) are regions of strong closed magnetic
field lines that launch eruptive events such as CMEs and solar flares.
Understanding these phenomena are crucial to predicting and preparing for
harmful space weather effects on Earth. This project will perform a statistical
study over four full solar cycles. Two early-career female scientists will be
supported and three undergraduate students will be mentored through this
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a detailed study of the role of
coronal hole – active region interactions in the generation of intense
geomagnetic storms (IGS). Two science questions will be addressed: (1) Can the
evolution of CH location and size be used as a proxy to understand IGS
occurrence and timing? (2) How does the interaction between HSSs and CMEs affect
the strength of geomagnetic storms? In the past, limited studies have hinted at
the possibility that the number of geomagnetic storms in even cycles increases
with increasing number of close CH-AR pairs and decreases with increasing number
of close CH-AR pairs in odd cycles. It is still not well understood how
location, size and CH-AR interactions could influence the potential for an
eruption to be geo-effective. Therefore, this project will make a statistical
observational study covering four complete solar cycles (21-24). They will
provide an overview of the solar wind conditions related to all IGS events (265)
and a detailed list of their characteristics (mean values of speed, magnetic
field, density, temperature, flow and magnetic pressures, components of the
magnetic field, minimum Dst index values) including their association with
active regions, coronal holes, high speed streams, and
CMEs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.