* 2201821
* Dialogic gesture in collaborative sense making in physics
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Benedikt Harrer, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 373,617.00

Active, collaborative learning approaches are widely seen as effective ways for
students to learn undergraduate science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM). However, learning outcomes are highly contingent on the
quality of the interactional processes in which students engage. There is a
great deal of research on successful verbal communicational practices in group
work, but little is known about how nonverbal communicational practices like
gesture contribute to successful collaboration. Previous research shows that
when groups are responsive to, take up, and discuss one another’s spoken ideas,
they are more successful at collaborative problem solving in STEM. In this
project, researchers will investigate (1) how students are responsive to, take
up, exchange, or interact with each other’s gestures while working together, and
(2) how this behavior shapes or constrains groups’ problem solving and sense
making in introductory undergraduate physics. This project will improve our
understanding of the role nonverbal communication plays in collaborative
learning, and it will contribute to the development of broader, more expansive,
and inclusive definitions of the competencies and practices involved in learning
and doing STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers will analyze
an existing large video corpus of active, collaborative physics learning in an
algebra-based introductory undergraduate physics course using the Collaborative
Learning through Active Sense-Making in Physics (CLASP) curriculum at a
Hispanic, Asian American and Native American Pacific Islander-Serving
Institution, where diverse groups of students engage in group sense making to
model the energy dynamics in mechanics scenarios. After creating a comprehensive
content log of the video corpus, the team will code the corpus for
representational gesture use to identify the forms of dialogic gesture used by
physics groups. Using multimodal conversation analysis, researchers will then
characterize the communicational functions of these dialogic gestures and create
a taxonomy of dialogic gesture types. Researchers will examine how students’ use
of certain types of dialogic gesture contributes to (or constrains) groups’
sense-making practices in physics as part of developing accurate and robust
scientific models. This project will make fundamental contributions to advance
current theoretical understandings of learning and communication in STEM by (1)
creating a taxonomy of forms and functions of dialogic gesture types that
students use in collaborative physics learning, (2) identifying and
characterizing mechanisms by which dialogic gesture use supports (or constrains)
sense making practices, and (3) characterizing relationships between students’
use of dialogic gesture and sense making outcomes in physics. This project will
highlight, identify, and characterize assets (in the form of communicational
resources) that a diverse set of students bring to the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform
efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and
innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM interest, education,
learning and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.