* 2201764
* Collaborative Research: Learning to observe: Unpacking teachers development of expertise in scientific observation
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Holly Godsey, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2025
* USD 599,599.00

Scientific observation is a ubiquitous discipline-specific skill that has been
overlooked in contemporary science instruction. Instructional materials often
treat scientific observation as a simple skill or a minor pedagogical challenge
to be overcome. For secondary science teachers, challenges compound as they
themselves are often emergent learners of this skill. Furthermore, the field has
yet to develop explanatory frameworks for the development of expertise in
observation. Existing research using disparate theoretical frameworks has
offered only an incomplete picture of the development of this essential skill.
To address these issues, this research will study how teachers develop their
observational skills in a disciplinary context, and to examine how these skills
are shaped by their knowledge systems, social interactions, and the cultural
contexts in which they are practiced. Results will advance the field through
generating knowledge about how learners develop observational skills and an
explanatory framework to foster these skills. By focusing on the cognitive,
interactional, and cultural dimensions of learning to observe, the instructional
paths to be identified to support scientific observation will inherently attend
to equity issues that emerge in group learning. The resulting shift in our
collective understanding of scientific observation will improve K-12 science
instructional materials and teacher professional development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research study is to deepen research-
based knowledge about how expertise in scientific observation develops as a
multidimensional skill. To achieve this goal, the researchers will design and
implement high quality science professional learning experiences (PLEs) that
forefront scientific observation as a learning opportunity in a discipline where
observation is of utmost importance and where secondary teachers typically have
little training: field geology. This study will unpack how secondary science
teachers learn to generate scientific observations by using a novel approach
that integrates three complementary theoretical frameworks: cognitive,
interactional, and cultural dimensions of learning. The researchers will analyze
teacher learning in two rounds of a year-long PLEs. The PLEs will be designed to
enable teachers to build understanding of the geologic record using a three-
dimensional (3D) approach that foregrounds field-based scientific observation.
Following a semester of virtual instruction and a week-long field trip, teachers
will apply their newfound skills to develop field-based experiences for their
science students. The structure of the PLEs will enable researchers to use three
theoretical frameworks to analyze how teachers’ developing expertise in
scientific observation relies on their1) knowledge systems, 2) social
interactions, and 3) cultural contexts and backgrounds. Applying these
theoretical frameworks to produce complementary case studies from a single
dataset and using mixed-methods to integrate findings will produce a holistic
picture of the multidimensional nature of the development of expertise in
scientific observation. Results will advance our understanding of scientific
observation and its role in 3D science learning by offering a new, research-
based framework to explain learning and expertise development within this
important but understudied skill.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental
STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest
intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.