* 2201446
* AccelNet-Implementation: US-Africa Sustainable Food Systems through Water-Energy- Food Nexus Networking (SustainFood)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Christopher Scott, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

Global change is driving changes in agricultural systems around the world. Food
production requires sustainable practices in the use of water and energy under
pressure of growing populations and accelerating climate change. The SustainFood
network synthesizes research on issues of sustainable and equitable food
systems, renewable energy transitions, and water governance in Africa to
safeguard ecosystems so that they are resilient to weather extremes and
political instability. The network links scientists, communities, and
policymakers to research challenges at the nexus of water, energy, and food
(WEF) security. These dynamics are critical for US interests in relation to
scientific innovation, sustainability, and human and environmental security.
This network addresses the need to improve agricultural yields while maintaining
environmental integrity and supporting social equity. These collaborations
investigate climate-change impacts on food production, processing, distribution,
and use. The SustainFood network links research and teaching institutions,
policy and practice NGOs, government, and civil-society participants to develop
solutions that address food insecurity challenges across Africa with relevance
for the US and elsewhere. The network contributes to science and expands
knowledge on urban landscapes as areas of food production to promote food
security through socially and environmentally sustainable
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SustainFood network identifies challenges
and develops solutions by promoting: 1) systems-level understanding of
sustainable water, energy, and food security; 2) increased STEM participation of
underrepresented groups in identifying solutions; and 3) advancing science-to-
policy impacts. The network uses the nexus of interactions among food, energy,
and water security as the framework for sustainable food systems. It develops
integrated modeling and tradeoff analysis, fills data gaps, and engages with
decision-makers to address rising food insecurity. The group supports
bidirectional student exchanges between the US and Africa and works with small
and independent farmers, communities, and public and private service providers
to share new practices with global stakeholders. The data science tools,
scientific understanding of WEF systems, and evidence-based policy engagement
emerging from this teamâ€™s work in the US and across African countries contribute
to use-inspired research, policy uptake, and social impact. With regionally
focused research and policy solutions, Africa can achieve WEF resilience through
better planning that sustainably fosters well-being at home, in the US, and
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through International
Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate
the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next generation of U.S.
researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The AccelNet program
supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and complementary
networks abroad that will leverage research and educational resources to tackle
grand scientific challenges that require significant coordinated international
efforts. This project is funded by the Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.