* 2201505
* CC* Planning Grant: Computational Infusion for Missouri Undergraduate Science and Education (CIMUSE)
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Marcus Bond, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 30,857.00

Many of the Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs) in Missouri are
substantially under-resourced and located in less-populated, connectivity-
challenged areas. Missouri PUIs vary widely in their experience with advanced
networking and High-Performance Computing (HPC) usage. There is wide variability
in the adoption of new research and teaching resources including student access
to meaningful STEM experiences enabled by a robust Cyberinfrastructure (CI).
While PUIs educate about 40% of STEM graduates, in 2020 less than 5% of NSF
awards in Missouri went to PUIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the Computational
Infusion for Missouri Undergraduate Science and Education (CIMUSE) Planning
Grant, Missouri is working on the first in a series of National Science
Foundation Campus Cyberinfrastructure (CC*) proposals for robust access to a
uniform set of shared resources regardless of geography, proven
cyberinfrastructure designs, opportunities for research computing design, and
operational support requirements. The CIMUSE planning grant brings interested
institutions together for demonstrations and discussion of existing resources,
typical CI roles and responsibilities, and potential operational issues. The
first wave of researchers, science educators, and campus information technology
staff are working to articulate long-term computing and networking needs,
document science drivers and required computational resources, and coordinate
state research network and campus CI plans for the first wave of CC*
proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, the Missouri Research and Education
Network (MOREnet) and first wave PUIs will develop a consistent set of resources
to increase the research capabilities at under-resourced institutions, bring
robust teaching tools to STEM instructors and provide computation-intensive
experiences for STEM students becoming future STEM
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.