* 2201621
* Building the Cell Therapy and Flow Cytometry Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Savita Prabhakar, Frederick Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 349,911.00

Recent innovations in personalized medicine have spurred rapid growth in the
regional biopharmaceutical industry and an increased demand for skilled
technicians. Working closely with industry leaders, this project from Frederick
Community College will create a specialized curriculum to meet the needs of the
regional biotechnology workforce. Over the three-year project, 25 students will
gain specialized skills in cell therapy and flow cytometry as part of an
associate’s degree, certificate, letter of recognition, or Registered
Apprenticeship pathway. The overall enrollment in the Frederick Community
College biotechnology program is anticipated to increase by 50%. The project
will establish a new advisory team comprised of business and industry leaders to
guide the development of a new Cell Therapy and Flow Cytometry course. Faculty
will receive training, a flow cytometer will be purchased, and the instrument
will be used in the delivery of hands-on instruction. A recruitment specialist
will be hired to develop and implement a comprehensive recruitment plan. The
project has the potential to broaden participation in the STEM workforce by
making affordable, relevant, industry-validated biotechnology technician
education accessible to local students, many of whom represent underserved
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two overarching goals: 1) to
meet the growing industry need for technicians with cell therapy and flow
cytometry skills, and 2) to increase enrollment of traditional and non-
traditional students in the Frederick Community College biotechnology program.
The project will develop a new Cell Therapy and Flow Cytometry course that will
align with workforce requirements of regional industry partners. This course
will provide hands-on instruction in cell therapy and flow cytometry techniques
and will be required for all biotechnology program pathways. The project will
also develop and execute a comprehensive recruitment plan to increase awareness
among local high school students, generate interest among undergraduate
students, and appeal to job seekers and workers who wish to expand their skill
sets. Faculty will receive training on using flow cytometers to expand their
knowledge of cell therapy techniques and procure one to provide hands-on
instruction. To ensure the curriculum is aligned with industry needs, the
project will engage a new Business and Industry Leadership Team (BILT) to
provide subject matter expertise, input, guidance and feedback on course
development and implementation. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation’s
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.