* 2201407
* Engineering for Students with Extensive Support Needs
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Bree Jimenez, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 06/30/2025
* USD 789,508.00

Although noteworthy growth in research on mathematics and science content
instruction for students with extensive support needs (e.g., students with
moderate/severe intellectual disability, and autism; ESN) has occurred over the
past two decades, research on engineering practices with this student population
is significantly lacking. By addressing the relevance of engineering to help
people in meaningful contexts, engineering instruction may provide a unique way
to engage students with ESN. With increased focus on STEM education for students
with ESN, engineering practices highlight the importance of problem-solving
skills (e.g., systems thinking, creativity). Further, for students with ESN,
engineering lessons/units may provide a viable format for systematically planned
math and science instruction, that naturally embeds opportunities to teach
students skills promoting increased self-regulated learning. Due to lack of
prior experience teaching engineering, little is known about how teachers of
students with ESN scaffold instruction to build their students’ engineering
practices. Thus, this project focuses on teachers’ development of engineering
practices, including how teachers support their students’ development of
engineering-focused behaviors and mindsets through instruction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves four strands of work: (a)
empirically investigating teachers’ engineering instruction, (b) developing a
framework of conceptual understanding of engineering education for students with
ESN, (c) conducting design-based implementation research to support universally
designed engineering instruction and instructional materials, and (d) producing
and disseminating the instructional support framework and materials. First, the
team will develop a framework of conceptual and epistemic understanding of
engineering education for students with ESN. Data will then be collected across
multiple mixed methods studies using (a) teacher interviews and focus groups;
(b) evaluation of professional learning; (c) classroom observations and behavior
coding; (d) fidelity of implementation of engineering curriculum; and (e)
assessment of student engineering-focused behaviors and mindsets. Finally, after
several rounds of iterative design for each component of the curriculum, the
teacher participants will pilot implementation with students. Feedback obtained
from this process, as well as unit enactments and data analysis, will be used to
further refine the universally designed for learning engineering unit.
Additionally, insights from project research will be used to further refine
professional learning materials to better support teachers' ability to support
engineering focused behaviors of students with ESN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.