* 2201539
* Guitar, Robotics, Rocketry ATE (GRRATE) Summer Institutes
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Calhoun Calhoun, Santa Fe College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 570,729.00

Rural students are often faced with low educational attainment, geographic
isolation, and negative social dynamics tied to race, class, and economic
inequality. For many rural students, majors and careers in STEM fields are
undesirable and not encouraged. Research shows that early interventions to shape
the perception of STEM to students as early as middle school by developing a
sense of belonging can shift the interest of students in technical careers
specifically and STEM generally. This project will address technician workforce
needs by increasing the number and diversity of students who are interested in
entering career and technical education majors and ultimately technician careers
in high-tech STEM fields. The Santa Fe College Technician Education programs
include: Air Conditioning and Refrigeration, Automotive, Biotechnology, Building
Construction, Computer Networking, Computer Programming and Analysis,
Information Systems, Plumbing, and Welding. The project will leverage lessons
learned from the Upward Bound summer camp pilot to adapt and implement the
Guitar, Robotics, and Rocketry curriculum as a Summer Institute program to
attract students to these technician career fields before they graduate high
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to increase
the quantity of students from rural regions and from groups underrepresented in
STEM entering technician careers in high-tech STEM fields. This goal will be
accomplished through five objectives: 1) Adapt and format curriculum to enhance
college preparation mathematics for the Summer Institutes ; 2) Provide faculty,
staff, and local secondary school educators professional development to ensure
consistent implementation of the curriculum and pedagogical models; 3) Host
Summer Institutes at the College’s five educational centers over the project
lifetime; 4) Evaluate the effectiveness of project outcomes through a validated
pre/post attitude and career interest survey, pre/post comparison of math
skills, and follow-up interviews; and 5) Engage local employers in the
development of technician career exploration presentations and/or videos. The
project will collaborate with community partners including Upward Bound (UB),
College Achievement Program (CAP), SF Achieve, and two University of Central
Florida and Children’s Home Society Community Partnership Schools (CPS) to
recruit students and to provide year-round support for student development.
Collaboration with the Florida Local Alliance for Math Literacy and Equity
(FLAME) will provide guidance in strengthening the math skills of project
participants. Curriculum adaptation will be based on pedagogical practices
designed to combat stereotype threats and enhance self-efficacy. Local employers
will provide expertise for curriculum improvement based on industry needs and
provide information about technician career opportunities and educational
requirements for those careers. The project results will be disseminated through
project presentations and publications and will be shared with project partners.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.