* 2201554
* CC* Planning: Delaware Research &amp; Education Network (DEREN)
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Joseph Kempista, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 91,813.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Delaware Research and
Education Network (DEREN) project incorporates community research requirements
to develop a plan for a sustainable research and education network that fosters
collaboration, data sharing and new research opportunities across the State of
Delaware. Delaware’s research community includes several mid-sized and under-
resourced colleges and universities, including a Historically Black College and
University (HBCU). The vision of DEREN is to enable partnerships between
research entities across the state of Delaware and beyond through coordination,
training, and access to local and regional research cyberinfrastructure. The
project will provide a plan for a viable and scalable structure for Delaware’s
broader research community to flourish. The partnership between University of
Delaware (UD) and the State of Delaware’s Department of Technology and
Information (DTI) will support strong regional collaborations and their impacts
to science drivers in Delaware. Prior work has been conducted to identify on
campus research needs and capabilities at UD and there is a general consensus to
improve access for other partnering institutions to dedicated research resources
located across the state. These would be available to hospitals, research
facilities, small and mid-sized under resources schools, and an HBCU. The
project will also engage other Research and Education Networks (RENs) along the
East Coast in understanding the community aspect of the business, cost, and
revenue structure for these organizations. Such efforts have potential to aid in
developing and supporting a regional strategy for operating a shared research
cyberinfrastructure (RCI) to benefit researchers across the state of
Delaware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the potential to impact many
educational institutions in Delaware through access to and management of
networking and computational systems that are distributed throughout the state
and region. The project planning will entail university-led workshops that focus
on potential community users and their respective research and education
requirements, potential participation in University of Delaware research
programs, network requirements, opportunities for collaboration, and data
sharing strategies between community entities. The project aims to actively
involve three other pre-existing state-wide network entities from other states
(Nysernet, OSHEAN, and Link Oregon). After analyzing community research
requirements, UD will evaluate opportunities and associated fiscal strategies to
extend powerful research and cyber infrastructure via DEREN to advance research.
The project outcome would provide the framework to design the DEREN as a
successful, scalable, and comprehensive community anchor network across the
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the collaborative
efforts of the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (OAC) and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.