* 2201592
* CC* Planning: High-Performance GPU Cluster for Computational Intensive Interdisciplinary Research
* CSE,OAC
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Ahmet Arac, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

With recent technical advances in research methodologies, there is an ever-
increasing generation of large datasets in biomedical research. This coincides
with advances in analytical methodologies such as deep learning techniques.
These analytical tools heavily utilize the power of graphical processing units
(GPUs) as the main computational hardware. However, the current infrastructure
of many research institutes is not sufficient to provide solutions for this kind
of special computational needs of the biomedical fields. This results in
attempts by individual research laboratories to solve these computational needs
temporarily, slowing down the research and putting the difficult-to-obtain data
at risk of loss. To address these issues and find a more efficient and
sustainable solution, this project aims to systematically go through several
steps at different levels, create solutions that will expedite the biomedical
research and provide an institutional example for setting up infrastructure to
meet these computational needs for biomedical research institutes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the goal is to create a detailed plan
of such an infrastructure. These include: (1) identification of science use
cases and representative users, (2) determining the standards for computing,
networking, storage and security of such a system, (3) creating a high-
performance GPU architecture plan and (4) developing a support model to maintain
and improve this infrastructure. This project aims to create a model that is
efficient, useful, sustainable and that will expedite the data processing and
analytics in biomedical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.