* 2201479
* CC* Compute: Collaboration in Computing Infrastructure for Research and Education (CO-InResE)
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Horst Severini, Langston University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 399,262.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational science forms an
essential component of scientific inquiry. It contributes to the advancement of
research and development and boosts discovery speed. High-Performance Computing
(HPC) and High Throughput Computing (HTC) enable scientific inquiry that was
unthinkable just a few years ago while allowing the contribution from a range of
research. Such advancement is also accomplished through multidisciplinary and
multi-institutional contributions. This project will acquire, deploy, and
maintain a 16 node HPC cluster, and support computing-intensive research and
training across a wide range of disciplines. The new cluster is available as a
campus-wide shared resource to Langston University and researchers across
Oklahoma and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to 1) Improve campus
awareness and adoption of advanced computing and data resources for Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) research and education
activities; 2) Contribute to and enhance the current research computing
resources at Langston University, the only Historically Black Colleges and
University (HBCU) in the region; 3) Train a diverse cyberinfrastructure
workforce; and 4) Actively contribute to the Open Science Grid gateway and the
regional Cyberinfrastructure Consortium. The project facilitates a range of
Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering research activities
across campus. In addition, under served undergraduate students interested in
joining the cyberinfrastructure workforce will be mentored and trained on all
aspects of the job and career. This project has potential to advance the
regional infrastructure and research efforts by sustaining and increasing the
number of local resources across the region. Thus, it aligns with well-
established regional distributed support teams such as the OneOklahoma
Cyberinfrastructure Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Program notes that this
Area#4 in CC* was created explicitly to address computing needs at under served
campuses. Langston University is a strong example, with an outdated computing
resource and compelling needs for their proposed cluster. The project acquires a
16 node HPC cluster that will be deployed at Langston University. The proposed
cluster, which consists of 768 Central Processing Unit (CPU) cores and 8 A100
Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) accelerators, will enhanced research and
education at Langston University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded
through the collaborative efforts of the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure
(OAC) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.