* 2201051
* Developing Science Assessments for Language Diversity in Early Elementary Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Nonye Alozie, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,054,766.00

There is an urgent need for vetted classroom-based, formative assessment tasks
for the early grades that align with the Next Generation Science Standards
(NGSS); specifically, ones that consider the language and literacy diversity of
young students, and explicitly integrate equity and inclusion for young science
learners in the design. This project will design instructional assessment
materials by using an innovative and unique design approach that brings together
the coherent and systematic design elements of evidence-centered design, an
equity and inclusion framework for the design of science materials, and
inclusive design principles for language-diverse learners. Using this three-
pronged approach, this project will develop a suite of NGSS aligned formative
assessment tasks for first-grade science and a set of instructional materials to
support teachers as they administer the formative assessments to students with
diverse language skills and capacities. These resources will be of high utility
for classroom teachers in the early elementary grades and offer an important
step towards meeting the need for useable NGSS aligned assessments for the early
grades. The design approach will provide assessment developers with a rigorously
designed and tested model for developing their own NGSS-aligned assessments
which will support the study of science in early elementary classrooms and
promote further development of new curriculum materials, and support the
evaluation of existing curriculum materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop small group checks and individual checks as formative assessments
and study the design features, implementation practices, and affordances of each
assessment. To accomplish the goals of this project, the project will bridge the
Next Generation Science Assessment for Young Scientists (NGSA-YS) and the Equity
and Inclusion Curriculum Design (EI-CD) approaches to generate a novel and
innovative assessment design and development approach. The combined approach
will generate new assessments that reliably measure young learners’ NGSS three-
dimensional science proficiency and purposefully position equity and inclusivity
as central to the design of the assessments. In addition, the project will
develop resources that guide teachers’ implementation and scoring of the
assessments and their application of results to inform instruction in language-
diverse classrooms. To support claims about validity, the project will collect
data from multiple sources including expert reviews, cognitive interviews of
student performance, a small classroom pilot, and a larger field study. The
project will use established psychometric and qualitative approaches to
investigate the structure of scores from the assessment tasks, evaluate whether
assessment tasks provide students with sufficient and inclusive opportunities to
demonstrate their proficiencies in science and ensure that formative use of the
assessment tasks provides appropriate grade and language and literacy
information needed to make instructional decisions. Classroom implementation
data will also be collected to learn about challenges in teacher administration
and scoring, and the usability and value of the assessments to teachers. This
project will contribute to the field of science education by providing teachers
with formative assessment tasks, rubrics, and support materials for use in their
classrooms and by providing assessment developers with a model for creating NGSS
assessments for Grade 1 that includes principles and design documents for
developing additional tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.