* 2201204
* Build it Green!: Enhancing Middle School Science Education through an Energy Efficient Building Design Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Audrey Mohan, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,756,336.00

To act on energy issues, students need a strong understanding of energy flow and
energy efficiency. However, students rarely have opportunities to learn about
how buildings, such as their own school, drive about 40% of energy use and
global carbon emissions. Addressing this gap in science education, this project
will design, pilot, and evaluate a 6-week middle school curriculum called Build
it Green! (BIG!). Blending classroom experiences and interactive digital
learning tools, the researchers will work with rural middle schools in Missouri
to implement and test how following the story of energy flow in and out of a
hypothetical school building enhances students’ understanding of energy systems
in the science of green buildings. At the same time, the project partners with
the Kummer Center for rural STEM education to support teachers’ understanding of
engineering design principles, energy issues and place-based education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BIG! will be enacted in rural classrooms and engage
approximately 600 middle school students over time. Its quasi-experimental
approach focuses on assessing students' ability to construct and explain models
of energy systems and on teachers’ use of newly developed digital instructional
tools such as visualizations. Data to be collected includes students' drawn
models of the energy systems in their school building, surveys of students’
attitudes and behaviors, student and teacher interviews, classroom observations,
and teacher questionnaires. Student understanding of BIG!’s learning goals will
be determined through their energy models, explanations, and related rubric
systems. A key goal of the work is to compare student engagement and learning
across the digital format of BIG! and an analog format of the curriculum which
was tested in a previous project, Energy and Your Environment (EYE, DRL-
2009127). In this way, the project can inform understanding of the relative
affordances and limitations of instruction on energy flow that uses simulations
rather than actual building materials. The project’s multidisciplinary research
team includes researchers in science education, education technology,
architecture, and building science. The curricular unit is aligned with the Next
Generation Science Standards to foster energy literacy, modeling of energy use
and flow, and systems thinking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research
K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching
of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students
and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models
and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.