* 2201214
* Expanding Educational Opportunities for Secondary and Post-Secondary Educators and Students in the Technology and Applications of Unmanned Aircraft Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Ken Yanow, Southwestern College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2025
* USD 649,956.00

Labor market studies of the Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) or “Drones” industry
indicate that UAS is now a significant driver of job and economic growth in many
regions across the nation. The UAS industry is well established in the San Diego
region thanks to major employers in the industry as well as numerous other small
to medium sized businesses. The outlook in the region is growing as the use of
UAS across a variety of disciplines is increasing. Yet despite the high demand
in the market, the skills gap is rising leaving drone service providers and
related organizations scrambling to fill drone-related positions. This project
will address the needs of an ever-expanding industry by providing both secondary
and post-secondary educators and students with a variety of educational
opportunities, such as: 1) Up-to-date and relevant work-based curriculum; 2)
Articulation agreements between partnering secondary and post-secondary
institutions; 3) Professional development workshops in UAS applications and
operations; and 4) Summer high school academies specifically designed to inform
and excite students (many of whom are from traditionally underserved and
underrepresented communities) about UAS applications, educational opportunities,
and career pathways. A unique element of the summer academies is the inclusion
of students from the Pacific Islands, providing an opportunity for students from
San Diego County and the Pacific Islands to become culturally connected, learn
from one another, work together with different global perspectives to solve
problems, and potentially make life-long connections with someone from a
different part of the world. The project team includes college faculty,
secondary school partners, educational consultants, and industry professionals.
This project will provide relevant curriculum and educational opportunities for
both secondary and post-secondary students, better preparing them to become
skilled and thoughtful members of the UAS workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
mission of this project is to strengthen the educational opportunities and
career pathways in drone technology and applications for secondary and post-
secondary students so that they can succeed as employees or entrepreneurs in the
ever-expanding UAS field. To meet the mission, three goals will be implemented,
each with a set of objectives, activities, and deliverables: 1) Curriculum: In
consultation with industry and education partners, the project team will: a)
Create industry-aligned work-based learning projects; b) Develop and offer an
advanced course in drone photography and videography; c) Create a set of
engineering learning modules (in manufacturing, maintenance, and customization)
to be offered in existing introductory engineering courses which will then be
added to the list of program electives. 2) Professional Development: UAS are
being used across a variety of disciplines, therefore it is important that
secondary and post-secondary educators in those disciplines have hands-on,
professional development opportunities in UAS applications so that they can
share this information with their students. As part of the 2-day workshops,
participants will create curriculum that will be vetted and placed on the
National Center for Autonomous Technologies (NCAT) resource repository. 3)
Secondary Education: In order to link high school learning experiences to
college and careers, the project will do the following activities: a) Partner
high school UAS curriculum will be cross-walked and modified where needed in
order to articulate it to the college curriculum. The articulated course will
create an academic pipeline for students, as the course will go toward the
completion of the Southwestern College Drone Technology and Applications
Certificate. b) The project will host hybrid summer drone academies for students
in San Diego County and the Pacific Islands. At the academies, students will
receive real-time instruction on flight training, data collection/processing,
autonomous flight coding, and collaborative problem solving. The project
evaluation will include formative feedback throughout the 3-year project along
with annual evaluation reports that will assess progress towards achieving the
goals and objectives. A summative evaluation at the end of the project will
examine the effectiveness of strategies and provide an overall assessment of how
well the project has met its goals. To maximize impact, the best practices and
resulting content of the project will be documented and disseminated in
publications, at various conferences, and on NCAT. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.