* 2201674
* Collaborative Research: Bridging Preschool and Kindergarten Science: Exploring Play-based Engagement with Scientific and Engineering Practices in Early Learning Environments
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Lisa Kenyon, Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 07/31/2026
* USD 642,426.00

This project will investigate how and to what extent preschoolers and
kindergarteners can engage in science and engineering practices in play-based
learning environments. Young children are natural scientists, curious about the
world around them, eager to pose questions, and ready to investigate their
surroundings. They make sense of the world primarily through play, as has been
recognized internationally as a fundamental component of child development.
Science learning experiences for young children can reflect these facts about
children. Rather than relying on adults to direct structured activity around a
particular table or “station” in a classroom, children can interact freely with
their environment both indoors and outdoors to have rich experiences that build
on children’s creative and intuitive ways of engaging with science through play.
The project will also explore how spaces, materials, and pedagogies can support
and extend children’s engagement with science and engineering practices. Early
childhood educators will engage in professional learning using a refined version
of the Science and Engineering Practices Observation Protocol (SciEPOP), an
observation tool that allows researchers to identify and describe high-quality
play-based engagement with science and engineering practices. Through video-rich
professional learning along with peer-based coaching, early childhood educators
will grow in their ability to prepare play environments, identify nascent
science and engineering practices, enhance and extend investigations through
play, and record and reflect upon this learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to deepen understanding of how to support and develop early
childhood science learning by articulating science and engineering practices
observed in children’s play. It also aims to develop early childhood educators’
abilities to identify and support nascent science and engineering practices with
young children. Researchers will use a multi-method, design-based research
approach to investigate the following research questions: (1) What are the key
design elements of the SciEPOP tool and the surrounding professional learning
experiences needed to support student engagement with science and engineering
practices? (2) How does the use of the SciEPOP tool during professional learning
progressively enhance teachers’ abilities to support children’s engagement with
SEP in play? (3) How does the proposed teacher professional learning
intervention impact classroom-level patterns of children’s engagement with
science and engineering practices during play? (4) How does the proposed teacher
professional learning intervention impact site and classroom-level knowledge and
attitudes about SEP during play? These investigations will take place across
more than 12 collaborating preschool and kindergarten classrooms from three
demographically distinct areas. Key deliverables include a series of
professional learning modules designed to support teachers in noticing,
enhancing, and extending engagement with the science and engineering practices
through play, a refined version of the SciEPOP tool for use by educators in
growing their own practice, and a series of papers and publications written for
both practitioner and researcher communities. The Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects. This project is also co-
funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices,
program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students'
knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.