* 2201254
* Collaborative Research: Learning in Places: PK-5+ Field Based Science Education Across Schools, Families, and Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Carrie Tzou, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 06/30/2027
* USD 376,652.00

There is an immense need for elementary school students to have meaningful and
high-quality science learning experiences. This project aims to meet this need
by developing PreK-5, equity-oriented, field-based, interdisciplinary curricular
materials that support students' socioecological reasoning and sustainable
decision making. The science learning experiences will be integrated across
disciplines from literacy to civic and social studies lessons. The curricular
materials will be part of a science education model that facilitates family
engagement in ways that transform relations between educators, families, and
students' science learning. The curricular activities will be co-designed with
teachers while using local nature and culture as a
resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is structured to engage a leadership
cohort of teachers (68 teachers, who reach 5600 students) pulling from three
locations (Eastern Washington, Michigan, and Louisiana) to co-design, refine,
and study the model over four years. The project team will engage in a seasonal
series of hybrid (online and in-person) co-design summits to develop the model.
Leadership teachers will then fully implement the model and support two
additional cohorts (150 teachers, who reach 3300 students) to adopt and
implement the model. During these implementations, the project team will utilize
ethnographic and cross-comparative analysis methods to study educators'
adaptations and the affordances and constraints of geographic diversity for
instruction. In addition, the research design includes investigating the impact
on students' socioecological reasoning. The project has the potential to broaden
participation in deep science learning at the elementary level with an
accompanying professional development that would support and cultivate field-
based pedagogies in and around schools across K-12
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.â€¯&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.