* 2201525
* CC* Regional: NCShare Science DMZ
* CSE,OAC
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Tracy Doaks, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 03/31/2024
* USD 984,868.00

This project creates a shared high-performance network to enhance research and
education at minority-serving and smaller institutions in North Carolina. Such
networks, typically undertaken by individual universities, establish a parallel
physical network infrastructure (a Science network) to interconnect researchers
on the campus to external sites. Conversely, this project builds a shared,
regionally based, Science network operating on the existing state-wide research
and education network, rather than as a separate infrastructure. The resulting
Science network is expected to lower costs, require fewer local (campus) support
personnel, and provide fast and unrestricted data movement to multiple
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The network is hosted at MCNC, North
Carolinaâ€™s research and education network operator, and is a collaboration with
Duke University, North Carolina Central University and Davidson College.
Technically, the project establishes parallel "friction-free" paths for 5-7
participating institutions by virtualizing existing last-mile circuits between
university networks and the statewide network. Project components include a Data
Transfer Node, sufficient storage, and modest computation to demonstrate the
efficacy of the shared Science network model. Shared resources are accessed
using federated identity management and out-of-band traffic inspection ensures
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By identifying transmissions between trusted
research sites (regionally/nationally) and securely routing that traffic around
local campus security inspections that are intended to examine general,
untrusted network traffic, the speed of Science network transmissions is
significantly improved. This virtualized approach increases accessibility of
high-speed data-driven research by democratizing access to advanced
Cyberinfrastructure, enhancing research productivity, promoting collaboration,
and reducing the time required for scientific discoveries at participating
minority-serving and smaller institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.