* 2201095
* Exploring K-2 Children Understandings of Visual Representations in Algebraic Reasoning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Maria Blanton, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 471,998.00

Algebra is a foundational topic in mathematics and STEM. As research has
demonstrated how arithmetic is connected to algebra, there is more need to
explore how K-2 children understand and use visual representations such as
graphs and tables. This project will explore how children in grades K-2
understand visual representations of algebraic concepts. For instance, children
might create tables or graphs to organize information about the relationship
between two quantities. They might use graphs and diagrams to explain their
mathematical thinking and develop their understanding of relationships in
numbers and operations. The project will use data gathered in K-2 classrooms and
via interviews with children to describe their use of the visual
representations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory project aims to develop
learning trajectories as cognitive models of how children in grades K–2
understand visual representations for algebraic relationships. Generalized
arithmetic involves generalizing arithmetic relationships and reasoning
explicitly with these generalizations. These relationships include field
properties of number and operations (e.g., the Commutative Property of Addition)
as well as relationships on classes of numbers, such as evens and odds. It
entails reasoning about the structure of arithmetic expressions and equations
rather than their computational value. The project has three guiding research
questions. First, what are trajectories of learning in how grades K–2 children
understand visual representations such as tables, graphs, and diagrams of
algebraic relationships? Second, what features of tasks or instruction
facilitate movement in students’ thinking within the trajectories? Third, what
are similarities and differences in how children understand visual
representations of algebraic relationships across the content dimensions of
functional thinking and generalized arithmetic? The study will use a design-
based research methodological framework to organize data collection via
classroom teaching experiments, semi-clinical interviews, classroom
observations, and children’s written work. The research will produce cognitive
models that can be used to design further interventions for algebra learning in
grades K-2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.