* 2201255
* Culturally Responsive Engineering Experience Design and Development through Teacher-Undergraduate Engineering Student Partnerships
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Joshua Ellis, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,837,566.00

Engineering is everywhere and K-12 teachers are increasingly tasked with
teaching engineering content in ways that meet state educational standards and
in ways that engage students from diverse racial and ethnic backgrounds. As
teachers strive to meet these twin requirements, of accountability and
responsiveness, they face two major challenges. First, teachers have limited
experiential or professional preparation for teaching engineering content
effectively. Second, engineering culture in its current state does not equitably
engage diverse learners and has historically excluded and marginalized people
from minoritized racial and ethnic populations. Reproducing engineering in K-12
as it has existed in post-secondary education may reproduce this historical
exclusion and marginalization. While K-12 teachers have increasing access to
resources that support their teaching of engineering content, this work will
generate new ways to support teachers’ roles as change agents in enacting
engineering pedagogies centering those who have been historically
excluded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year early-stage design and
development project will support a new teacher professional development and
support model that builds the agency of 30 Miami-Dade County public high school
science teachers to design, implement, and refine engineering instruction for
their Latinx and Black students who comprise more than 90% of their local
public-school population. A unique feature of the Culturally Responsive
Engineering Experience Design and Development (CREED2) program is its partnering
of high school teachers with Latinx and Black undergraduate engineering students
in collaborative teams to co-design and implement inclusive, standards-aligned
formal and informal engineering experiences. Using mixed methods (i.e.,
interviews, focus groups, surveys and observation), the team will examine the
project’s impact on high school teachers’: (a) identities as culturally
responsive teachers-of-engineering; (b) agency in designing and teaching K-12
engineering experiences; (c) integration of engineering in ways that are
responsive to their Latinx and Black high school students; and (d) experience of
the teacher-engineer partnerships embedded in the professional development
program. The project also examines how near-peer mentoring by engineering
students with shared ethnic and/or racial identities influences Latinx and Black
high school students’ classroom experiences with engineering. The project
represents partnerships among university faculty, university student
organizations (Society of Women Engineers, Society of Hispanic Professional
Engineers, National Society of Black Engineers), high school teachers, and
diversity professionals including industry through the National Association of
Multicultural Engineering Program Advocates. The Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.