* 2201632
* Geophysical Imaging of a Buried Paleovalley in Support of ICDP Deep Dust Project
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Heather Bedle, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 48,261.00

Geologists analyze the Earth’s past in order to better understand what may
happen in the future. In this study, the investigators test the idea that
glaciers may have existed in the Wichita Mountains of Oklahoma a region that was
located near the equator roughly 300 million years ago. By using seismic survey
techniques this award aims to ‘see’ deep into the Earth’s crust, to image and
analyze the shape of an ancient, buried valley to determine its origin. The
shape of the valley will reveal critical clues to its formation – if it was
formed by a glacier, or if it was formed by river processes. Understanding the
origin of the valley will allow us to update and improve climate models that
look backwards in time, allowing a better evaluation of what may happen in the
future. The imaging of this buried valley will also be used to guide a future
deep continental drilling project called Deep Dust, that will retrieve rock
samples from this region, to be analyzed by a large team of scientists to answer
many questions regarding past climate, and responses of life to climate changes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will help test the “outrageous” hypothesis
that equatorial uplands hosted glaciation during the late Paleozoic ice age—and
thus illuminate fundamental questions about climate and tectonics. If this work
supports the hypothesis that the Wichita Mountains were glaciated during the
late Paleozoic, then it implies mountain glaciation at relatively low elevation
across many regions of equatorial Pangaea, which would fundamentally shift our
view of the late Paleozoic icehouse. Because current climate models cannot
replicate such a scenario, this outcome would force new modeling efforts to
understand how Earth’s system veered to such conditions, thus aiding refinements
in our grasp of climate forcing mechanisms. To test this hypothesis, this
project funds site-survey work for the proposed International Continental
Drilling Program (ICDP) Deep Dust project. Deep Dust aims to recover core of the
continental Permian to elucidate environmental conditions, biogeochemical
cycling, and responses of the terrestrial biosphere to climate forcing during a
critical period in the evolution of Earth and life. One drilling target is the
buried paleo-upland of the Wichita uplift of Oklahoma. This drilling objective
is designed to access a unique record of upland climate to complement the team's
lowland site, which is well imaged. Proprietary seismic data has revealed an
apparent paleo-valley feature in the buried Wichita uplift, and to understand
and better image this feature a new seismic data acquisition is essential. Two
2D seismic reflection lines will be acquired, one perpendicular to the valley
orientation, and a second along the valley axis, to precisely image and
characterize the feature at high resolution. In addition, this project will
heavily involve student participants, exposing them to a variety of geologic
problems, from sediments, to paleoclimates, to geophysical techniques. In this
aspect it will spur multiple educational opportunities for field-site planning,
acquisition, and interpretation of seismic data. If the Deep Dust ICDP project
is funded, these data will enable precise siting of the drill location and thus
recovery of core through this feature to reconstruct a detailed record and date
that record. Even if Deep Dust is not funded, the seismic data will still enable
fundamental assessment of the origin (fluvial or glacial) of the valley, which
has significant paleoclimatic implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.