* 2201340
* CC* CIRA: Alabama Advanced Research Computing Consortium (AARCC)
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* John-Paul Robinson, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 185,653.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alabama’s institutions of higher
learning are often limited in local cyberinfrastructure resources, including
research computing facilitator expertise, and in effectively leveraging national
cyberinfrastructure resources and investments. This problem puts Alabama
researchers at a competitive disadvantage for sponsored research that would
otherwise benefit research, healthcare, and economic growth for the people of
Alabama. The diversity of institutions and priorities have made the creation and
implementation of a unified cyberinfrastructure plan difficult. Alabama,
however, is at a unique moment in time where federal, state, and academic
research priorities are aligned to invest in statewide cyberinfrastructure for
research and economic development. Alabama EPSCoR (ALEPSCoR) recently completed
a Science and Technology report identifying areas of strategic research
importance. This project aims to take advantage of three existing efforts: the
NSF CI CoE: Demo Pilot: Minority Serving Cyberinfrastructure Consortium, the
ALEPSCoR plan, and Governor Kay Ivey’s Alabama Executive Order 720 to stimulate
an innovation economy. These three efforts not only have the potential to
provide focus on broadening the playing field, but also bringing critical social
and political energy to the table to transform research and education in Alabama
for smaller institutions. The project aims to bring together a diverse group of
institutions, including 15 HBCUs, to develop a comprehensive cyberinfrastructure
plan. This has the potential to broaden participation and access to essential
scientific computing resources. The team will host outreach events at each of
the eight doctoral degree granting universities in the state in addition to one
with industry leaders in the state. The events will be held at Alabama A&amp;M
University, Alabama State University, Auburn University, University of Alabama
at Tuscaloosa, University of Alabama at Birmingham, University of Alabama at
Huntsville, University of South Alabama, and Tuskegee University. The project
goal to foster improved and better coordinated advanced research computing and
networking capabilities across the state's institutions of higher education can
contribute to increased STEM participation, education, and workforce training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alabama Advanced Research Computing Consortium (AARCC)
is composed of a steering committee and working groups from the eight doctoral
universities, two of which are designated HBCUs, and industry leaders in the
state, tasked with three deliverables: 1) a statewide cyberinfrastructure plan,
2) a statewide research network plan, and 3) a statewide research computing
consortium plan. Stakeholder engagement events are being used to inform
researchers and campus leaders about the research cyberinfrastructure available,
and also for AARCC to learn about research priorities and cyberinfrastructure
barriers at those institutions. AARCC will also coordinate with the Alabama
Higher Education CIO Council to address needs for high-capacity networking
within the state. Ultimately, AARCC seeks research competitiveness in ALEPSCoR
investment priorities to spur growth of the modern 21st century Alabama economy.
The activities proposed have the potential to significantly impact the role of
computational education across the state of Alabama. Providing a collaborative
state-wide cyberinfrastructure plan would provide significant value, especially
to the bulk of the institutions in the state that serve underrepresented and
rural populations. This project is a great example of the types of activities
targeted in CC* Area#5: state-wide CI planning and coordination activities
providing a long-term basis from which to implement a vision and strategy for
equitable access to CI resources across all institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the collaborative efforts
of the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (OAC) and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.