* 2201033
* ECR:Core: Promoting Spatial Skill Development
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2027
* Ariel Starr, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 05/31/2027
* USD 833,927.00

Spatial skills are a key predictor of success in STEM fields throughout the
lifespan. When children first begin formal schooling, large individual
differences in spatial skills are already present. These early emerging
differences in spatial aptitude can have long-lasting, detrimental effects on
studentsâ€™ engagement with and performance in STEM classes. To address these
issues, this research will conduct a series of studies with children between
infancy and 8-years of age as well as adults to identify: 1) factors that
contribute to differences in spatial skills in early childhood, and 2) new
methods for promoting spatial skill development. The work will build on their
novel theoretical construct of spatial structuring: an individual ability to
structure abstract concepts (across domains) in terms of space. For example, how
does grounding abstract concepts in space, as with the mental number line,
facilitate reasoning about them? This research will provide new insights into
the course of development of spatial skills and their relation to STEM
achievement to set students up for success even before they set foot in the
classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use a multi-method approach
that involves longitudinal, observational, and experimental techniques to
provide a comprehensive view of the cognitive and environmental factors that
support spatial skill development between infancy and early childhood. The first
study will use a longitudinal design to assess how spatial language competency
and nonverbal spatial skills contribute to spatial skill development and math
achievement. The second and third studies will explore how ability to ground
abstract concepts in concrete spatial representations contributes to STEM
readiness. By focusing on verbal and nonverbal abilities and using both
correlational designs and experimental manipulations, this research will answer
key questions related to spatial skill development and explore novel mechanisms
that link spatial aptitude to success in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports
fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.