* 2201678
* Broadening Participation in the Automation Technician Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Carlos Genatios, Miami Dade College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 07/31/2025
* USD 370,033.00

The demand for technicians who can implement, maintain, and troubleshoot
robotics systems is growing as manufacturers adopt new automation technologies
in their manufacturing facilities to improve their competitiveness. Broadening
participation in this field requires new pathways that engage students from
traditionally underrepresented groups in active learning experiences. Miami Dade
College provides technical education for a diverse student population, many of
whom are first generation and low-income students. In addition, given the
regional demographics, there is an opportunity to broaden participation in the
automation technician workforce by providing a pathway for students to obtain
nationally recognized certifications. This project will develop a new pathway to
help students learn fundamental skills and provide an entry point to further
technical education in robotics, automation, electrical engineering, electronics
engineering, mechanical engineering, programming, and information technologies.
A professional development program will provide robotics training for college
faculty and high school teachers. The project team will identify the role that
hands-on robotics experiences have on increasing recruitment and retention of
students from underrepresented groups in technical education. Using best
practices based on lessons learned from the project, the project team will
develop a workshop on successful strategies to recruit and retain female
students in technical education programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to increase the number of students from underrepresented groups who
have the necessary technical skills to enter the automation technician
workforce. To achieve this goal, the project team will develop a new robotics
certificate program, train high school teachers to teach courses in the
certificate program, and recruit students from underrepresented groups to
participate in a summer robotics camp. To earn a certificate, students will take
four courses including introduction to robotics, algebra, electrical
fundamentals, and digital circuits. Two of the courses will be offered for high
school students who are dual enrolled. The project team will collaborate with
the college’s industrial advisory committee to ensure that these courses align
with industry credential requirements. The certificate program will provide
students with hands-on training for programming and operating industrial robots.
Faculty and subject matter experts will provide training on robotics for college
faculty and high school teachers. At the summer camps, high school students will
learn soft-skills training such as teamwork, writing reports, giving
presentations, and problem-solving. Students will also have the opportunity to
receive training on industrial equipment to obtain industry certifications. The
project evaluation will assess the impact of the project activities on the
enrollment of students from underrepresented groups in the certificate program.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.