* 2201164
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying Curricular Reasoning as a Critical Practice in Teaching Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Dawn Teuscher, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2026
* USD 328,942.00

Teachers of mathematics engage in curricular reasoning as they design and
interact with their students, choose curricular materials, and implement
curriculum standards in the service of high-quality instruction. Currently,
there is no shared measure of curricular reasoning of middle school teacher
classroom decision making in mathematics. In this research project, the team
develops and validates two measures of middle school teachers’ curricular
reasoning in mathematics as practiced. The first measure looks at curriculum
reasoning from the perspective of the teacher, the second measure attends to the
perspectives of the mathematics education research community. The research
examines teacher self-assessment compared and aligned with those of professional
observers (e.g., coaches, school leaders, and researchers) to establish the
validity of the teacher self-report measure. The research establishes benchmark
scores of teachers curricular reasoning in middle school mathematics, supporting
increased interpretability and utility of the curricular reasoning score to
improve classroom practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers carefully
examine four research questions: [1] To what extent does validity evidence
support use of the Curricular Reasoning Self-Assessment Survey Suite for middle
school mathematics teachers to measure their own curricular reasoning? [2] To
what extent does validity evidence support use of the Curricular Reasoning
Observation Assessment to measure middle school mathematics teachers’ curricular
reasoning? [3] Is there a significant relationship between middle school
mathematics teachers’ curricular reasoning when measured by the new curricular
reasoning tools? [4] What benchmarks define different curricular reasoning
levels on each of the two measures? The research team gathers validity data
based on shared standards held by the American Psychological Association, the
National Council on Measurement in Education, and the American Educational
Research Association. The research advances our understanding of teacher
curricular reasoning through the development of the two measures. The work
bridges research and practice as the researchers use self-report and
observational evidence to support and improve teachers’ practice of curricular
reasoning. The team uses Rasch psychometric tools for standard setting to
improve the usability of the measures for classroom usage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.