* 2201486
* Achieving Critical Transformations in Undergraduate Programs in Mathematics (ACT UP Math)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Wendy Smith, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 06/30/2025
* USD 983,075.00

2201486 Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The disparity in achievement and access
for students from backgrounds that are underrepresented in STEM are well
documented, but there remains a lack of attention to what to do with this
knowledge and how to measure the impact of improvement efforts beyond pass rates
and demographics. While many university mathematics departments value providing
diverse, equitable, and inclusive (DEI) student experiences, the faculty often
do not have the professional training to engage with DEI work or measure its
progress, which can lead to disengagement from these initiatives. Achieving
Critical Transformation in Undergraduate Programs of Mathematics is a Level II,
Track II ECR Broadening Participation in STEM project. This project aims to
conduct foundational research to identify the mechanisms and structures that
best support mathematics stakeholders in making data-informed decisions to
promote DEI and critically transform introductory mathematics courses and
programs. Addressing issues relating to DEI in introductory mathematics courses
are important to broadening participation in STEM disciplines. Mathematics
departments are not only capable of engaging in these issues and improving the
mathematics experiences for students from underrepresented populations but are
significantly well-positioned to do so because of the elevated role that
mathematics plays in studentsâ€™ STEM careers, STEM identities, and sense of
belonging in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on the
strength of two prior national studies of introductory mathematics programs,
Progress through Calculus and Student Engagement in Mathematics through an
Institutional Network for Active Learning. Researchers can leverage this
existing body of quantitative and qualitative data to engage key stakeholders in
improvement cycles. This project aims to deploy a Networked Improvement
Community (NIC) model to bring together three undergraduate mathematics
department teams in partnership with educational researchers to analyze their
local data, in comparison to the national sample. Utilizing a NIC framework,
researchers will provide professional development and technical assistance to
the department team, along with focused research to interview students, faculty,
and instructors across these communities to inform departmental transformation
efforts, as well as empower sites to develop the structures needed for lasting
change. In a broader sense, this project will also serve as a model to assist
members of other institutions, including community colleges, and other STEM
fields working to address experiences and outcomes related to DEI in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad, and enduring: STEM learning
and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM
workforce development. The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence
to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain and suggest
interventions and innovations to address persistent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.