* 2201895
* Collaborative Research: Analogy Training to Promote Science Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Benjamin Jee, Worcester State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 07/31/2025
* USD 76,022.00

The goal of this project is to develop and test methods for training powerful
thinking skills. Specifically, the research will explore techniques for
improving students' analogical reasoning ability. The history of science has
shown analogy to be a powerful tool in scientific discovery. And there is
abundant evidence from laboratory and classroom studies that analogical
comparison can improve students' ability to learn, especially in mathematics and
science. For example, reading that sound waves are analogous to water waves can
give students insight into how sound behaves. Yet not all students benefit
equally from analogical teaching. The first goal of the research is to discover
how best to equip students with methods for engaging productively with
analogical comparisons of all sorts—in short, to become better thinkers and
learners. The second goal is to test whether acquiring these skills will improve
students' ability to learn in a new scientific arena: evolution. Overall, this
project will provide new insights into analogical reasoning and learning as a
fundamental ability and into how it can be trained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will develop an analogical training program for undergraduate students
targeting three intersecting facets of analogical thinking: (1) strategies for
processing analogical mappings, including aligning two examples, drawing
inferences from one example to another, and noting key differences; (2)
metacognitive insight into the nature and uses of analogical thinking; and (3)
ability to recognize opportunities for comparison. In Phase 1, iterative design
and experimental methods will be combined to develop and test training
components. In Phase 2, a complete training program for improving analogical
reasoning and supporting science content learning (specifically, about
evolution) will be tested. A group that has received analogical training will be
compared with a control group on their ability to learn from analogical
comparisons in evolution and in other topics, using a pre-post design. They will
be assessed in both short-term (immediately after instruction) and long-term
(6-7 weeks later) learning. A pilot study will explore adapting the analogical
training program for eighth graders in a classroom setting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR)
program, which supports fundamental research on STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.