* 2201969
* Investigating how STEM Baccalaureate Graduates use Assets Developed through Higher Education to Navigate Career Transitions
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Timothy Weston, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 07/31/2026
* USD 496,047.00

This project focuses on a critical juncture in the STEM education and workforce
pipeline, the transition of community college students into baccalaureate degree
programs and potentially to graduate school. This transition period is
especially important for students from groups that are underrepresented in their
overall participation in STEM fields of study. The goal of the investigators is
to understand how STEM transfer students use assets, such as disciplinary co-
curricular opportunities obtained through higher education, as they transition
into post-baccalaureate careers or graduate school. The project is motivated by
a prior study of community college students that documented lost research
opportunities, internships, and jobs; derailed or delayed plans for graduate
school; challenges related to remote instruction; delays in graduation; and
decreased sense of competency in STEM. The study will produce nuanced
recommendations to improve practice by exploring group differences in graduates’
experiences and outcomes and a conceptual model that illustrates the
relationship among factors that influence students’ post-college choices and
transitions. The results could inform interventions to mitigate the leaky STEM
pipeline for community college students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will pursue three objectives. First is to longitudinally investigate transitions
into early careers or graduate/professional school of a diverse population of
STEM baccalaureate graduates from three public universities. Second is to
compare graduates’ professional transitions and outcomes for students who began
their studies in community college and those who entered the university
directly. Third is to use an asset-based framework to explore how graduates use
networks, skills, and competencies developed during higher education to navigate
post-college transitions. The central research question is how are recent STEM
baccalaureate graduates – including former transfer students – using those
assets developed through higher education to navigate early post-college
transitions? The investigators will use a mixed-methods descriptive case study
design to collect and analyze data from individual interviews with a stratified
sample of STEM graduates and employ narrative analysis of students’ STEM
pathways to complement analytic coding. Focusing on longer-term outcomes from
disciplinary, co-curricular activities will enable the study to provide
discipline-specific recommendations to strengthen connections between
undergraduate preparation and STEM professional
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded by the EHR Core
Research Program (ECR). ECR supports fundamental STEM education research
projects that address STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.