* 2201981
* Characterizing the Use of Contextual Factors During Engineering Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Kentaro Toyama, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 05/31/2025
* USD 438,893.00

The successful design of engineered technology depends on designers’ appropriate
consideration of context - i.e., the total physical, social, and economic
environment of the technology’s anticipated use. Little is known, however, about
how and when experienced engineering designers incorporate contextual factors
into their designs. Through extensive interviews with experienced engineering
designers, this research aims to understand how they incorporate contextual
information to inform design decisions throughout an engineering design process.
Findings from this work, especially when compared against previous research with
novice engineering designers, will result in recommendations for good practices
in engineering design. For novice engineering designers, the recommendations are
expected to accelerate their learning. For experienced engineering designers,
the recommendations will improve product design, which in turn, will impact
consumers through the creation of more contextually appropriate products,
processes, and systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will involve
qualitative methods, including semi-structured interviews, observations, and
document reviews across three engineering design domains - medical devices,
consumer products, and information and communication technologies. Sixty
experienced design practitioners (20 from each domain) will be recruited to
participate in a retrospective project-based semi-structured interview designed
to focus on one or two specific design experiences during which designers
incorporated contextual factors. Additionally, case study research of two
ongoing design projects will be conducted to collect more details regarding
designers’ incorporation of contextual factors. The data gathered will be
analyzed through descriptive coding and iterative thematic analysis to generate
rich and nuanced understandings about the uses of contextual information within
engineering design processes by experienced design practitioners. The analysis
will result in a refined classification of contextual factors; strategies for
gathering, synthesizing, and applying contextual information within engineering
design processes; and rich narratives of context use-case scenarios. Results
will provide insight into the extent to which behaviors are transferable across
multiple engineering design domains, engineering designers with varying levels
of experience, and various use settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.