* 2201215
* Supporting Secondary Students’ Earth Science Knowledge and Engineering Design Skills with Mobile Design Studios
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Shanna Daly, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,527,001.00

Today’s youth face a future riddled with challenges, including access to clean
water, increasing biodiversity loss, and climate change. These challenges are
particularly thorny because the underlying problems are either ill-structured or
can be perceived in multiple ways. Addressing these thorny Earth science
challenges will require creative solutions, which is why the Mobile Design
Studio project focuses on integrating science and engineering content. In the
four-year project, the research team will create a computer-mediated design
environment that enables students in grades 7-10 to collaboratively explore,
make connections, generate, and evaluate design ideas that address environmental
science challenges. A unique feature of the project is its use of an artificial
intelligent (AI) design mentor that relies on Design Heuristics, a research-
based creativity tool that guides students through exploration of ideas and
“learns” from students’ design processes to better assist them. The project will
examine students’ perceptions of science and engineering, their ability to
integrate academic and personal or community knowledge, their confidence for
engaging in engineering, and their design thinking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use front-end engineering design work (i.e., engaging in problem
definition and solution exploration) to support secondary students’ learning at
the intersection of Earth science, engineering design, and socio-scientific
disciplinary skills and content. Further, studying how Earth and environmental
science teachers and their students engage with the AI design mentor addresses
the ongoing challenge of low teacher familiarity with engineering and advances
research at the human-technology frontier. Using mixed methods, the team will
examine students’ design thinking, engineering design self-efficacy, perceptions
of and interests in science and engineering and their integration of scientific,
engineering, and personal/community knowledge. Data sources include classroom
observation, student design artifacts, student actions in the platform (e.g.,
editing a teammate’s design concept) and pre/post surveys. Analytic methods
include inductive coding, learning analytics, sequence analysis and data
visualization. The project evaluation will examine how the team plans, delivers,
and iteratively enhances the MODS platform (e.g., AI mentor, front-end design
activities), class lessons (created by the project team and teachers),
professional development, and other project support materials. The project’s
work will be shared through conferences and journals in the engineering
education and science education fields. Research findings, teacher and school
feedback, and project reflections will also be shared with school leaders and
teachers through the University at Buffalo’s College of Engineering Outreach
Office and through the biannual @Concord newsletter, which has 46,000 subscriber
network. In the final year, the team will hold public-facing, mini-workshops on
teaching engineering design with innovative technology at the national and local
levels. A dedicated website will make all design challenges, instructional
guides, tutorial videos, and teacher and student tips, freely available. This
project is funded by the Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12), which
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.