* 2201154
* Data in Space and Time: Supporting Learners in Understanding and Analyzing Spatiotemporal Data
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2025
* William Finzer, Concord Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,053,057.00

Many of society’s biggest dilemmas and grandest opportunities involve extensive
interpretation of complex data that vary across both space and time. Such
spatio-temporal (ST) data stand at the forefront of the most critical decisions
across practically all sectors of society, from making sense of changes in the
climate and responses to the causes of socioeconomic differences to the
understanding of global economic changes. Over the past few decades, analyzing
and interpreting ST data has moved from the purview of niche domains to a
necessary skill for citizens and workers alike. Hence, the need to prepare
learners to work with such data has grown to the same level of urgency. Skills
at analyzing and interpreting ST data cannot be left to begin in undergraduate
study or learned during workplace training. However, despite the growing
importance of such data in industry and society, the STEM education field's
understanding of how learners come to make sense of ST data remains severely
limited. Fortunately, emerging research and techniques offer promise for
improving this understanding. Drawing upon existing research into visual and
spatial understanding, cognitive interpretation of time, and technology-based
tools and techniques, this project will identify how learners approach and make
sense of ST data. In doing so, the project will produce a guiding framework
outlining fruitful directions for future research and actionable principles for
the development of curricula and instructional materials that aim to engage
learners in exploring ST data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three objectives guide this
project as it aims to understand how secondary school learners make sense of
spatio-temporal data. First is to compile an inventory of existing knowledge
about learners’ understanding of ST data and analyzing students’ approaches to
ST data. Second is to develop and test supports and affordances in an iterative
process that addresses identified challenges and opportunities. Third, and
finally, is to define and disseminate a framework identifying cognitive
challenges and related supports for learning with and about ST data. The project
will conduct use-inspired basic research to examine learners’ approaches and
sense-making via three related lines of investigation: 1) What strategies
learners use to make sense of the data and what challenges different data types
pose? 2) How learners come to identify and understand patterns and relationships
within such data and what challenges different pattern types pose? 3) What
understandings do learners construct when engaging with ST data and in what ways
technology-based affordances can help support learners in analyzing or
constructing understanding from such data? Adopting a design-based research
approach employing a combination of think-aloud protocols, retrospective
interviews, and data skills assessment, the project will create and disseminate
a framework that identifies struggles faced by learners confronting varying
types of ST datasets, highlights user interface affordances and data
visualization approaches with potential for addressing these struggles, and
draws actionable connections between the two.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that are
essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The program
supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand,
build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to address
persistent challenges in education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.