* 2201249
* Investigating how combining intensive professional development and modest support affects rural, elementary teachers’ science and engineering practice
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Cathy Ringstaff, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,467,932.00

This study will investigate factors influencing teacher change after
professional learning (PL) experiences and will examine the extent to which
modest supports for science and engineering teaching in grades 3-5 sustain PL
outcomes over the long term. One hundred eighty elementary teachers situated in
small, rural school districts will be recruited for the study, bringing together
45 teachers from four states: North Dakota, California, Montana, and Wyoming.
The teachers will participate in intensive online PL over the span of 5 days.
After completing the initial PL, teachers will engage in modest electronic
supports including a half-day refresher session the year after the initial PL,
virtual meetings, social media connections among participating teachers, and
access to archived Webinars on a range of topics related to teaching elementary
school science. Modest support for replacement of consumable supplies needed for
hands-on classroom engineering tasks will also be provided. The project will
examine the extent to which these modest supports individually and collectively
foster the sustainability of PL outcomes in terms of increases in instructional
time devoted to science, teacher self-efficacy in science, and teacher use of
reform-oriented instructional strategies aligned with the Next Generation
Science Standards. The effects of contextual factors on sustainability of PL
outcomes will also be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This longitudinal study
will address four research objectives: (1) assessing the extent to which an
intense 5-day science and engineering PL event impacts teachers’ knowledge and
self-efficacy in science; (2) observing the effectiveness of modest supports on
teachers’ self-efficacy in science and engineering, on teachers’ use of inquiry-
based instructional strategies, and on the sustainability of PL outcomes,
including instructional time in science and engineering; (3) documenting the
effectiveness of intense PL, followed by modest supports, on teachers’
capacities to deliver engineering instruction, and specifically their
integration of engineering practices; and (4) capturing the outcomes of science
and engineering instruction delivered by teachers after intense PL and modest
supports, as shown by student achievement. The three-year mixed-methods research
design will collect quantitative and qualitative data from multiple sources,
including teacher surveys, teacher interviews, and classroom observations, plus
measures of student learning. Quantitative data will be analyzed using
hierarchical modeling to examine growth rates after the initial PL and the
change in growth after the provision of modest supports. Qualitative data
including instructional logs will be analyzed independently and together with
the quantitative survey data for triangulation purposes. These data will be
analyzed by individual teacher, by grade level, by school, by district, and by
state. Together, these data will enable the project team to address the
project's research objectives, which focus on the persistence of PL outcomes in
science and engineering, the extent to which teachers make use of various
supports and which supports are critical for attaining meaningful outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs).
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.