* 2201481
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Improving the University of the Virgin Islands’ Scientific Research Data Movement Infrastructure and Network Capacity
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Kim Waddell, University of The Virgin Islands
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of the Virgin
Islands (UVI), through its Information Services and Institutional Assessment
department and in collaboration with Virgin Islands Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research, aims to upgrade campus network switching
electronics, implementing a Science DMZ (a perimeter network), and providing
training opportunities for undergraduate students. The project will deliver
increased network capacity and redundancy required to enable the movement of
scientific data to conduct various network-based research activities, permit
advanced computing, and take advantage of public cloud computing and storage
resources. These improvements will increase UVI’s ability to support ongoing
scientific research and teaching and attract new researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network switching upgrades from 10/100BASE transmission
speeds to high performing multigigabit network switches allow for increased
network capacity and redundancy required to enable the movement of scientific
data to conduct various research activities, permit advanced computing, take
advantage of public cloud computing and storage resources, and also support the
Internet of Things (IoT). These network improvements will build upon past NSF
cyberinfrastructure investments, support UVI-based marine and environmental
research that informs federal and territorial natural resources managers focused
on marine ecosystems health, increase data sharing between researchers and
collaborators, and help to facilitate time-sensitive environmental monitoring
and real-time model validation. UVI's Science DMZ will offer a network
environment tailored to the needs of high-performance science applications,
including large data transfers, remote experiment control, data visualization,
and addresses network performance problems that occur when large research data
sets traverse through firewalls. It also will enable faster processing of data
for UVI’s collaborating partner, the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, a
radio telescope facility used by the international scientific community.
Additionally, computer science and computational biology undergraduate students
from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM will be provided
opportunities for hands-on training and work experience. This project has
potential to facilitate professional development, help build high-demand
technical capacity within the university and across the Territory, and make a
sound and long-term investment in campus-wide research and education at
UVI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the collaborative
efforts of the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (OAC) and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.