* 2201269
* CC* Planning: Designing a Regional Science DMZ for Small Colleges and Universities in Pennsylvania
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* John O'Keefe, Keystone Initiative for Network Based Education and Research
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 04/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Many smaller and mid-sized campuses in Pennsylvania have compelling science
research and education activities along with an awareness of the benefits
associated with better access to cyberinfrastructure resources. Yet, these
under-resourced schools continue to struggle through the process to: identify,
understand, and quantify their existing science drivers; understand the
corresponding cyberinfrastructure; and, then provide both the technical and
application support associated with the cyberinfrastructure to support initial
and future research applications. For some institutions, the standard regional
connectivity model, a separate connection to a high-performance research and
education network, may not be appropriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
works with the initial set of pilot schools, Indiana University of Pennsylvania,
Lafayette College and Lehigh Carbon Community College to develop mechanisms for
a campus to identify cyberinfrastructure-based applications, understand the
required cyberinfrastructure-based resources and identify appropriate campus
science DMZ architectures. The project investigates the feasibility of various
campus and regional Science DMZ designs through outreach to existing funded
projects and develop a design for a statewide regional science DMZ aimed at
easing access to cyberinfrastructure resources in a cost-effective manner for
small and mid-sized campuses in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.