* 2201647
* The Neurobiology of Hypoxia Tolerance in the Naked Mole-Rat
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Thomas Park, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,309,959.00

This project will contribute to understanding tolerance of hypoxia (low oxygen
levels) within the nervous system by studying the African naked mole-rat. This
mammal lives in crowded, oxygen-starved burrows, and has evolved the ability to
survive extended periods of oxygen deprivation without triggering brain cell
death. This project will test new target genes that may protect brain cells from
cell death resulting from exposure to hypoxia, with potential applications in
designing new treatments for humans that experience oxygen deprivation during
traumatic events like a stroke or heart attack. By studying the genome of the
naked mole-rat, the investigators previously discovered changes in the genes of
this species that likely reduce cell death from oxygen deprivation. The goal of
the current project is to test each of those genes for its potential role in
brain cell protection. The project will support two graduate students each year,
who will help mentor a number of undergraduate student researchers recruited
from existing programs targeting students from groups underrepresented in
science. Information on the naked mole-rat will be shared via outreach to a
local zoo and area high schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate molecular, cellular, and physiological mechanisms in the brain that
underly hypoxia tolerance and will contribute to understanding evolutionary
adaptations to environmental challenges in general. The naked mole-rat will be
developed as a model system for studying the molecular and genetic basis of
hypoxia tolerance in the mammalian brain. Brain cells from the naked mole-rat
display an intrinsic tolerance to hypoxia and a dramatic reduction in calcium
accumulation during hypoxia compared with most other mammals, which is
hypothesized to result from multiple adaptations that limit and buffer calcium
currents. Additionally, there appears to be a significant neuroprotective role
for the endocannabinoid system in the brain of the naked mole-rat. This project
will specifically examine the neuroprotective function of the calcium channel
TRPM7, NMDA glutamate-receptor ion channels, a calcium-related kinase, and the
calcium-binding protein parvalbumin, as well as the endocannabinoid system. The
investigators will use brain slice electrophysiology, mass spectrometry, and
gene manipulation techniques to determine the molecular and genetic basis of
hypoxia tolerance in the naked mole-rat. Experiments designed to introduce naked
mole-rat-specific gene alterations into mouse cells will test the hypothesis
that the changes in the naked mole-rat genes can also protect other species.
Understanding how brain cells are protected from oxygen deprivation may
ultimately lead to new therapeutic targets for heart attack and stroke victims.
Several graduate and undergraduate student trainees will participate in the
research, and results will be incorporated into undergraduate courses and
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the
Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program and the Neural Systems Cluster
Organization Program in BIO-IOS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.