* 2201489
* CC* Integration-Large: An Extensible Internet for Science Applications and Beyond
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Scott Shenker, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 03/31/2024
* USD 997,908.00

Modern scientific research often involves huge datasets and many geographically
distributed collaborators. The collaborative sharing of data in such research
efforts requires rapid, flexible, and automated data transfers between sites.
These sites have different computational and networking infrastructures, and are
managed by different entities. To provide a uniform and extensible set of data
sharing tools to such collaborations, the network should serve as a Data Valet
for collaborating scientific institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This main
technical challenge in achieving this goal lies not in each individual piece of
data-sharing functionality. Rather, it lies in how one builds an extensible
architecture where current data-handling features can synergistically coexist
and new ones can be seamlessly incorporated. To meet this challenge, this effort
will leverage a design called the Extensible Internet (EI). EI allows network
operators to insert new data processing functionality in a way that (i) any host
that is aware of the new functionality can use it and (ii) hosts that are
unaware of the new functionality can continue to function. This system will be
deployed on ESnet, which is a high-performance network optimized for large-scale
science, interconnecting the National Laboratory System in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Laboratory System pursues research in
a wide array of fields. The work described here will facilitate any National
Laboratory effort that involves the sharing of large datasets among
geographically distributed collaborators. Potential opportunities for impact
range from the biological sciences (e.g., genomic research) to the environmental
sciences (e.g., climate research) to the physical sciences (e.g., Large Hadron
Collider) to the energy sciences (e.g., National Synchrotron Light
Source).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative effort brings together
researchers from Mount Holyoke College, New York University, the University of
Washington, and the University of California at Berkeley. All source code, data,
papers, documentation, and course materials produced as a part of the proposed
work will be available from http://extensibleinternet.org/ . All material will
remain available for at least five years after the end of this project or five
years after publication, whichever is later. All source code will be released
under a permissive license.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.