* 2201707
* Collaborative Research: Droplet breakup in homogenous turbulence: model validation through experiments and direct numerical simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Michael Olsen, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 01/31/2025
* USD 406,601.00

The breakage of liquid droplets in a turbulent fluid flow is an important
phenomenon in numerous engineering, scientific, and environmental applications.
For example, many chemical and pharmaceutical processing techniques involve
droplets breaking as components mix and react. Droplet breakage is also
important in environmental applications such as the dynamics of oil spills and
their cleanup, and in the leakage of underground storage tanks into water
sources. Scientists and engineers have worked to develop computational
techniques to predict complex fluid processes such as those listed above. A key
component of these computational techniques are models that accurately describe
droplet breakage and its dependence on flow parameters such as turbulence
intensity and droplet properties such as viscosity, surface tension, diameter,
and density. This project will conduct a series of experiments to measure
droplet breakage under highly controlled conditions. Data from the experiments
will be used to improve droplet breakage models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will investigate effects of turbulence intensity and fluid properties on
droplet breakage by performing detailed experiments and using these data to
improve and validate droplet breakage models. In the experiments, individual
droplets will be injected into a flow chamber that has been designed to generate
a uniform turbulent field. The turbulent field will be characterized using
particle image velocimetry. High-speed movies will be captured of the droplet as
it is deformed and then broken by the turbulence. The experiments will be
repeated for different droplet diameters and fluids, and large ensembles of
droplet breakage movies will be analyzed statistically to yield data on the
droplet breakup process, including droplet size and shape. Moreover, because the
timing of successive images in the movies will be known, droplet breakage event
timings and frequencies can be determined by analyzing each image sequence.
Graduate and undergraduate students will work on this project. Local high-school
students will be recruited to participate as part of the research team through
the Ames (Iowa) High School Enhanced Learning Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.