* 2201825
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: Not All Eggs in One Basket: Authority Distribution for Resilience Against Compromised Nodes in Communication Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Remi Chou, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The ubiquity of networked communication systems in society raises ever-growing
security and privacy concerns. In particular, such concerns exist for
applications that collect private user information, as in health monitoring,
e-commerce, and financial services, and applications associated with critical
infrastructure as in transportation, smart grids, or process supervisory
management systems. Indeed, for these applications, a single
compromised/malicious agent or node of the network can provoke catastrophic
events such as ransom payments to recover private data, large-scale electricity
blackouts, interruptions of service, data breaches, financial losses, or
fatalities. This project aims to explore how distributing the authority to
launch critical tasks in the hands of multiple, rather than a single, nodes or
users of the network can be an efficient means to avoid having a single point of
failure and hence losing private data in its entirety in the case of a security
breach. Furthermore, the proposed research studies how authority distribution is
able to empower networks with the capability of coping with compromised devices
or persons before they are identified as malicious and, most importantly, before
they are able to do any harm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates
novel solutions beyond traditional threshold cryptography to address challenging
roadblocks in authority distribution for data access and biometric
authentication. Specifically, the project aims to overcome (i) privacy
challenges with the use of biometrics, (ii) the need for costly resources as
perfectly secure communication channels, (iii) a poor scaling behavior with the
number of users, and (iv) the need for a central entity which is not compatible
with distributed systems, to unravel fundamental trade-offs between privacy and
storage requirements. The project comprises three interrelated thrusts. The
first thrust studies the fundamental security and privacy guarantees that
authority distribution can offer in the presence of, potentially unnoticed,
compromised users or nodes. The second thrust investigates the construction of
low-complexity coding schemes for authority distribution that operate at finite
blocklengths, based on novel methods derived from error control coding and
cryptography. The third thrust aims to enable a universal learning framework for
authority distribution via deep learning that is independent of the data
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.