* 2201623
* Race, Religion, and STEM: Examining the Intersections for Black Students
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Julie Park, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 07/31/2025
* USD 380,640.00

This project will explore how Black undergraduate and graduate students in STEM
view the relationship between religion and science, and the implications for
their persistence in STEM. The project is of significance because religion and
religious communities were recently identified as a vital source of support for
many of Black students, although for STEM students the dichotomy between science
and religion can be challenging. While numerous studies document perceived
tensions between religion and science among predominantly white groups, very few
of these studies specifically address the perspectives of Black individuals,
despite historically high rates of religiosity within Black communities.
Consequently, little is known about the implications of Black students’ views on
the relationship between religion and science for participation in STEM. The
project will shed insight into intersectionality of race, religion, and STEM
with a goal of providing a more complex and textured portrait of factors that
facilitate and/or challenge Black student participation in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to examine how Black
undergraduate and graduate students in STEM view and negotiate their
relationships between science and religion throughout their academic journeys.
This project will primarily focus on extrinsic religiosity (e.g., participation
in religious services and prayer) and intrinsic religiosity (e.g., encompassing
beliefs and values), with a secondary focus on religious identity (including
identification as religious, spiritual, or not identifying as either, as well as
self-concept related to religious affiliation/membership). The three theoretical
frameworks guiding this research are 1) boundary construction between science
and religion, 2) STEM identity formation, and 3) the influence of religiously-
linked social capital on participation in STEM. Participants will be recruited
from three public traditionally white institutions and one historically Black
college and university (HBCU). After completing a baseline demographic survey,
qualitative interviews will be conducted with 1) 30 Black undergraduate students
majoring in biology and 30 non-biology STEM majors; 2) 30 Black undergraduate
students not majoring in STEM, including those who left STEM; and 3) 30 Black
graduate students pursuing biology degrees and 30 pursuing non-biology STEM
degrees. These interviews will ask about their perspectives on religion and
science, how religious identity and participation have influenced experiences in
STEM, and how such experiences have influenced their decisions to participate in
STEM academic degree programs. The interviews will be transcribed verbatim. The
interview data will be coded and analyzed using the constant-comparative method
and entered qualitative data analysis software. Cross-case analysis will also be
used to compare and contrast cases within the sample. Participants will be given
the opportunity to review manuscripts with their quotations and asked to provide
feedback to ensure the analysis and interpretation of their words is consistent
with their understanding and intentions. This project will add critical
foundational knowledge to the STEM education literature on broadening the
participation of underrepresented minorities by documenting the influence of
religion in the lives of Black students in STEM, as well as non-STEM majors’
perspectives on religion and science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and
enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation
of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and
suggest intervention and innovations to address
persistent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.