* 2201502
* AccelNet-Design: Extreme Light in Space, Intensity, Time and Space(X-lites)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2022,11/30/2023
* William Graves, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 11/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The invention of the laser in the late 1960s enabled a wide range of scientific
and technological advances, from communications to surgery to facial recognition
to analysis of Martian soil. Laser science and technologies continue to advance,
and a new generation of lasers are accessing frontiers of laser-matter
interactions at the highest intensities, the fastest times, and the shortest
distances. The Extreme Light in Intensity, Time, and Space (X-lites) network
builds on these technological advances to organize and support scientists around
the world as they research and apply this extreme light. X-lites is a new global
network that unites the work of scientists across disciplines and geographic
borders to support the next generation of scientific advances, researcher
training, skills development, and laser technology. X-lites accelerates
discovery and invention through its support of team building, knowledge sharing,
and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;X-lites applies the Science of
Team Science (SciTS) to build on existing networks of researchers developing and
applying extreme light. X-lites builds on US and European investments in
research facilities that provide access to cutting edge extreme light
capabilities. The X-lites network is built on a coupled, two-layer network
concept that has proven to be effective in forming impactful networks. One
networked layer links user facilities, and the second layer links these
facility's users. Users are a diverse community of researchers taking advantage
of infrastructure investments to explore questions in physics, chemistry,
biology, materials, and more. X-lites hosts workshops and short courses on
effective teaming, followed by meetings of the researcher community to
strengthen connections, enable collaboration, gather feedback on the key
technical challenges, and shape the future of X-lites. These activities
intentionally engage early career and diverse researchers (i.e., diverse
demographics, scientific specialties, and geographic locations) who are the
future of these fields and who drive X-lites and extreme light science,
technologies, and applications forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Accelerating Research through International Network-to-Network Collaborations
(AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate the process of scientific discovery
and prepare the next generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international
collaborations. The AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S.
research networks and complementary networks abroad that will leverage research
and educational resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require
significant coordinated international efforts. This project is funded by the
Office of International Science and Engineering
(OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.