* 2201306
* Collaborative Research: Developing neural and behavioral measures to predict long-term STEM learning outcomes from a high-school spatial learning course
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Robert Kolvoord, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 07/31/2025
* USD 57,321.00

This project uses neural and behavioral measures of learning as a basis for
making improvements to an immersive high school course that trains students in
flexible spatial cognition and data analysis. Tracking students into college,
the project measures long-term effects of improved spatial cognition resulting
from the modified geospatial course curriculum. Large-scale longitudinal studies
have demonstrated the overwhelming benefit of advanced spatial cognitive
abilities for success in STEM careers. Recent research has shown the
effectiveness of spatial cognitive training for developing these skills in the
context of secondary and higher education curricula. What is lacking are the
data to connect these separate lines of research: does spatial cognitive
education yield lasting effects on cognition that influence future success in
STEM fields. This project leverages, and further develops, a successful high
school spatial STEM curriculum to identify factors that support long-term
learning that builds over time, demonstrated by tracking progress into college.
Given the substantial evidence that spatial cognition is a determinant of
success in STEM, broadening access to spatial learning is critical to broadening
the gateway to STEM achievement. Currently, spatially-focused educational
experiences (e.g., extracurricular science activities) often require access to
resources associated with socioeconomic status. This project aims to establish
an empirical basis for broad adoption of spatial curricula so that more students
receive spatial instruction, as well as curriculum development tools to yield
more effective STEM curricula and shorten development time. Further, this
project can provide new insights for broadening participation in STEM and will
point to neural targets for intervention, identifying possible effects of sex
and STEM-related anxieties on conceptual learning in the brain, and testing the
efficacy of spatial education for reducing disparities. Most broadly, the
research has potential to bolster spatial ability in the next generation of the
U.S. STEM workforce, with diverse backgrounds and diverse career paths.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses neural data, in combination with
behavioral tests, to measure and compare the effectiveness of different
instructional approaches and to improve the curriculum itself. The research
builds on a foundation of work by the multidisciplinary team, including years of
curriculum development, neural data analysis, and examination of the cognitive
and neural benefits of spatial cognitive education. The insights provided by
this project allow the investigators to address several fundamental questions,
including how to most effectively train and utilize spatial cognition in
education, what long-term neural and cognitive changes are associated with
spatial learning during adolescence, how can neural data be incorporated into
the curriculum development cycle, and which instructional changes benefit
student learning and motivation to pursue future STEM endeavors. Beyond testing
the efficacy of spatial education, this project also generates new methods for
decoding the neural signals that reflect learning and conceptual understanding.
Further, the project puts these methods to use in comparing different versions
of the spatial curriculum on the basis of short-term and long-term neural and
cognitive changes. By comparing traditional learning outcomes, novel neural
measures, and student motivation for pursuing STEM disciplines, the project
provides a new, powerful evidentiary basis for decision-making when choosing
among instructional approaches. This project builds new capacity for focus-group
testing that includes neural data to improve educational curricula, in addition
to providing specific and actionable recommendations for spatially-enriched
science curricula. This project therefore advances curriculum development on two
fronts: by demonstrating the long-term effectiveness of spatial cognitive
learning in secondary education – tracking student progress into college – and
by adding neural data to the toolbox of the curriculum developer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12), EHR Core Research (ECR) program, and the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ECR program
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that are
essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The program
supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand,
build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to address
persistent challenges in education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ITEST program
supports projects that build understandings of practices, program elements,
contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge and
interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.