* 2201584
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Medieval to Modern Climate Variability and Climate Change in the Great Plains
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Dorian Burnette, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2025
* USD 39,786.00

The general goal of the research is to develop moisture sensitive tree-ring
chronologies from old-growth populations of Juniperus, Pinus, and Taxodium trees
from within or near the Great Plains for in situ reconstructions of seasonal
precipitation and the long-term soil moisture balance that together will
constitute the Great Plains Drought Atlas (GPDA). Five gridded reconstructions
that span the Great Plains at 0.5 degree resolution will be developed, including
the Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI) for the spring and summer seasons,
precipitation totals for spring and summer, and the summer Palmer Drought
Severity Index (PDSI). The reconstructions will be designed for maximum length,
with the goal of extending the moisture estimates into the Medieval Period when
the climate appears to have been much warmer and drier. The GPDA will be used to
test hypotheses concerning the magnitude of Great Plains drought and pluvial,
the anthropogenic imprint on recent moisture trends in the Great Plains, and the
possible multi-decadal regimes in the frequency of rapid-onset spring to summer
flash drought over the Great Plains during the past 500- to
1000-years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The highest agricultural production in the
United States occurs in the Great Plains, a region also subject to frequent
drought, including the flash drought of 2012 that resulted in $30 billion in
losses. Proxy tree ring and lake sediment data suggest that the instrumental
record of precipitation and soil moisture may not be representative of the
natural variability of severe droughts and prolonged wet intervals over the past
millennium. Anthropogenic climate change may be contributing to wetter
conditions in the Northern Plains and increasing dryness over the Southern
Plains, a possible expression of the drying symptomatic of the expansion of the
Hadley Cell and the weakening of the jet stream predicted by many climate
models. These human-induced changes threaten to disrupt agriculture, energy
production, and water use, and may be magnified by recurrent decadal moisture
extremes witnessed in instrumental and paleoclimate records. Very few exactly
dated, annual tree-ring chronologies are available from the mostly treeless
Great Plains. The lack of data adds considerable uncertainty to the available
reconstructions of moisture anomalies for this region. This project seeks to
reduce the uncertainty by developing long tree-ring chronologies within and
along the boundaries of the Great Plains to aid reconstruction of past drought
and wetness in this critical agricultural region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
potential Broader Impacts (B.I.) include improvement in understanding climate
processes involving drought and extreme events in the Great Plains regions that
impact the highest agricultural production in the United States. Importantly,
the project includes researchers and students from a regional Primarily
Undergraduate Institution (PUI) which has strong ties to affected agricultural
and tribal communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.