* 2201149
* Collaborative Research: Differential Methods, Implicitization, and Multiplicities with a View Towards Equisingularity Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Bernd Ulrich, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2025
* USD 205,000.00

This research project concerns the structure of geometric objects that arise as
solution sets of systems of polynomial equations in several variables. Such
objects, called varieties, play a fundamental role throughout mathematics as
well as in applications in science and engineering. Motivated by a question that
originates with mathematician Henri Poincaré in 1891, the investigators will
study the relationship between local properties of a variety and global features
of tangents at points of the variety, as these points vary. They will also work
on implicitization, a classical question in pure mathematics that is of much
interest to scientists in geometric modelling and computer aided design. Given
any geometric object, such as a curve or surface, the goal is to find the system
of polynomial equations that has the geometric object as a solution set; knowing
these 'implicit' equations provides insight into the geometric object. The PIs
will involve graduate students and postdoctoral visitors in the project, and
they will facilitate scientific exchange by organizing international programs,
conferences, and national online seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will work on projects pertaining to algebraic vector fields, the
implicitization problem for Rees rings, equisingularity theory, and residual
intersections. The PIs will use tools from commutative algebra to investigate
how the types of singularities and the global invariants of a variety are
reflected in properties of the vector fields that are tangent to the variety. In
particular, they wish to establish a correspondence between the types and
constellation of the singularities of a projective plane curve on the one hand
and the graded Betti numbers of the module of derivations of its homogeneous
coordinate ring on the other. Determining the implicit equations defining the
graph and image of a rational map between projective spaces is a classical
problem in elimination theory. The PIs will concentrate on the case of Cremona
maps, where the implicit equations of the graph also provide a parametrization
of the inverse map. For dominant rational maps they will investigate the
relationship between the projective degrees of the rational map and the number
and bidegrees of the equations defining the graph. In equisingularity theory,
one seeks fiberwise multiplicity-based criteria for a family of analytic spaces
to be Whitney equisingular and hence topologically trivial. The PIs plan to
devise such a criterion for analytic spaces with arbitrary singularities by
using a new notion of multiplicity inspired by intersection theory. Graduate
students will be supported as part of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.