* 2201583
* CC* Integration-Small: Harnessing FABRIC for Scalable Human Genome Sequence Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Praveen Rao, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 07/31/2024
* USD 526,173.00

Human genomes contain valuable information that can enable new ways of treating
life-threatening diseases and improving health outcomes. However, human genomes
are very large in size and require substantial computing, networking, and
storage resources for processing and analysis. The goal of this project is to
leverage FABRIC (https://fabric-testbed.net, an NSF-funded national research
infrastructure) for efficient and secure processing and analysis of human genome
sequences. Students will be involved in the research and outreach activities of
the project. Software will be developed for broader use by the education and
research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to a suite of
new algorithms and techniques for efficient and secure processing and analysis
of human genomes at scale using cluster computing technologies and cutting-edge,
programmable hardware available on FABRIC. The research thrusts include (a)
acceleration of variant calling pipelines using hardware accelerators and Big
Data tools, (b) secure and efficient processing of genomes using advanced
networking capabilities, and (c) a workload distribution scheme for combining
the resources of FABRIC with CloudLab (https://cloudlab.us/, another NSF-funded
testbed) for genome processing. Measurement data on FABRIC and CloudLab will be
collected for further analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance
the state of the art in scalable human genome sequence analysis, which is
essential for the prevention and treatment of complex diseases like cancer as
well as drug discovery. It will lead to an open source software for large-scale,
cost-effective human genome sequence analysis using cutting-edge, everywhere
programmable testbeds. The findings will be disseminated in the form of
publications, software, datasets, and training materials. New coursework will be
developed for computer science and informatics students. A summer camp will be
conducted for high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project website is
hosted at https://github.com/MU-Data-Science/GAF. This repository will be
maintained for 5 years after the completion of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.