* 2201424
* Collaborative Research: Learning probability through AI problem-solving in a Game-based Environment
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Karen Mayfield-Ingram, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 06/30/2025
* USD 809,155.00

Understanding probability is essential for daily life. Probabilistic reasoning
is critical in decision making not only for people but also for artificial
intelligence (AI). AI sets a modern context to connect probability concepts to
real-life situations. It also provides unique opportunities for reciprocal
learning that can advance student understanding of both AI systems and
probabilistic reasoning. This project aims to improve the current practice of
high school probability education and to design AI problem-solving to connect
probability and AI concepts. Set in a game-based environment, students learn and
practice applying probability theory while exploring the world of probability-
based AI algorithms to solve problems that are meaningful and relevant to them.
The project holds significant potential for advancing our knowledge on how to
support youth in gaining knowledge while targeting misconceptions of
probability, as well as addressing the urgent need of helping the nation’s youth
learn the fundamentals of AI. The project will be piloted in classrooms in the
Local District East of the Los Angeles Unified School District. Through a
partnership with the Viterbi K-12 STEM Center at the University of Southern
California, the project plans for broad dissemination of the technology and
findings, including the game-based learning environment and teacher professional
development resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to use technology-
supported learning to improve current practice in high school math education
through research and development of a game-based learning environment. The
project will engage teachers as co-designers to develop AI problem-solving based
on the high school probability curriculum, and iteratively refine the problem
design through cognitive interview studies. Building on the instructional
guidelines and scaffolding strategies distilled from these studies, the project
will develop a game-based learning environment that will guide students through
problem-solving based learning, address students’ misconceptions in probability,
immerse them in scenarios aligned with the interests of the students and mirror
those in real-life where the probability concepts and AI algorithms can be
applied. Through a series of pilot studies and scaled-up studies, the project
will iteratively refine the game-based learning environment and gather evidence
of how and how well students learn through the game, measured through objective
performance, motivations, and transfer. Additionally, the project will gather
feedback from the teachers through professional development workshops and pilot
studies, to understand how teachers use the game in classroom teaching. This
project is supported by NSF's Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program, in
the Directorate for Education &amp; Human Resources. DRK-12 seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. This project is also co-funded by the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.