* 2201464
* Science Education Instruction for Elementary Students with Learning Disabilities
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Jennifer Chiu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,296,315.00

Scientific literacy is essential for everyone. Unfortunately, many students with
learning disabilities (LD) do not do well in science and, in turn, have limited
career opportunities in STEM fields (science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics). For studentsâ€™ with LD, difficulties in science start early, with a
large achievement gap between students with LD and typically achieving peers
evident by early elementary school. More concerning is that this science
achievement discrepancy widens over time. While lower science achievement for
students with LD is well documented, little is known about why this disparity
exists. We know little about the quality of science instruction students with LD
receive during the upper elementary school years when foundational scientific
content and practices should be taught. Therefore, this project aims to conduct
a large-scale survey and observational study using a nationally representative
of U.S. elementary schools to investigate the science education of 4th and 5th
graders with LD. The project will provide foundational knowledge on the quality
and type of science instruction students with LD receive and how this
instruction aligns with effective practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a
crowdsourcing approach, researchers will work with ten different universities to
collect and analyze data from 20 schools located across all nine U.S. census
districts. This nationwide crowdsourced collaboration will allow for a
generalizable sample of U.S. elementary schools and the students with LD
educated in these schools. Through teacher surveys, interviews, and direct
observations of science instruction, researchers will ascertain a myriad of
critical information currently unknown to the field. The will investigate the
time allotted to science instruction in 4th and 5th-grade elementary classrooms
across the country and the amount of the allotted time enacted by teachers. Data
collection will consider how often students with LD are present for science
instruction, and the science content delivered and curricula used. Further, the
team will quantify meaningful engagement (i.e., instructional interactions
occurring between teachers and students) of students with LD during science
instruction. They will ascertain if meaningful engagement levels vary by (a)
type of science instruction (e.g., didactic, practice-based), (b) quality of
science instruction (e.g., alignment with emerging effective practices), and (c)
instructional supports (e.g., scaffolded material) provided to students with LD.
Further, the team will investigate whether science instructional features are
associated with higher achievement for students with
LD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research
(ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research
that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in
critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM
learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform
efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and
innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM interest, education,
learning and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.