* 2201571
* AccelNet - Implementation: Development of an International Network for the Study of Ocean Metabolism and Nutrient Cycles on a Changing Planet (Biogeoscapes)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Mak Saito, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,918,341.00

Microorganisms play important roles in the biogeochemical cycles of the oceans
and help maintain the functioning of Earth’s ecosystems. Yet much remains
unknown about what determines their occurrence around the globe, and what
controls ocean metabolism. Human activities and climate change are affecting
ocean microbes and biogeochemical cycles in many ways; being able predict and
understanding those changes is needed to inform management and decision-making.
An international community effort is building a global, marine microbial
biogeochemistry network, “BioGeoSCAPES: Ocean Metabolism and Nutrient Cycles on
a Changing Planet”, that combines biological and chemical sampling to map
microbial communities and study ocean metabolism and their effects on ecosystem
health and biogeochemical cycles. This Accel-Net project draws upon expertise
and infrastructure across multiple national and international networks to lay
the groundwork for the BioGeoSCAPES program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BioGeoSCAPES
is an interdisciplinary effort that combines biological and chemical
measurements through a coordinated international program. Network activities
contribute to the development of BioGeoSCAPES through a combination of virtual
and in-person meetings, workshops, working groups, student and postdoc
exchanges, and summer school events. Large workshops focus on: science
integration and planning; informatics and data management; intercalibration
review and assessment; and science implementation and infrastructure. Smaller
workshops/meetings include a modeling and data integration workshop, two summer
schools, and two scientific steering committee meetings. These community
activities contribute: an intercalibration assessment; methodological and
sampling best practices; data management and informatics planning; data-model
integration strategies and recommendations; and planning for the launch of an
international BioGeoSCAPES Program. To support early career engagement and
development, this Accel-Net includes international research experiences across
international network partners via: in-person summer schools designed to build
scientific, technical and data integration expertise; international early career
research exchanges; virtual professional development workshops; and a cross-
network mentoring program. The proposed capacity building activities for early
career scientists (participation in Accel-Net leadership, research exchanges,
summer schools, professional development workshops, mentoring) provide the
training and tools needed to transcend disciplines and utilize “big data” sets
in novel ways to understand how marine microbes interact with their changing
environment. These activities facilitate participation across networks and
diverse groups, foster new collaborations across career stages and nations, and
cultivate leadership skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research
through International Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is
designed to accelerate the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next
generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The
AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and
complementary networks abroad that will leverage research and educational
resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require significant
coordinated international efforts. This project is funded by the Office of
International Science and Engineering (OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.