* 2201344
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Autonomy of Origami-inspired Transformable Systems in Space Operations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Ruike Renee Zhao, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2025
* USD 266,000.00

Origami-inspired structures that fold flat sheets along creases with designed
patterns to create transformable structures have been widely applied in science
and engineering, especially in space operations, e.g., for deployment of folded
solar panels equipped on launched satellites. Although the deformation process
plays an essential role in transitions between the origami states, few studies
focus on the control and actuation of the origami folding mechanism toward high
autonomy of the deformation process. This project aims to develop an autonomous
origami-inspired transformable system to enable high-performance deformation
maneuvering in space operations requiring frequent and/or time-responsive shape
changes. The integrative research incorporating theory, analysis, algorithm
development, and experimental verification will contribute to a theoretical and
experimental platform to advance the autonomy of origami system operations in
challenging environments. The research products will have significant impacts on
the proliferated satellite marketplace where low mass, small volume, and
adaptable structures/subsystems of space vehicles are in demand. Going beyond
the applications in space missions, origami-inspired transformable systems have
much broader applications in science and engineering. Moreover, the
collaboration of experts in both cyber and physical areas promotes the creation
of interdisciplinary products that bridge different
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the research goal of advancing
autonomy of origami-inspired transformable systems, four research thrusts are
identified, namely (1) developing a network-based approach for modeling and
design of multi-shape origami structures, (2) designing an integrated sensing
and control strategy with guaranteed controllability, reachability, and energy
efficiency, (3) developing programmable untethered actuation via thermal loading
to realize designed control maneuvers, and (4) evaluating the performance of
autonomous systems using multiple origami structures in space operation
missions. These identified research thrusts will together contribute to an
analytical and computational framework for achieving autonomy of the origami
deformation process, which will result in real-world applications in future
space missions. Theoretically, the fundamental analysis based on networked
control and graph modeling can lead to rigorous support of control performance
in terms of controllability, reachability, and energy efficiency for the origami
deformation process. Practically, the development of programmable untethered
actuation enables the generation of designed control commands under operational
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.