* 2201586
* AccelNet-Implementation: Accelerating Transformations to Sustainability Across the World’s Mountains
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* Julia Klein, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,999,962.00

Mountains cover 20% of Earth's land and shelter nearly half of Earth's
biodiversity ‘hotspots.’ They support abundant animals and plants and provide
water to about half of humanity. Mountain peoples possess deep understanding of
their extreme environments in which they face threats from warming climates,
declining snowpacks and melting glaciers, increasing wildfire, and other
challenges. This project establishes the Mountain Science Operating with Society
(MtnSOS) network that works with diverse mountain peoples to develop strategies
for sustaining their lands and livelihoods. MtSOS brings together 19 networks
from six continents and over 50 countries. This group is comprised of mountain
peoples, scientists, and local experts who work together to identify adaptations
for environmental change, empower local voices to improve policies and
governance, and develop problem-solving approaches toward mountain
sustainability. This project strengthens international scientific collaboration
by understanding linkages between local and Indigenous knowledge systems,
nature-based solutions, and governance structures. MtSOS provides societal
benefits through research on transformations to sustainability in mountain
ecosystems by integrating science with diverse practices, knowledge, and
participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MtnSOS network science goals address
four critical knowledge gaps for mountain sustainability: 1) contributions of
local and Indigenous knowledge to adaptation and transformation; 2) nature-based
solutions for climate change in mountain systems; 3) approaches to strengthen
local governance, and build equitable partnerships for sustainable livelihoods
and policy, and 4) synthesis across diverse mountain contexts of transformative
pathways. The networks within the network leverage RCN and INCLUDES projects,
science-based mountain networks, local and Indigenous knowledge networks, team
science networks, and education-based networks. The network expands convergence
research into a new model of science called Transformative Science with Society
to integrate science with action. A Machine Learning component uses integrated
datasets to quantify mountain characteristics and allows participants to explore
pathways to sustainable futures. The Transformative Science with Society
approach improves equity and access and creates a structured process to expand
collective impact. Early career individuals receive leadership training,
participate in network exchanges, and engage in the policy process of the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. MtnSOS supports planning and
implementation of societally relevant research such as improved conservation of
mountain resources and expands public participation in sustainability
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through International
Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate
the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next generation of U.S.
researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The AccelNet program
supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and complementary
networks abroad that will leverage research and educational resources to tackle
grand scientific challenges that require significant coordinated international
efforts. This project is funded by the Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.