* 2201888
* Aligning Measurement of Personal Attributes for Predicting STEM Education Outcomes
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* James Heckman, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* David Daniel
* 04/30/2027
* USD 1,025,789.00

Scholars in personality psychology, economics, and child development report a
variety of empirical relationships connecting personality traits, executive
functions (EF), and economic preferences to enrollment and performance in
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) courses in elementary and
secondary education and choice of STEM majors in college. The similarities and
differences in how these attributes are measured and their relationships to STEM
education outcomes have not been rigorously examined. This interdisciplinary
multi-country study will investigate the evolution and co-evolution of traits,
EF skills, and preferences in children to determine how those attributes predict
STEM achievement and the choice of STEM majors and careers. In particular, it
will use a common measurement framework across samples from three sites in the
United States and China, as well as data from the Australian Household, Income
and Labour Dynamics Survey, to find out how personal attributes are related to
STEM education achievement, college attainment and STEM major choice. It will
provide a better understanding of age-specific windows of opportunity for
interventions promoting STEM achievement and the pursuit of STEM majors. This
study will produce core sets of distinct attributes to use in assessing students
and schools, which will be useful as a diagnostic tool for teachers and school
administrators to counsel students and to facilitate personalized learning.
Students may reap the academic and social benefits of teaching interventions
focused on the impact of traits, skills, and preferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this study is to identify the combination
of traits, EF skills, and preferences for predicting STEM achievement (grades,
test scores, teacher ratings, as well as choice of college major and career). To
do this, first the study will generate a parsimonious measurement system of
personal attributes by conducting linear and nonlinear factor analysis to
determine the relationship and dimensionality of traits, EF skills, and
preferences. Second, it will collect data on these personal attributes in
different experimental conditions to quantify how incentives, frames and
contextual factors affect their measurement, in order to propose standardized
measures for personal attributes that predict STEM outcomes. Third, it will
examine trait, skill, and preference growth longitudinally, spanning cohorts
from 4th to 12th grade, for both mean change and change in the prediction of
STEM outcomes. Finally, it will examine how background factors including geo-
cultural settings moderate the relationship between STEM outcomes and traits, EF
skills, and preferences. This study makes five major contributions to STEM
education research: (1) The longitudinal measurement furthers our understanding
of age-specific windows of opportunity for interventions promoting attributes
that drive interest in STEM; (2) Examination of relationships across the
elicited measures enables determination of which measurement strategies capture
the same constructs, and which add genuine new dimensions to the study of
individual differences. This study will use a common set of measures across
countries; (3) For each construct, use of experimental manipulations enables
investigation of the quantitative importance of standardizing for incentives and
environments; (4) By studying the power of the various elicited, standardized
measures for predicting STEM achievement, college attainment, and STEM major and
career choices, this study will support schools and teachers to promote
personalized education and improve student outcomes; and (5) The study of
similarities and differences in measures across cultural, race, ethnicity,
gender, and family background, allows for optimal prediction of STEM outcomes
across distinct contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.