* 2201904
* From Black Boys to Men in a Multiyear STEM Education Intervention and Mixed Methods Research Project
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Julius Davis, Bowie State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 08/31/2027
* USD 3,163,527.00

Conceptualizing a community-based model that enhances the recruitment,
engagement, and transition to STEM teaching roles for Black male students while
retaining and advancing Black male teachers is critical to addressing their
significant and historically disproportionate representation in teaching
careers. The project explores systemic barriers that dissuade Black male
students from pursuing STEM majors and takes a strength-focused approach to
fostering a critical mass of Black male STEM teachers. This project will advance
foundational knowledge by developing conceptual and methodological frameworks
that interrogate the systemic barriers in the STEM teacher staffing challenge,
while expanding the possibilities of motivating Black boys and men in STEM
fields. This project leverages the work of authentic partnerships between
academic institutions (Prince George's County Public Schools, Prince George’s
County Community College and Bowie State University) and their various industry
and community partners to increase the number of Black boys and men in
postsecondary schools and professional settings. This applied study has the
potential to impact how school systems, community colleges, and four-year
universities work together to develop tiered approaches to recruiting and retain
Black boys and men in STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through mixed methods
designs, this project investigates Black male students’ STEM pathways from
middle school to the STEM teaching profession through various programmatic
efforts. Efforts include community-centered outreach, early clinical teaching
experiences for undergraduate students, and professional development for
participating STEM teachers and mentors. This multi-institutional engages Black
boys and men in STEM from across the career path continuum, attends to many gaps
in the research literature pertaining to racialized experiences of Black boys
and men in STEM education, specifically: 1) how systemic racism impacts their
recruitment, development, attrition, retention and advancement; and 2) how Black
male students’ individual and collective racialized experiences in a STEM
education program should inform evidence-based strategies for recruiting Black
middle school boys to become STEM teachers. Further, it sheds light on the
impact of Black men mentors of Black male students on STEM education and career
pathways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the Racial Equity
in STEM Education program (EHR Racial Equity). The program supports research and
practice projects that investigate how considerations of racial equity factor
into the improvement of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the voices, knowledge,
and experiences of the individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted
by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise. This program aligns with
NSF’s core value of supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers
from across the Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of
organizations. Funds for EHR Racial Equity are pooled from programs across EHR
in recognition of the alignment of its projects with the collective research and
development thrusts of the four divisions of the
directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.