* 2201394
* Collaborative Research: Fostering Virtual Learning of Data Science Foundations with Mathematical Logic for Rural High School Students
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Wanli Xing, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2026
* USD 557,645.00

Data science is revolutionizing science and industry, and the current job market
has shown a strong demand for a workforce fluent in data science. The
LogicDataScience (LogicDS) curriculum in the Florida Virtual Schools (FLVS) is
introducing high school students to this exciting area and related careers. The
project addresses a major educational barrier, namely that rural students are
less likely to choose a major in STEM and have far less access to advanced STEM
courses taught by highly qualified teachers. The LogicDS curriculum and virtual
delivery are expected to relieve the resource constraints significantly and thus
reach rural students. The strategy behind this curriculum development for data
science explores the utility of emphasizing how the foundations of data science
in computing, mathematics, and statistics are unified by mathematical logic. The
project is studying the impacts of the new curriculum on students’ learning of
computing, mathematics, and statistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the core of the
proposed curriculum is a principled, unified, and novel approach naturally and
rigorously integrating the foundations of data science in computing,
mathematics, and statistics through mathematical logic. The foundations of
computing, mathematics, and statistics are contextualized in each other and in
real-life, data-rich problems in this curriculum. This approach does two things
that hold fundamental promise for data science education. First, it draws
relations between statistics and computing in ways that are helpful for data
science learners. Second, it reduces cognitive load and makes learning of key
constructs of data science more accessible. A design-based research paradigm
guides the project, which is directly impacting about 1,000 students. The
project uses microgenetic analysis to study the mechanisms underlying student
learning premised by the rationale of the curriculum. In addition, a quasi-
experimental study is being employed to investigate comparatively the impact of
the new curriculum on students’ learning of computing, mathematics, and
statistics and in what way it affects their learning. The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of STEM subjects by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12
program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.