* 2201929
* Spatial Justice in Physics Teaching and Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Amy Robertson, Seattle Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/2025
* USD 526,070.00

This project will prepare scientists, mathematicians, engineers, and technicians
who understand how to address the roles of race and racism in physics education.
This project seeks to address racism in physics by building knowledge about the
spatiality of injustice in physics teaching and learning environments – how
racism gets inscribed in space, including the physical layout of the classroom,
the policies and practices that shape instructional approaches and student-
teacher interactions, and the ways students and faculty think about and are
allowed to “take up” or inhabit space. Spatiality is an often-ignored dimension
in justice work, which more often attends to historical and sociological
dimensions. The spatiality of injustice focuses on how injustice can be embedded
in space. The overall goal of this project is to support physics instructors,
students, and researchers to build an awareness of how racism shapes physics
teaching and learning spaces to transform how the discipline is taught in higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will partner with
undergraduate students to conduct in-depth case studies of physics classrooms,
bringing existing methods to the study of STEM spaces and developing new
methodological tools that can be applied to other STEM disciplines. The project
will analyze video from physics classrooms, interviews with physics students,
and other artifacts to identify how and to what extent issues of race arise in
physics classrooms and how space is experienced and negotiated by physics
students. The project will produce design principles for more racially and
spatially just physics teaching and learning, methodological tools that can be
used by STEM researchers, artistic renderings of reimagined learning spaces
(counter-maps), reflections on anti-racist practices and authentic participant
research, and publications and presentations that share project insights.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project is funded through the Racial
Equity in STEM Education program (EHR Racial Equity). The program supports
research and practice projects that investigate how considerations of racial
equity factor into the improvement of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the
voices, knowledge, and experiences of the individuals, communities, and
institutions most impacted by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise.
This program aligns with NSF’s core value of supporting outstanding researchers
and innovative thinkers from across the Nation's diversity of demographic
groups, regions, and types of organizations. Funds for EHR Racial Equity are
pooled from programs across EHR in recognition of the alignment of its projects
with the collective research and development thrusts of the four divisions of
the directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.