* 2201155
* Sulfenyl Chloride Electrophilic Addition to Olefinic Monomers: A New Step-Growth Polymerization Reaction to Prepare Optical Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Robert Norwood, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2025
* USD 550,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jeffrey Pyun and Professor Robert
Norwood from the University of Arizona will develop novel approaches to the
chemical synthesis of optical polymers. Synthetic polymers, the main constituent
of plastics, are ubiquitous in our everyday life. Through the design and
synthetic control of the chemical structures of polymers, polymer properties can
be tailored for use in a wide range of applications. This research project
focuses on the investigation of chemical processes that will enable controlled
polymerization of sulfide units into polymeric materials, which has significant
potential to afford high refractive index, highly transparent optical plastics
for use in consumer eye-ware, stretchable optical fiber and electro-optic
devices. Currently, the industrial production of plastic optical lenses requires
the use of high-cost sulfur-containing monomers. The Pyun and Norwood team aims
to address this limitation by developing novel synthetic approaches that employ
low-cost monomers as an alternative feedstock for high-volume manufacturing of
next generation optical polymers. Graduate and undergraduate students, including
women and underrepresented minorities, will receive interdisciplinary research
training on synthetic polymer chemistry, polymer processing, optical physics,
materials characterization, and device integration. In addition, Prof. Pyun and
Prof. Norwood will expand a remote-research learning program to engage non-
Chemistry and non-Optical Science majors in independent research activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research team will develop a new step-
growth polymerization process based on the electrophilic addition of sulfenyl
chlorides to olefinic monomers. The synthesis of polyhalodisulfide materials and
halogen free polydisulfides will be explored. The new science of the project
will focus on the fundamental polymerization chemistry required to afford
homopolymers, segmented block copolymers, thermoplastics and thermosets. Monomer
reactivity will be studied to determine polymerization mechanisms and kinetics.
The structural factors that influence the optical properties as well as the
chemical and thermal stabilities of the polymers will be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.