* 2201835
* Research on the role of attention in improving video-based learning
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Lucas Parra, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 05/31/2025
* USD 842,488.00

Education is moving online. During the global pandemic, this ongoing process
accelerated and educators increasingly leveraged existing online video content
to supplement synchronous remote instruction. One problem with this approach is
that passive viewing of video content is not a particularly effective form of
instruction. Many students struggle to sustain their attention to online video,
and this is reflected in poor performance in subsequent tests of learning. This
project will explore a variety of interventions that aim to engage the students
with such video material. These interventions include such characteristics as
interleaving questions and feedback, prompting constructive thinking and
facilitating discussion with other students. The premise is that active viewing
enhances attention and leads to better learning outcomes. This laboratory
research aims to refine the concept of “student engagement”, which at present
does not distinguish between active participation and attention to the learning
material, two important but potentially differing factors that contribute to
learning. This fundamental research on learning is made possible by measuring
attentional engagement directly using brain and eye activity. From a practical
point of view, the goal of this project is to identify simple interventions
teachers can use to better leverage the vast trove of educational videos
available online. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project is
to improve the efficacy of video in remote instruction. The basic hypothesis is
that attentional engagement with educational video mediates learning and that
attentional engagement can be enhanced with interventions that promote active
viewing. This hypothesis motivates the following aims. Aim 1: Test interventions
that convert passive viewing into active viewing to improve learning:
Specifically, identify interventions that improve attention and learning with
existing short STEM education videos. Interventions will be tested prospectively
on an online platform while recruiting participants online and among STEM
college students. Aim 2: Explain the effects of attentional engagement with
video on learning: Specifically, test the basic hypothesis by determining
whether the effect of successful active viewing interventions prospectively
affect attentional engagement and performance. Attention will be measured with
eye tracking in remote experiments and with EEG in the lab, while recruiting
among STEM college students. The project will also test the effect of cognitive
traits and the learning environment. Aim 3: Include students from groups
underrepresented in STEM fields in the research. Specifically, students will
assist in research with eye tracking and EEG, as well as the selection of video
material and design of test questions. In doing so, these student researchers
will provide their unique perspective on the challenges of remote
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the EHR Core Research
(ECR) program, which supports fundamental research on STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.