* 2201663
* Expanding a Multi-skilled STEM Technician Pipeline to Meet Industry Needs
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Shawn Ford, Johnston Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2025
* USD 635,012.00

Johnston Community College’s (JCC) Expanding a Multi-skilled STEM Technician
Pipeline to Meet Industry Needs “Bio Blend 2.0” seeks to better prepare students
to meet biotechnology company hiring needs and to improve employment outcomes
for underserved populations, specifically focusing our recruitment of
neurodiverse individuals on the autism spectrum. JCC is located one hour south
of Research Triangle Park in North Carolina, where the demand for well-trained
and diverse biopharma technicians is growing and exceeding the number of
technicians currently produced from local and regional community colleges. Bio
Blend 2.0 will further modify Applied Engineering and Bioprocess Technology
curriculum to provide access to distributed control system software (DeltaV),
work-based learning, and internship opportunities with a goal of enrolling 50
students in years two and three of this project. The project will broaden
participation of students with autism at JCC by 150%, leading to greater
participation of neurodiverse individuals in Science, Technology, Engineering
and Math (STEM) related programs. This three-year project will provide
opportunities for DeltaV certification, Bio Blend certification, and Associates
Degrees in Applied Engineering and Bioprocess Technology. Project results will
include an increased number of trained technicians for local partners with
national scalability for other colleges and industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bio Blend 2.0 seeks to accomplish three goals: 1) Modify
Bio Blend curriculum, course progression, and resources based on stakeholder
feedback and expand to all degree students across both the Applied Engineering
and Bioprocess Technology programs; 2) Improve the Talent Pipeline to meet
workforce and industry needs by developing a work-based learning experience and
soft-skills training; and 3) Increase neurodiversity in the Applied Engineering
and Bioprocess Technology programs to include more individuals from the autism
spectrum. As part of the Bio Blend 2.0 project, DeltaV, the distributed control
system used by many biotech companies, will be embedded into the curriculum
across both programs. The project will also increase diversity and inclusion as
it relates to the neurodivergent population. This is based on local industry
feedback, unemployment rates for this population, and familiarity with a
successful STEM program specifically for individuals with autism at other
colleges. Faculty will receive training in Universal Design for Learning (UDL)
to support diverse learners. JCC will also offer summer professional development
opportunities for middle and high school educators and career counselors to
strengthen the pipeline from public schools to postsecondary technician
education. Industry feedback through advisory council meetings, classroom
support, and on-going communication will improve student engagement and project
outcomes. JCC’s Career Coach will facilitate learning communities for all
students with specific focus for neurodiverse students on the autism spectrum.
Bio Blend 2.0 will ultimately produce a more diverse and talented group of
students from Applied Engineering and Biotechnology, ready to enter the
workforce with hands-on applicable experience and certifications to fill the
local industry need. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the Nation’s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.