* 2201101
* Collaborative Research: The Organizational Climate Challenge: Promoting the Retention of Students from Underrepresented Groups in Doctoral Engineering Programs
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* So Yoon Yoon, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 07/31/2026
* USD 190,406.00

The ongoing lack of diversity in the engineering doctoral workforce remains a
significant problem with far-reaching implications for the US economy. The long-
term vitality of the US workforce relies on the full range of engineering career
pathways being available to all Americans. A diverse STEM workforce is more
creative and innovative. While the number of women completing STEM doctorates
has risen, the proportion of women earning engineering doctorates remains low.
And, in 2019, while 24.1% of engineering doctorates were earned by women, only
1.4% were earned by Hispanic, Black, and Native American women (no Native
Hawaiian/ Pacific Islander women). Doctoral engineering attrition rates reveal a
disproportionately high loss of students from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM. The problem is not students’ inability to complete the
Ph.D. degree requirements, but rather that talented students leave engineering
doctoral programs before completing their doctorates. Student attrition results
in a loss of human talent to the national endeavor of research and discovery at
universities fueling US economic growth. Unwelcoming organizational climates in
engineering doctoral programs likely contribute to this attrition. This project
aims to examine the organizational climates of engineering doctoral programs to
guide efforts that promote the persistence and retention of doctoral students in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this mixed-methods project is to
examine doctoral students’ perceptions of the factors that impact their
persistence in degree completion and the differences in experiencing those
factors based on intersecting social categories. This project adopts an
explicitly intersectional approach to the meaning and relevance of students’
belonging to multiple social categories, including gender, race/ethnicity, and
sexual orientation, considered within the context of engineering doctoral
education. Drawing on organizational climate research and intersectionality
theory, the project’s multidisciplinary team aims to use a student-centered
approach to shed light on multiple climate factors (e.g., climate for diversity,
climate for inclusion, student sense of belonging, etc.) by engaging with
students from diverse groups. To achieve a comprehensive picture of departmental
climate and persistence, which may differ by intersectional group, major, and
institution type, iterative and complementary cycles of project implementation
are planned over the four-year project period. In Year 1, the researchers aim to
use findings from the quantitative pilot climate survey approach to inform the
qualitative design. The team aims to repeat this process in Year 2 to develop,
refine, and validate the final survey instrument, including a climate scale
which will be sensitive enough to assess intersectional phenomena unique to
students from diverse groups. The scale will be grounded in measurement
invariance, in that factors will be measured in the same way across different
groups to reveal similarities and differences between engineering doctoral
student populations. In Years 3 and 4, the researchers plan to administer the
final survey nationally and incorporate follow-up interviews with a subsample of
survey respondents, using a mixed-methods approach. In partnership with the
American Society for Engineering Education, the team plans to deploy the climate
survey nationally to engineering doctoral students and to share survey findings
with engineering deans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's
EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM
education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest
intervention and innovations to address persistent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.