* 2201625
* Creating New Aerospace Technician Pathways Using Space Materials Design and Fabrication Skills Training
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Patrick Land, Florida State College at Jacksonville
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 05/31/2025
* USD 492,747.00

Training and certifications in engineering technology provide pathways for
students to enter the aerospace technician workforce. Currently there is a
shortage of qualified technicians for the aerospace industry in Northeast
Florida. To be successful in the aerospace workforce, students need to learn
skills associated with the design and fabrication of products using lightweight
materials. This includes an understanding of the technologies used to create
these products such as additive manufacturing, fiber composites fabrication,
polymer fabrication, and computer-numerical control in metal working. This
project will create a new curriculum within an existing engineering technology
degree program that focuses on these skills and techniques. As students complete
courses in the program, they will have the opportunity to earn three industry
certifications. Students will learn how to use these manufacturing technologies
through hands-on training. To increase the number of students in the aerospace
technician pipeline, dual enrollment courses will be offered for high school
students. Project results and educational resources will be made available
through the ATE Central Portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to increase the number of qualified aerospace technicians in Northeast Florida.
The project will: (1) create a new Advanced Materials Design in Manufacturing
track within the current engineering technology degree program, (2) prepare
students to earn at least three industry-recognized credentials in space
materials manufacturing, (3) develop a Space Materials Manufacturing Laboratory
to help students learn manufacturing techniques, and (4) create a career pathway
for secondary students. Using best practices from the Florida Advanced
Technological Education Center as well as existing institutional programs, the
project team will recruit students from underrepresented groups to broaden
participation in the aerospace technical workforce. Professional development for
community college instructors and secondary teachers will provide hands-on
training on space materials and fabrication techniques. The project will assess
student learning gains due to the new curriculum by comparing the results of
pre- and post-tests. Student surveys will be used to assess the impact of
project activities on studentsâ€™ sense of belonging and self-efficacy. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.