* 2201997
* SBIR Phase I:  Insu Health Design: Temperature Control System
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Mason Lucich, INSU HEALTH DESIGN, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Parvathi Chundi
* 10/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Phase I project is to offer
novel opportunities to substantially improve temperature-controlled storage and
transportation systems. The technology has the potential to become the ideal
temperature-sensitive medication storage solution available to advance the
health and welfare of the American public and third world countries by enabling
a reliable means to protect and long-term refrigerate temperature-sensitive
biomaterials such as medicines, blood, organs, vaccines, chemicals, and hormones
even in areas that lack or have an unstable power supply. This project within
the wireless technology area involves the integration of wireless and Bluetooth
communication technologies for data capture and transmission to further support
a wide variety of applications and services while maintaining full mobility, and
long battery life for the system. Currently, there are over 200 different
temperature-sensitive medications used by over 100 million people worldwide that
the proposed innovation could provide monetary savings for individuals as well
as decrease the $35 billion annual loss in the global biopharmaceutical industry
due to failures in temperature-controlled logistics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project tackles the problem of keeping a portable volume within a
precise temperature range for extended periods regardless of ambient conditions
and power grid availability. The objective of the proposed research focuses on
innovating the heat transfer design in portable volumes where meaningful
performance improvement can be achieved through building proofs-of-concept that
will later inform and enable the production of advanced products that create
better solutions in the healthcare industry and cold chain transportation
sector. The research plan consists of developing multiple designs of specific
components within the cooling system, testing their respective effects on
performance using our platform, and quantifying the cold storage efficiency and
temperature precision for long-term stability. The anticipated technical result
is a tested system design with a robust proof of concept platform demonstrating
the technology with data to support further development of this new technology
for a product ready to bring to market. The company will have also gathered data
for a broader understanding of the technologyâ€™s scalability in other potential
markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.