* 2201932
* Amping Up Today’s Electric Drive Automotive Education - AMPED Technology Certification: Advanced Modules in Powered Electric Drive Technology Certification
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Olle Gladso, Minnesota State Community & Techncial College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 349,652.00

Hybrid and electric vehicles currently represent 10 percent of the total market
share of all vehicles on the road in the United States. The past twenty years
have seen remarkable growth in this industry with expansion not only in the
number of electric vehicles, but also the variety of engine types which include
hybrid, fully electric, and plug-in electric. This rapid growth has created a
need for trained automotive technicians in Hybrid Electric Vehicle (HEV) and
Electric Vehicle (EV) platform technologies. Minnesota State Community and
Technical College will meet this need by creating Open Educational Resources
(OER) and two new stackable certificates that will enable current students, past
graduates, and current industry technicians to advance their knowledge and
capabilities to diagnose, service, repair, replace, and maintain these
technologies. The college will create two new academic certificates and recruit
current students and recent graduates from the Automotive Technology program.
These certificates represent the kind of specialized training that regional
employers have been seeking for their
technicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Minnesota State Community and Technical
College will align their current program offerings to address trends in regional
training and make them more accessible by creating Open Education Resources. In
partnership with the Midwest Teachers of Technical and Industrial Areas (MTTIA),
the team will provide training to secondary and post-secondary instructors in
Hybrid and Electric Plug-In Technologies. The classes that support these new
certificates will be developed at Minnesota State Community and Technical
College and will be expanded to include Riverland College as a model for
widespread dissemination. Equipment from this program includes a 125-kilowatt
capable charging station that will simultaneously support public infrastructure
and student training. Community based “Ride and Drive” events will be organized
by students as community-based education events that will empower students to
become ambassadors for the electric car revolution. An evaluation plan will
measure the project’s ability to design and disseminate certificates that meet
the needs of industry and provide a path to employment for students. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.