* 2201546
* AccelNet-Design: Connecting Sustainable Consumption and Production for Systems of Value-Retention (The Value Retention Exchange Network-of-Networks - VR(Ex)Change)
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Maurie Cohen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 12/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has exposed vulnerabilities in global supply-chains and in
the production of manufactured goods, with social and environmental impacts.
Through collaborations that explore practices to increase connections among
sustainable consumption, sustainable production, and sustainable development,
the VR(Ex)Change Network increases efficiency and sustainability of global
manufacturing and supply chains. This highly interactive network offers early-
career fora, teaching incubators, webinar series, training and leadership
opportunities, to engage diverse, underrepresented, and early-career individuals
from around the world. Diverse perspectives, from across different regions,
fields, and sectors inform opportunities for applied research and collaboration.
The VR(Ex)Change enhances the competitiveness of U.S. researchers and
professionals within the global sustainability and circular economy
transformation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The VR(Ex)Change Network produces research
and analysis to support viable and sustainable human communities, and tackles
questions of resource scarcity, environmental degradation, and human well-being.
Members utilize scenario analysis, case studies, landscape studies, and other
methods to investigate key themes: (1) Universal Development, Livelihoods, and
Resilient Communities; (2) Moving from Circular Economy to Circular Society; (3)
Digital Technology to Enable Sufficiency; (4) Design and Cultural Change as
Drivers of Secure Lifestyle; and (5) Future of Work and the Role of Consumption.
The collaboration provides a solutions-focused, stakeholder-driven approach that
produces research and applications from a unified approach to studying
sustainable consumption and production. Using a systems-approach focused on
mutuality and higher-order learning, the team produces outputs that include a
strategic roadmap for transformative integration of production and consumption
that facilitates future development of the network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Accelerating Research through International Network-to-Network Collaborations
(AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate the process of scientific discovery
and prepare the next generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international
collaborations. The AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S.
research networks and complementary networks abroad that will leverage research
and educational resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require
significant coordinated international efforts. This project is funded by the
Office of International Science and Engineering
(OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.