* 2201439
* Educating Autonomous Vehicle Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Olle Gladso, Minnesota Riverland Technical College (Austin Campus)
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 348,486.00

Riverland Community College (RCC) in Minnesota is the home of an Automotive
Service Excellence Education Foundation with an accredited Automotive Service
Technology Program that has served the region for several decades. To meet the
need for automotive technicians with appropriate skills in driver assistance and
autonomous vehicles, RCC will improve outcomes for students as they complete
their academic programs and enter the workforce. This program will graduate
Automotive Technicians with Advanced Driver Assistance System (ADAS) and
Autonomous Vehicle (AV) expertise. The project will leverage a recently
renovated space that includes a 30,000 square foot building. The project will
provide professional development, procure essential equipment, modify existing
courses, and add new curriculum that will advance the skills of current and
future automotive technicians with an Autonomous Vehicle Technician Advanced
Certificate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the course of four semesters students
will participate in training that will cover essential topics in AV and ADAS
repair and maintenance. Utilizing new and existing relationships, the project
will establish an Advisory Board that will ensure the transferability of skills
between the classroom and the workplace. Instructors will develop and adapt
curriculum relevant to ADAS and AV in cooperation with academic partners and
collaborating automotive ATE projects and Centers across the country. This
project will make the program more adaptable and responsive to rapidly evolving
industry needs and will have more appeal to technologically advanced students.
Through targeted outreach, the project will engage under-served populations to
promote awareness and increase the diversity of the automotive technology
workforce. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.