* 2201028
* CICI: UCSS: Building a Community of Practice for Supporting Regulated Research
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Erik Deumens, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 12/31/2024
* USD 499,781.00

The daily news clearly shows the increasing threat to safety and privacy of
data, personal as well as intellectual property. The Department of Defense
modified the DFARS clause to mandate that NIST 800-171 be followed for data
classified and marked as CUI in 2017. The next evolution of this program is
called Cybersecurity Maturity Model Certification CMMC. Other agencies, for
example, Department of Education, have indicated that they are considering
following a similar path to safeguard data. While these requirements improve the
consistency of data handling between agencies and contractors and grantees, it
leaves academic institutions to figure out how to meet such requirements in a
cost-effective way that fits the research and education mission of the
institution. Most institutions, agencies, and companies act in isolation with
one-off contract language to address data security and safeguarding concerns.
The Regulated Research Community of Practice (RRCoP) builds a network of people
able to help each other in implementing an affordable but effective
cybersecurity and compliance program at academic institutions. Even though
cybersecurity has a clear and uniform goal of protecting data, a onesize
solution does not fit all academic institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
this project, RRCoP accomplishes 1) Developing cybersecurity training resources
that share validated and diverse best-practices. 2) Establishing a leadership
training and development program accelerating availability of distributed
university resources 3) Developing representation through strategic partnerships
with industry and government entities. By supporting this community with
development of a community strategic roadmap, regular discussions and workshops,
and a repository of generalized and specific resources for handling regulated
research programs RRCoP lowers the barrier to entry for institutions handling
new regulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.