* 2201045
* Algebraicity, Transcendence, and Decidability in Arithmetic and Geometry through Model Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Thomas Scanlon, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2025
* USD 207,000.00

The PI will study fundamental mathematical structures from the point of view of
model theory. More specifically, the project breaks into three parts having to
do with connections between differential and difference algebra and equations
satisfied by special functions, a study of decidability for the theory of
rational functions, and an explanation of certain transfer principles through
mathematical logic. The project will provide research training opportunities for
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More concretely, the PI will employ the
model theory of differential and difference fields to analyze transcendence and
algebraicity problems. Specifically, the model theory of differential fields
will be used to elucidate transcendence and algebraicity for variations of Hodge
structure. The model theory of difference fields will be used to analyze
functional transcendence of Mahler functions and to classify invariant varieties
for triangular dynamical systems. The tilt/untilt construction in the theory of
perfectoids will be given a rigorous account in terms of bi-interpretation in
the sense of continuous logic and further equivalences will follow. Definability
within the field of rational functions over the complex numbers will be studied
in depth. Scanlon will follow a strategy to establish the decidability of its
existential theory using the geometry of rational curves on algebraic
varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.