* 2201641
* Collaborative Research: Connecting Professional and Educational Communities to Prepare Construction Engineering Students for the Workplace
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Sheryl Ball, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 07/31/2027
* USD 919,837.00

While universities equip students with theoretical knowledge for STEM, there can
be challenges in employing those theories to solve real-life problems. This
challenge has resulted in an imbalance between the preparation of graduates
entering the workforce and the demands of the industry. This disconnection is
persistent in the construction industry as construction practitioners continue
to highlight skill shortages that have resulted in low performance and low
productivity. This research project is designed to connect learners with
communities of practice thereby giving them access to expert ways of knowing,
thinking, reasoning, and solving real-life problems. The research team will
develop a tool that connects construction engineering programs with communities
of practice thereby enabling instructors access to industry practitioners with
the appropriate expertise to meet their practical course-support needs (e.g.,
site visits, guest lectures, and mentors for capstone projects). As learners
interact with communities of practice, this has the potential to inform the ways
learners perceive the profession and the development of their own professional
identity. These two phenomena will be examined through a qualitative study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to create a collaborative network
(called ConPEC) to investigate how the accessibility of construction industry
practitioners to instructors, influences construction engineering students’
disciplined perception and professional identity development. The ConPEC
platform will employ machine learning algorithms and complex data analysis to
allow for pairing instructors with their community of practice. To achieve this,
the research will first investigate the practical course-support needs of
construction engineering instructors and the characteristics of industry
practitioners. Next, the ConPEC framework will be designed to include learning-
driven algorithms to exploit dynamic matching patterns between instructors and
industry practitioners. Finally, the team will use semi-structured interviews
with both students and industry practitioners to gather qualitative data that
will be analyzed using Grounded Theory. The research team will examine changes
in students’ disciplined perception and professional identity
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform
efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and
innovations to address persistent challenges in
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.