* 2201810
* Collaborative Research: A qualitative inquiry into sex/gender narratives in undergraduate biology and their impacts on transgender, non-binary, and gender non-conforming students
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Aramati Casper, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,429.00

This project examines how a more accurate curriculum about the diversity of
sexes found across species, the role of the environment in sex determination,
and the complex relationship between sex and gender can create a more inclusive
environment for transgender, non-binary, and gender non-conforming (TNG)
students in undergraduate biology courses. Research indicates that rather than
emphasizing the diversity of strategies and experiences that organisms have
around sex, gender, and orientation, biology courses often inaccurately
categorize sex and gender as binary. The oversimplification of sex and gender
into binary categories can make biology classrooms particularly challenging for
TNG students. Early data suggest that how sex and gender topics are represented
in the biology curriculum impacts TNG students’ sense of belonging and interest
in biology. Understanding TNG students’ experiences with biology content will
support the design of interventions and curriculum inclusive of both TNG and
intersex students. This project will also help all biology students develop
inclusive and scientifically accurate understandings of sex and gender. Finally,
this work will positively impact the career competencies of all biology majors
who will need skills and knowledge to work with diverse patients, stakeholders,
and teams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by master narrative theory, the goals of
this project are to: 1) explore how sex and gender are currently represented in
the undergraduate biology content, 2) describe the impact this content has on
classroom climate and belonging for TNG students, and 3) characterize the
current efforts of biology instructors to create a more inclusive climate for
TNG students. Master narrative theory deciphers how messages in the cultural
environment become internalized and impact the development of personal identity.
The sample will include TNG students with diverse racial/ethnic and social
identities along with biology instructors recruited from a variety of
institutions. Data collected will include participant interviews (recorded and
transcribed), participant baseline demographic surveys, course observations
(e.g., video recordings), and course artifacts (e.g., lesson plan, assessment
questions). Feminist phenomenology, qualitative content analysis, and document
analysis will be used to analyze the data. The anticipated outcomes of this
project include (a) identifying aspects of biology content that could influence
the sense of belonging of TNG students and impact the career competency of all
biology majors, (b) describing factors that can help or hinder instructors as
they try to create more inclusive and accurate biology curricula related to sex
and gender, and (c) creating professional development materials to support
instructors who design lessons around biology topics related to sex and gender.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR)
program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that
generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical
areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to
understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to
address persistent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.