* 2201497
* CC* Compute: Augmenting a 2,560-core EPYC2 Computational Cluster with GPUs for AI, Machine Learning, and other GPU-Accelerated HPC Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Anthony Skjellum, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 415,868.00

This project augments an existing computing cluster at the University of
Tennessee Chattanooga (UTC) with 36 NVIDIA A100 80GB Graphical Processing Units
(GPUs) for 18 of the existing servers. This upgrade provides over a threefold
increase in performance for those computers on many workloads, and even higher
speed improvement for certain computational areas, such as artificial
intelligence problems. GPUs are the best way, at present, to achieve extremely
high computational performance cost-effectively on today's servers,
workstations, and desktop systems. Adding GPUs to the existing servers is a
straightforward upgrade process. The upgrade enables 13 science drivers, or
subprojects, spanning a range of domains and specialties, including researchers
at UTC and among collaborating institutions nationwide. Undergraduate and
graduate students benefit from using the upgraded computing faculty implemented
through this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 13 science drivers pursued in
this project support current funded and unfunded research in addition to
teaching activities for both undergraduate and graduate students. Also, external
collaborators at the University of Alabama, University of New Mexico, and
Worcester Polytechnic Institute will utilize a significant fraction of this
scalable computing resource, usually in collaboration with UTC researchers.
Expected users include the more than 40 computational science PhD students at
UTC, plus postdocs, Masters students, and undergraduate researchers. The
science-driver projects complement existing uses of the cluster while
emphasizing GPU-accelerated research and creative activities, which are
specifically enabled by the GPU upgrade supported by this funding. These science
drivers include: Data-driven Methods for Predictive Intention Models for Drivers
and Pedestrians; Above Ground Carbon Sequestration Using GIS and Remote Sensing
for Chattanooga; Portable Performance Optimizations for Irregular Communication;
Identifying Metabolites from the Data of Tandem Mass Spectrometry; and Molecular
Dynamics Simulations of Active Filaments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.