* 2201127
* Collaborative Research: Applying and Refining a Model for Dynamic, Discussion-Based Professional Development for Middle School Teachers about Fractions, Ratios and Proportions
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Rachael Brown, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 07/31/2026
* USD 87,424.00

This project explores the effectiveness of two different versions of
professional development (PD) designed to enhance middle school mathematics
teachers’ understanding of fractions and proportions, and their teaching of
these mathematical concepts to students. The PD uses an approach that engages
teachers with web-based apps that allow them to test and experiment with their
mathematical ideas. The apps, combined with guiding questions that challenge
teachers’ thinking about fractions and proportions, serve both to promote
critical thinking about the concepts and to further developing their
understandings of the concepts. The researchers will use an innovative approach,
topic modeling, to examine the effectiveness of each of version of the PD. Topic
modeling will allow the researchers to identify patterns in the language
teachers use as they participate in the PD, and subsequently, to better
understand the development of the understanding teachers develop. The project
has promise to not only enhance teachers’ instruction on topics with which
students have traditionally struggled, but also to demonstrate the viability of
Topic Models as a means to measure learning using natural language—an approach
that could potentially replace large-scale, multiple-choice tests as a measure
of student learning with learning activities in the classroom.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a design-based research approach to focus
on three main goals: expansion of a pilot PD model to include fractions and
proportions; testing of a conjecture about the PD model focused on supporting
teachers in making connections between learning content in novel ways to
developing pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) from their experiences; and
implementing topic modeling as an assessment model for measuring changes in
teachers’ participation in the PD. Topic models will be used as the primary
assessment, rather than pencil and paper assessments, because of their alignment
to the content and the PD approach, which is highly interactive and focused on
conjecture testing. The use of topic modeling opens an opportunity for
qualitative data to be used as an assessment tool rather than relying on
assessment instruments that may not be aligned to the instruction. Proposed
outcomes of this work include: a pool of mathematical tasks for teachers that
support playful engagement with important mathematical ideas; a guide outlining
a coherent 30-hour experience for teachers that engages in developing both
content knowledge and PCK related to fractions, ratios, and proportions;
evidence of the PD program’s effectiveness that relies on topic modeling to
measure change in teachers’ participation and learning in the workshops; data on
two different approaches to supporting teachers in linking content knowledge
development to PCK development; and a coding framework that defines “robust”
understanding of fractions related to referent units and invariance. All aspects
of the PD will be grounded in the use of dynamic, web-based “toys” (apps) that
have been designed to support the development of robust understandings of
proportion and fraction concepts. Contributions to the field include the PD
model, the robust understandings framework, and findings specific to the use of
topic models. One such contribution will be further insight into the sample size
necessary to use topic models for assessment, which will help the field better
understand how to use this quantitative approach with relatively small
qualitative data sets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.