* 2201297
* Adaptive Physics-informed Machine Learning Strategies for Turbulent Combustion Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Ope Owoyele, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 05/31/2025
* USD 270,480.00

The design and optimization of combustion devices is crucial in the mission to
combat climate change and achieve national security goals. Simulations can play
a role in this mission by enabling rapid virtual testing of combustors at
various design configurations, so that promising designs can be selected for
physical prototyping. However, turbulent combustion simulations involve solving
for a large number of molecular species that are produced and consumed as part
of the combustion process. Due to this, combustion simulations require the use
of many computer processors for several hours on supercomputers or compute
clusters. This limits the usefulness of promising computer models for practical
design and optimization endeavors. This work contributes to the ongoing quest to
develop reduced combustion models that decrease the simulation times and
required computing resources, yet preserve accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
response to the excessive computational costs of turbulent combustion, physics-
based reduced-order models have been introduced. These models often solve
chemistry in an “offline” phase, store the solution in a table, and then
interpolate the table’s entries to retrieve the chemical state during the
“online” phase. The use of these lookup tables, however, suffers from the curse
of dimensionality, wherein the size of the table and the interpolation
complexities increase exponentially with the number of control variables. As a
result, these lookup tables are limited to situations that employ a few control
variables, thus preventing their application to many practical combustion
devices. This work aims to address this problem by developing machine learning
strategies to efficiently learn combustion physics within physically derived
low-dimensional manifolds. This will be achieved by introducing machine learning
models that are adaptive, consistent with the underlying physical laws, and
suitable for high-dimensional combustion state spaces. This work will enable
simulations at levels of fidelity that are currently impossible to perform using
traditional tabulation techniques, and therefore, will aid in the design and
development of clean and efficient combustion technologies. Furthermore, the
tools developed in this study will be vital to the broad area of scientific
machine learning, which continues to have an increasingly important impact on
the modeling of many physical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.