* 2201832
* Examining the Mechanisms of the Math Anxiety-Math Achievement Link through a School-Based Grades 2-3 Intervention
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Colleen Ganley, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,050,183.00

Many children, adolescents, and adults experience math anxiety. Research has
shown that math-anxious children typically continue to experience math anxiety
as they get older. People with math anxiety tend to perform more poorly in math
and are less likely to take advanced math courses or pursue science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers. Thus, tackling math anxiety early
on is important for mitigating negative impacts later in life. This project will
develop and test a school-based intervention to decrease children’s math
anxiety. Researchers have suggested that math anxiety leads to lower math
achievement because it leads people to avoid math, and because anxious thoughts
use the limited cognitive resources in working memory, which are required for
solving math problems. Therefore, this project will test whether any reduction
in math anxiety from the intervention leads children to avoid math less, have
better working memory skills, and perform better in math. This project will
produce intervention materials that can be used to alleviate children’s math
anxiety and help to better understand long-term effects of math anxiety on math
avoidance, working memory, and math achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
goal of this project is to develop the math anxiety intervention. This
intervention will adapt an existing classroom-based intervention and add
exposure components from cognitive behavioral therapy interventions, which are
effective for children with other anxiety-related disorders. The work will
involve developing a child workbook, facilitator session guides, and facilitator
training materials. During this process, intervention components will be tested
with 24-39 children to inform revisions to the materials. The second goal is to
test the effect of the intervention on math anxiety and whether any effect leads
to changes in working memory and math avoidance, and subsequently math
achievement. Second- and third-grade classrooms will be randomly assigned within
schools to have their students with high math anxiety (140 students total)
participate in the small-group intervention or be in a business-as-usual control
group (140 students total). Children’s math anxiety, avoidance, working memory,
and math achievement will be assessed before and after the intervention, as well
as 3 and 6 months later. Results will be used to test the theory that
intervention-induced changes in math anxiety relate to increased working memory
and decreased math avoidance, which relate to improved math achievement. The
findings from this project will have implications for understanding the role of
math anxiety in math achievement, and have the potential to lead to long-term
increases in STEM workforce participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and
enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation
of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and
suggest intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.