* 2201460
* Collaborative Research: Archeomagnetism of southern Africa and dynamo modeling: Testing the hypothesis of South Atlantic Anomaly-Large Low Shear Velocity Province Agency
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Rory Cottrell, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 05/31/2025
* USD 311,398.00

Earth’s dipole magnetic field has been rapidly decreasing in strength, by ∼9%
over the past 160 years, with the decline linked to a broad swath of low field
intensity in the Southern Hemisphere known as the South Atlantic Anomaly. When
extrapolated to Earth’s deep interior, to the boundary between the liquid core
and overlying solid mantle, this weak surface field appears as prominent patches
of reversed polarity beneath South Africa and Patagonia. This pattern, together
with the rapidly decreasing field strength, has led to hotly debated speculation
that Earth is in the early stages of a geomagnetic polarity reversal. Principal
limitations in this debate have been a lack of data for the last 1500 years from
key regions in the Southern Hemisphere and theoretical understanding of deep
Earth controls on magnetic fields. To address these limitations, this project
will refine the archeomagnetic record of the southern Hemisphere, develop
numerical simulations to explore the affect the deep Earth has on magnetic
fields, and integrate these two components to explore whether the unusual mantle
beneath South Africa and Patagonia (the African Low Shear Velocity Province)
places a first-order control on the character of the South Atlantic Anomaly.
This project will foster international collaboration with archeologists from
South Africa, Botswana, and Zimbabwe, develop a revised geodynamo code that will
be made available to the community, and support of graduate and undergraduate
students who will receive a broad training in the field, experimental rock and
paleomagnetism, and geophysical modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
support a collaborative study that will bring together workers in disparate
disciplines and subdisciplines to further refine the archeomagnetic record and
more directly test the efficacy of Low Shear Velocity Province control on the
character of the geomagnetic field. Specifically, the research team will: (i)
conduct field studies including field surveys and collection materials with the
goal of refining the Iron Age archeomagnetic record with potential application
to both deep Earth and to archeological problems; (ii) conduct rock magnetic,
analytical microscopy, and paleomagnetic analyses and processing of field
magnetic survey data to define ambient magnetic fields of the collection sites,
magnetic carriers in the collected archeological artifacts, and ancient
recordings of direction and intensity with the goal of testing primary
hypothesis of the proposed work; and (iii) use numerical dynamo simulations to
investigate whether the African Large Low Shear Velocity Province can locally
defect core flow, drive the magnetic Reynolds number toward unity, favoring
magnetic diffusion and flux expulsion, and thus place first-order controls on
geomagnetic observations made at Earth’s surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.