* 2201015
* Collaborative Research: Scaffolding middle and high school students’ scientific evaluations of sources and alternative claims in Earth and environmental sciences
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Janelle Bailey, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 08/31/2026
* USD 273,556.00

Contemporary scientific and social issues, such as water security or climate
change, are often complex and interrelated. This requires reasoned and
scientific evaluations to determine appropriate responses. Although reasoned and
scientific evaluations may be challenging for students, well-designed
instructional materials may facilitate the teaching and learning of contemporary
scientific and social issues. Students learning about these socioscientific
issues encounter both scientific sources that represent current consensus and
understanding as well as everyday information sources that may not be consistent
with current science. This project addresses tools to support students in
reading and evaluating a variety of sources to compare various claims addressing
socioscientific issues. It draws on literacy concepts from science education and
social studies to develop and implement scaffolding tools that can support
students' understanding of the links among data, evidence, and claims while
considering the trustworthiness and plausibility of sources. The project will
design and test such instructional scaffolds with the goal of helping middle and
high school science and social studies students to deepen their evaluation
skills as they make reasoned evaluations as expected of citizens in a functional
democratic society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's fundamental research
questions are: (1) What are the features of instructional scaffolds that support
middle and high school students to develop more critical source trustworthiness
and claim plausibility evaluations? (2) When engaging in these instructional
scaffolds, how do students' evaluations relate to their shifts in
trustworthiness and plausibility judgments toward justifiable understandings
(e.g., based on evidence and reasoning)? (3) How do these evaluations and
judgments relate to changes in students’ core disciplinary knowledge of social,
civic, and scientific concepts related to socioscientific issues? The project
will develop complementary instructional scaffolds to support source and claim
evaluation and conduct professional development sessions with pairs of middle
and high school science and social studies teachers to enable them to implement
these scaffolds in their classrooms effectively. Furthermore, the project team
will conduct rigorous classroom-based tests to gauge students' engagement,
reasoning, and understanding of the fundamental scientific, social, and civic
phenomena underlying these topics. The project team anticipates that these
scaffolds will support students' reasoning and deepening understanding of
socioscientific phenomena. The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks
to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.