* 2201235
* Collaborative Research: Mechanics of Reconstituted Self-Organized Contractile Actomyosin Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Aaron Dinner, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 01/31/2025
* USD 533,158.00

Many cellular functions rely on the cytoskeleton, a collection of dynamic
networks of biopolymers that provide cells with their mechanical properties and
abilities to change shape. These networks have diverse architectures, which
often coexist in cells. Although studies of whole cells have enabled
characterization of these networks, how they self-organize to give rise to their
observed structures and dynamics remains an outstanding question. By
reconstituting network structures and dynamics from purified components, this
project seeks to define the essential elements for self-organization and enable
well-controlled measurements and modeling to probe its mechanisms. To date, such
reconstitution studies have largely focused on protein assemblies in bulk
solution or on solid supports. However, cells are enclosed by a lipid bilayer
membrane, which is thought to be essential for many cellular functions and for
the mechanics underlying them. The membrane does not just confine molecular
species; it also provides a boundary that can anchor cytoskeletal structures yet
deform under typical forces in cells. The project will build on recent
technological advances to study protein networks that self-organize into
synthetic lipid vesicles. The Broader Impacts of the work include the intrinsic
merit of research itself as all cells contain some form of cytoskeleton.
Additional activities include training of high school students and their
teachers, along with undergraduates and post-doctoral research fellows. The PIs
will also contribute to an art installation on synthetic cells that is being
developed at the Marine Biological Laboratory at Woods Hole.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;By systematically characterizing the structures and dynamics
accessible to different compositions of cytoskeletal proteins within vesicles,
the project will advance understanding of self-organization and force generation
by actin networks and the roles membrane confinement and coupling play in these
processes. The project will specifically focus on reconstituting features of
cell division, in particular the formation and constriction of a contractile
ring composed of filamentous actin and the motor protein myosin II, along with
additional structural (e.g., anchoring and bundling) proteins. The foundation of
our experimental strategy is a powerful platform for reconstituting cytoskeletal
networks in giant unilamellar vesicles. This will be paired with coarse-grained
simulations of cytoskeletal networks. The project will determine the essential
elements for network/ring formation by characterizing the self-organization of
mixtures of actin, actin-binding proteins (alpha-actinin, fascin, and/or
fimbrin), and motor proteins (myosin and/or a truncated form of it) in the
absence of specific membrane interactions. Then, strategies to assemble an actin
ring in coexistence with an actin cortex at the membrane will be tested to
investigate how membrane binding alters the architecture of actin networks.
Finally, patterned motor activation will be used to drive membrane-associated
network/ring contraction and vesicle constriction, and the resulting forces will
be investigated. To achieve the greatest impact, research, education, and
outreach objectives will be closely integrated. This project was co-funded by
the Systems and Synthetic Biology, and the Cellular Dynamics and Functions
programs, both in the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.