* 2201112
* Geometric methods in the p-adic Langlands program
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Sean Howe, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

The Langlands correspondence describes a connection between two disparate areas
of mathematics: number theory, which includes the study of prime numbers and
integer solutions of polynomial equations, and harmonic analysis, which includes
the study of how light and sound decompose into waves. For example, certain
instances of the Langlands correspondence connect the prime numbers dividing
integer values of a polynomial to vibrational frequencies of a very symmetric
surface (like the fundamental tones of a musical instrument). For applications
to number theory, it is useful to study these very symmetric surfaces and
related higher dimensional shapes not only with classical geometry but also with
an alternative theory of geometry built up from an unusual notion of size and
distance that detects divisibility by a fixed prime number. This is called
p-adic geometry. The basic shapes in p-adic geometry look more like fractals
such as the Cantor set than like the shapes we encounter in our day to day lives
in the physical world, but it is still fruitful to try to reinterpret geometric
concepts like curvature so that they can be used also in the p-adic world. The
recent theory of perfectoid spaces provides a perspective on p-adic geometry
that is very well suited to studying the p-adic shapes that are most important
in the Langlands correspondence. This project aims to carry over ideas from
calculus to the study of perfectoid spaces in order to uncover new structural
properties of the Langlands correspondence that will ultimately help us
understand basic questions about the integers and prime
numbers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More precisely, the theory of diamonds (which are
quotients of perfectoid spaces by very nice equivalence relations) furnishes a
very broad foundation for p-adic geometry that includes most classical and
modern objects of interest but is in many ways more similar to the theory of
topological manifolds than it is to the theory of complex analytic spaces. The
goal of this work is to introduce a good notion of analytic structures on
diamonds and then apply this theory to study representation theoretic aspects of
p-adic automorphic forms as they arise in the Langlands correspondence. A
special emphasis is thus put on understanding the analytic structure on the
p-adic spaces which are analogs of the universal covers of complex locally
symmetric spaces that appear in the complex geometry of the Langlands
correspondence. In the complex setting the analytic structure can be transported
directly between the base and the universal cover because the fibers are
discrete, but in the p-adic setting this is obstructed by is a non-trivial
interaction between the profinite topology of the fibers and the rigid analytic
topology of the base. A crucial new insight in this project is that in many
cases this interaction can be understood locally by embedding the total space
inside of a rigid analytic variety as a locally closed subdiamond. This gives
rise in some cases to a new construction of Banach-Colmez tangent spaces via a
naive notion of profinite paths, and suggests a natural criterion for
perfectoidness, with potential applications to cohomological vanishing. The PI
will analyze concrete examples in order to elucidate the general shape of this
analytic theory while also connecting some very recent and previously disjoint
ideas in the theory of p-adic automorphic forms, the p-adic geometry of Shimura
varieties, and the p-adic Langlands correspondence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.