* 2201335
* AccelNet-Design: Soil and land management for food &amp; water security, adaptation and mitigation of climate change
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Arthur Nash, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,961.00

Management of agricultural land and soil (ALS) systems are often disconnected
from societal goals of food security and environmental sustainability. The ALS
network facilitates cooperation among scientific disciplines, policy makers,
Federal and State Agencies, agricultural producers, private industry, NGOâ€™s,
society members and land managers to develop resilient, sustainable practices of
ALS in the context of both socioeconomic and biophysical interactions. This
network would improve ALS management by considering changes to ALS management in
a holistic way that considers equity, access to data, and information synthesis.
This approach empowers diverse producers and land managers/stewards to adopt
outcome-based (e.g., improved soil health, water quality and carbon
sequestration) management. This team promotes research at the nexus of soil,
water, land, and climate systems to increase sustainability of the management of
agricultural land and soil. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ALS network (ALSNet): 1)
develops coordination and communication mechanisms, 2) establishes team science
processes and culture across multiple professional disciplines and groups to
convert knowledge into action, 3) identifies and prioritizes knowledge gaps and
opportunities, and 4) trains the next generation of a diverse and global
workforce to develop solutions for the complex challenges of ALS systems. The
project employs a team science approach that engages diverse partners to enhance
interdisciplinarity, conducts ideation workshops, collaborates around shared
vision, and develops research questions and synthesis papers. ALSNet supports
broader strategic collaboration among U.S. research networks, global networks,
professional societies, and social networks to integrate data, knowledge, and
information on theoretical and applied research. It uses a global perspective to
narrow the gaps of scaling complexities, to understand tradeoffs, and to empower
stakeholders to address the grand challenges associated with ALS. The team
integrates biophysical, social, economic, and behavioral sciences that enhances
the knowledge to action plan. The project will cross institutional boundaries
and engage diverse stakeholders including consumers and industry partners, in
both developed and developing nations, in the scientific discovery and
implementation processes to build a plan for putting knowledge into action. This
project is funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering
(OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through International
Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate
the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next generation of U.S.
researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The AccelNet program
supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and complementary
networks abroad that will leverage research and educational resources to tackle
grand scientific challenges that require significant coordinated international
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.