* 2201365
* Investigating Mixotrophic Algal Contribution to Copepod Diet and Reproduction
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Rebecca Gast, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2025
* USD 895,069.00

A primary topic of interest within biological oceanography is the role of algal
productivity in the global carbon cycle. Over the past few decades, the
traditional planktonic food web has been undergoing revision with a better
understanding of the significance of microbes. Many of the single-celled
organisms at the base of marine food webs are mixotrophic, meaning they are
capable of both photosynthesis and ingestion of prey within a single cell.
Though recognized for over a century, this trophic strategy has gone from being
considered a physiologically unfavorable oddity to a diverse and widespread
adaptation. Despite the prevalence of mixotrophy in marine systems, very few
experimental studies have assessed how mixotrophic organisms interact with and
impact the zooplankton that ingest them. This project is helping define
mixotrophic contributions to higher trophic levels in marine pelagic food webs.
The investigators are testing whether mixotrophs can support copepod
reproduction under conditions when algal food is of poor quality and assessing
mixotrophic contributions to the diet of two abundant copepod species within the
Gulf of Maine. Additionally, recent modeling efforts suggest that when
incorporated into biogeochemical and food web models, mixotrophy has significant
implications for primary productivity and carbon cycling. To facilitate broader
consideration of mixotrophy in models, the investigators are participating in a
mixotrophy working group and hosting a session at the Ocean Sciences Meeting. In
addition, the investigators are hosting undergraduate summer students who are
gaining experience with laboratory work, including through the Woods Hole
Partnership Education Program (PEP) and guest students recruited from local
communities to increase diversity in marine science. The investigators are also
partnering with local high school teachers to have students use their art
training to contribute to a graphic novel that illustrates the Gulf of Maine
food web and potential effects of climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective
transfer of carbon and nutrients to higher trophic levels in the marine
environment relies on the planktonic food web. Inclusion of mixotrophy in food
web models suggests that it may stabilize fluctuations in the nutritional
quality of microbial prey and could be an important pathway for transfer of
nutrients into zooplankton However, empirical data have been lacking to
parameterize these models adequately. To date, empirical studies of mixotrophs
as prey have suffered from testing a limited number of taxa, confounding effects
of prey abundance, and a failure to characterize their mixotrophic status.
Similarly, few field studies have assessed the diet of mesozooplankton in a way
that would allow mixotrophs to be identified, and as in lab studies, the
mixotrophic status of prey sources has not been identified. Thus, it has been
impossible to provide realistic parameters describing the contribution of
mixotrophs to nutrient transfer through the food web, and the issue of whether
mixotrophically-growing algae can mitigate the effects of poor-quality
photosynthetic food remains largely unresolved. This study is characterizing the
role of mixotrophic algae in mitigating deficiencies in phytoplankton food
quality with respect to copepod reproduction. Feeding experiments are being
conducted that include consistent quantities of actively-mixotrophic prey.
Analysis of the nutrient and fatty acid composition of different mixotrophic
algae is illustrating a continuum of prey quality that could help inform
zooplankton model predictions. The project is exploring effects of nutritional
plasticity by contrasting the nutritional quality of heterotrophs reared on
bacteria versus phytoplankton. The work is contributing to knowledge of the
ability of mixotrophs to supplement or support copepod reproduction, which can
coincide with poor phototrophic food availability. Finally, the presence and
identity of active mixotrophs in the field is being assessed using labeled-prey
ingestion experiments, followed by amplicon sequencing of labeled grazer DNA and
environmental water samples. The work is identifying the in situ grazing
preferences of copepods in the Gulf of Maine over a growing season, whether it
varies with life stage, and how it impacts egg
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.