* 2201324
* Developing a Place-based STEM Education Model for Cultural Connections to Alaska Science
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Charles Topkok, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,521,574.00

Developing a Place-based STEM Education Model for Cultural Connections to Alaska
Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will design and research the Cultural
Connections Process Model (CCPM), a place-based, culturally sustaining STEM
educational resources and model that will engage Alaska Native and other high
school students in STEM. The project approach is strongly informed by Indigenous
knowledge systems (i.e., knowledge embedded in the cultural traditions of
regional, Indigenous or local communities) and incorporates relevant arctic
scientific research. Culturally-based education is Place-Based Education (PBE)
rooted with cultural values, ancestral knowledge, and heritage language. The
project team includes Native Alaskan elders and advisors, university educators
and arctic researchers. Alaska’s rural districts loosely align with the
boundaries of Alaska Native tribal homelands. The project will take place in
four widely-dispersed geographic regions across Alaska encompassing four
Indigenous cultures (Iñupiat, Gwich’in Athabascan, Tlingit/Tsimshian, and
Alutiiq), serving approximately 1,300 students in 24 schools. The project will
involve a team of Native Alaska advisors from each region, who will work
together with the project team to co-develop a series of 10 hands-on curriculum
units and Alaska-based science videos. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project research
will address four questions related to the transferability, sustainability and
adaptability of the CCPM: 1) How can the CCPM be implemented effectively with a
more culturally and geographically diverse population? 2) With a broad selection
of Alaska schools, how effectively do the CCPM-based education resources
increase student engagement, help students contextualize science concepts to
place; and engage culture bearers in the learning process? 3) To what extent do
CCPM-based products complement Indigenous theoretical education frameworks? 4)
Which training methods and resources are most useful in preparing school
district staff to use the CCPM? Project research methodologies will be co-
created through collaboration with the project team (University of Alaska,
Fairbanks educators and researchers, teachers from participating districts) and
participating Indigenous communities. This process will be guided by using
cultural protocols stemming from indigenous cultural values and ways of knowing
and validating knowledge. The Indigenous ways of analyzing what is known about
the world relies on collaborative construction of understanding through
storytelling and sharing experiences. The project will also collect Indigenous
narratives and spoken languages (currently endangered) on audio and video,
preserving cultural knowledge and generational wisdom for future scholars. The
project will collect data directly from participants on the co-development
teams, elders, advisors, and school district officials. Data sources will
include focus group sessions, interviews, surveys, pre- and post-participant
student measures, and extensive documentation of co-creation processes conducted
by the project team and regional advisory teams. Research findings will be
widely distributed via journal articles, conference presentations,
community/tribal meetings, and the project website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.