* 2201527
* Developing a Novel Approach for Identifying Geologic Controls on Groundwater Flow
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jessica Meyer, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 08/31/2025
* USD 489,149.00

Groundwater serves almost half the worldâ€™s population and irrigates 38% of
agricultural land and there is increased strain on groundwater resource. In the
United States, more effective management and remediation of the thousands of
polluted groundwater sites will be critical. Managing these sites, responsibly
and cost effectively, requires accurate description of the hydrostratigraphy,
which describes the control that the distribution of different sediments and
rocks in the subsurface has on groundwater flow. This research will develop a
new approach that relies on collecting water levels in wells using a combination
of leading-edge groundwater monitoring technologies to characterize
hydrostratigraphy. The new approach will be tested at a field site where
groundwater is contaminated by a mixture of organic chemicals. Student trainees
will practice technical skills, science communication, project management
skills, and learn to apply research results to inform site decisions. The
groundwater monitoring technology from this research will be transferred to an
outdoor teaching facility to provide students across the University of Iowa the
opportunity to use the technology in their courses and undergraduate research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop an approach to
elucidate hydrostratigraphic units in the subsurface using a direct hydraulic
dataset (i.e., water levels in wells). Water level data will be collected every
10 seconds from 10 to 15 distinct depths in the subsurface at every monitoring
location using wells called multilevel systems. These data will show the
response of water levels to changes in vertical groundwater flow during
rainwater infiltration and/or changes in pumping. The response data will
highlight the boundaries and thicknesses of distinct hydrostratigraphic units.
Other complementary data sets and a computer model will be used to evaluate the
accuracy of the hydrostratigraphy determined using this new approach and
hydrostratigraphy developed using standard methods. The outcome will be the
creation of an improved approach to characterizing hydrostratigraphy that is
applicable to all groundwater settings. The findings will reduce uncertainty in
simulations of groundwater flow and contaminant migration and provide a better
basis for managing contaminated sites as demands on groundwater resources
increase. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Hydrologic
Sciences program, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), and the Earth Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.