* 2201031
* On the Mathematical Theory of Black Holes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Sergiu Klainerman, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2025
* USD 472,067.00

This project deals with problems connected to the mathematical theory of black
holes which, if solved, would contribute greatly to our understanding of these
most fascinating physical objects of the physical Universe. The project will not
only advance the science of black holes, but, by developing new mathematical
techniques of relevance to other fields of mathematical physics, it promotes the
progress of Mathematics and Science in the broadest possible sense. The
Principal Investigator (PI) has a strong track record in targeting specific
problems with broad appeal in various areas of Partial Differential Equations
(PDE). In that sense, the problems considered as part of this project, though
specific to the subject at hand, can also be reformulated in other important
problems of mathematical physics. The project also fits well with respect to the
long term goal of the PI to help create a vibrant scientific community working
on mathematical problems connected to these areas. In particular, the project
provides research training opportunities for graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on some of the main open problems concerning
black holes such as rigidity, stability, and collapse, with special emphasis
being given to the fundamental problem of the stability of the Kerr family. This
is a precise, explicit, family of solutions to the Einstein vacuum equations,
depending on two parameters (the mass and the angular momentum), on which our
theoretical understanding of black holes is based. Thus, the problems mentioned
above are not only deep from a mathematical point of view, they also have
serious implications in Astrophysics. This is particularly true about the
problem of stability, since if the Kerr family were to be found unstable, black
holes would be nothing more than mathematical artifacts. The PI interprets these
three related problems as mathematical "tests of reality" for black holes. All
three problems require a deep understanding of the dynamics of the Einstein
field equations in a strong gravitational field regime. This is a tall task
which can only be achieved by a systematic mathematical analysis of the
underlining structure of the problems, using new geometric PDE techniques. The
resolution of these problems promotes the progress of Mathematics and Science
beyond the subject matter of this particular project. Indeed, it is expected, as
it often happened in the past, that some of the techniques developed in
connection to these problems will be relevant to other important partial
differential equations of mathematical physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.