* 2201455
* Recruitment and Training Support for Diverse Populations in Mechanical and Architectural Manufacturing Technologies (RTS-MT)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Mark Malecki, Pittsburgh Technical Institute
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2025
* USD 649,954.00

Nationally, manufacturers struggle to fill middle-skills jobs that require some
level of technical training, applied skills, licensing, or certification.
Through the year 2030, there are an estimated 2.1 million manufacturing jobs
that will be unfilled, which could cost the U.S. economy up to $1 trillion. Even
though women represent almost half of the national workforce, less than one
third of manufacturing professionals are women. The goal of this project is to
develop an educational pipeline that will prepare a diverse population of
students qualified to fill middle-skill manufacturing jobs. This goal will be
accomplished using sector partnerships and career pathways and expanding
Pittsburgh Technical College’s (PTC) Mechanical Engineering Technologies (MET)
program and improving PTC’s Architectural Engineering Technology (AET) program
to meet the growing workforce demand. This project will build upon prior
experience gained working on the Integrating Software and Machine-Lab
Instruction (ISMI) project that has enhanced the ability of high schools to
deliver MET education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PTC will address the national and
regional need for filling middle-skill positions by implementing the following
goals and objectives (1) increase the number of non-traditional (women),
diverse, and military veteran students to both MET and AET; (2) modify the
architectural curriculum to include more focus on design principles; (3) provide
mentoring and instruction to high school students and faculty; (4) provide
professional development training and equipment for PTC faculty; and (5) expand
dual enrollment programs at secondary schools. The primary audiences affected by
these activities will be secondary school students and teachers, two-year
college students and instructors at PTC, and non-traditional and military
veteran populations. Project evaluation will be based on the identification of
formative outcomes through the application of project management techniques, and
summative outcomes of project activities through the application of a logic
model to identify the key evaluation questions, data sources and connections to
the project’s broader impacts of building a strong manufacturing sector and
strengthening the regional economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.