* 2201611
* Retooling A Machine Tool Technician Program In North Central Wisconsin to Support Diversity, Flexibility, and Accessibility
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Frank Fernandes, Northcentral Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 342,519.00

The north central Wisconsin region is a hotspot for machine tool technician
jobs, more than double the national average. This project from Northcentral
Technical College will integrate research and education to combine a revised
curriculum with targeted outreach to nontraditional populations to improve
outcomes in their Machine Tool Technician Program. Over the three-year project,
30 students will be recruited to complete credentials that will lead to high
demand technician careers. Northcentral Technical College will revise its
Machine Tooling program to (1) include industry relevant skills, (2) adopt
flexible scheduling, (3) provide culturally relevant professional development
for faculty and staff, (4) perform outreach through the College’s Advanced
Manufacturing and Emerging Technologies mobile labs, and (5) establish
peer/near-peer mentorships. As a result, the college intends to increase
recruitment, matriculation, completion, and employment of students in the
Machine Tool Technician program, with an emphasis on students of Southeast
Asian/Hmong descent. Students will have the option to earn up to four stackable
credentials ranging from a 4-credit certificate to a 58-credit degree.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the Project is to increase the skilled
machine tool technician workforce in central Wisconsin. Thirty students are
expected to enroll over the three-year period with a special focus on broadening
participation in the profession of populations that are significantly
underrepresented in the field. The project’s objective is to increase awareness
of, access to, and enrollment in machine tool technician educational and career
pathways for non-traditional students with an emphasis on Southeast Asian/Hmong
adults. The current curriculum will be reviewed and modified to include current
machine tool technologies, culturally responsive teaching, internships, and
flexible delivery options. Machine tool program faculty, advisors, instructional
assistants, and other student services personnel will participate in
professional development on Southeast Asian/Hmong culture in order to better
relate to and support their learning. Collaboration with the Hmong American
Center and local manufacturing leaders will support recruitment, identification
of project mentors, and community outreach. Workforce mentors will provide
guidance and encouragement to students by sharing personal and career
experiences. The Machine Tool Advisory Committee/Business and Industry
Leadership Team (BILT) will provide project oversight. The project team will
collaborate with regional cultural organizations, workforce development boards,
job centers, and regional machine tool employers to implement and disseminate
the full scope of work. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.