* 2201104
* Conference: Gordon Research Conference in Centromere Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Iain Cheeseman, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 02/28/2023
* USD 17,500.00

Centromeres remain perhaps the most enigmatic regions of the eukaryotic genome,
despite their critical role as the foundation for chromosome segregation during
every eukaryotic cell division. The importance of centromeres in genome
inheritance has long been recognized, but their properties, organization, and
variability have remained mysterious. Indeed, despite the “complete sequencing”
of the human genome more than a decade ago, it was only recently that the first
assembly of a human centromere was completed. This advance is now allowing
researchers to harness this sequence information to tackle fundamental questions
on centromere properties and behavior. The proposed Gordon Research Seminar and
Conference will stimulate discussions to consider how the field will need to
build upon centromere DNA sequence information towards understanding the
increasing complexity in structure and function. This conference will act as an
important catalyst for the centromere field to generate a unique conceptual
framework to address these questions, together with tools and technologies that
combine genome, computational and bioinformatics approaches, and complementary
functional biological studies at the molecular, cellular, and organismal levels.
The Broader Impacts of effort include the intrinsic merit of the research as all
eukaryotic cells rely on centromeres during cell division. In addition, training
and networking opportunities will be provided for the next generation of
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proper centromere function requires a complex
cascade of biochemical events to direct chromatin and kinetochore assembly and
involves hundreds of different proteins. However, the precise mechanisms that
integrate the genetic and biochemical events leading to functional centromeres
are still largely unknown. Kinetochore formation during mitosis depends upon the
specialized centromeric chromatin in which histone H3 nucleosomes are replaced
with nucleosomes containing the centromeric histone Centromere Protein A
(CENP-A). Failure to load CENP-A into centromeres each cell cycle ultimately
leads to centromere loss, kinetochore failure, chromosome mis-segregation and
cell death. Defects in centromere function and the resulting chromosome
segregation errors lead to chromosome aneuploidy, a hallmark of many
afflictions. Over the past decade, centromere researchers have identified some
of the key factors that control centromere protein assembly and the epigenetic
maintenance of centromeric chromatin. However, we lack a clear understanding of
how these factors come together to generate centromeres at a specific locus
through each cell division cycle and this conference and associated seminar will
bring together researchers to discuss strategic directions that are needed to
advance our understanding of this important region of the genome.&lt;br/&gt;This
conference is co-sponsored by the Cellular Dynamics and Function together with
the Genetic Mechanisms program, both within the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.