* 2201982
* Creating Relevant, Effective, and Accessible Technical Education for Electrical Skilled Trades
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Jeffery Hamilton, Terra State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 05/31/2025
* USD 349,535.00

An Ohio community needs assessment with 240 respondents showed 21% of
manufacturers in Northwest Ohio have unfilled skilled positions, due to a
regional skills gap. This challenge has highlighted the importance of skilled
Electrical Maintenance Technicians to Ohio industries. This project will
collaborate with industry partners, aligning the curriculum of a Programmable
Logic Control (PLC) certificate to meet their current and future needs. This
will facilitate and expedite both upskilling and employment for students at
Terra State Community College. Over the three years of the project, 110 students
will complete the PLC Certificate, providing them an advanced understanding of
Industrial Electricity and employment in this high-demand field. A Business and
Industry Leadership Team (BILT) will guide this project to define, align and
embed key competencies into the certificate. Faculty associated with the project
will benefit from professional development, capitalizing on new concepts and
technologies to enhance and implement a competency-based hybrid classroom model.
This structure will utilize mobile access to online learning modules, a new
assessment model, and competency-based outcomes. Each of these concepts will
combine, creating an environment where improved student learning occurs. This
flexible curriculum provides greater opportunities for students struggling to
balance family and work responsibilities by providing online learning with open
lab access. On a broad scale, this project has the potential to improve the
diversity of the industry by providing increased access for all students,
including underserved populations (e.g., women, minorities, and veterans), as
they pursue high-demand, family-sustaining occupations in the technical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to better prepare
students to enter the STEM workforce with relevant classwork and industry
experience. Approximately 110 students are expected to complete this certificate
over three years. Between four to six faculty will be trained in Competency-
Based Education (CBE) during summer learning experiences. The project will
create a series of critical skills assessments to ensure success in the
introductory courses, by providing students the requisite technical abilities.
Students completing ten electrical courses (and four Gen Ed courses) will
qualify for the PLC Certificate which includes two industry credentials. The
Business and Industry Leadership Team will demonstrate the scope of skills and
knowledge essential to skilled Electrical Maintenance Technicians in
manufacturing. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.