* 2201068
* Developing and Testing a Learning Progression for Middle School Physical Science incorporating Disciplinary Core Ideas, Science and Engineering Practices, and Crosscutting Concepts
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Peng HE, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2025
* USD 449,960.00

This project will develop and test a learning progression for middle school
physical science that incorporates the three dimensions identified in Next
Generation of Science Standards (NGSS): the Disciplinary Core Ideas of matter,
interaction, and energy; the Science and Engineering Practices of constructing
explanations and developing and using models; and the Crosscutting Concepts of
cause and effect and systems and system models. Bringing together all three NGSS
dimensions is an innovation that allows for the project to explore the variety
of learning pathways that students may follow as they apply scientific knowledge
and practices to make sense of compelling phenomena or solve complex problems.
This has the potential to help teachers, researchers, and curriculum developers
improve how they support students. Participating middle school science teachers
from a range of schools representing diverse communities will receive
professional learning and guidelines using the learning progression to adapt
their local curriculum and instruction materials. The project will examine
students' learning growth over time and how teachers use the learning
progression to support their students’ learning. This project serves the
national interest by exploring how to support teachers in creating equitable and
coherent learning environments and promoting all students' development in
problem-solving and sense-making in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
advances research on learning progressions in two ways: by developing and
testing a three-dimensional learning progression consistent with NGSS, and by
exploring a variety of learning pathways within the proposed learning
progression. The project explores three research questions: 1) How does the
theoretically grounded learning progression change as a result of empirical
evidence from teachers and students and feedback from experts? 2) In what ways
do teachers use the learning progression to adapt their curriculum materials,
instruction, and assessments to improve student knowledge-in-use? 3) In what
ways and how do students' knowledge-in-use develop in the learning progression-
based adapted classrooms? To address these questions, the project will design,
revise, and finalize the learning progression iteratively using both qualitative
and quantitative data sources across three years. Using data from students’
responses to classroom-embedded assessment tasks, the researchers will employ
latent growth curve models to examine student knowledge-in-use development.
Using data from teacher and student interviews, classroom observations, and
teacher and student artifacts, the researchers will develop a case study that
explores teachers' use of the learning progressions and how they adapt the
learning progression to their local curriculum, instruction, and assessment
materials to support student learning. The case study will also explore whether
and how teacher adaptation affects student development. The learning progression
will contribute to teaching and learning in science by guiding the development
of curriculum, instruction, assessment, and professional learning in a coherent
manner to provide all students opportunities to learn in science and support
teachers to improve their local science learning systems. Findings from the
project will expand the current knowledge and research on learning progression
with multiple intermediate learning pathways for three-dimensional learning that
provide all students the opportunity to learn in science. The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.