* 2201576
* Measuring the Social Networks and Community Cultural Wealth of Latina/o STEM Undergraduates
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Benjamin Flores, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 08/31/2026
* USD 259,739.00

This project is a collaboration between social scientists at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison and scientists within the University of Texas System Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) aimed at understanding the
assets Latinx students bring to their science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education and careers. Although Latinx undergraduates plan to
enter STEM at rates equivalent to or exceeding those of their peers from other
racial/ethnic groups, they are underrepresented in the STEM workforce and among
degree recipients in STEM. As a counter to deficit-based studies that
investigate these discrepancies by emphasizing what Latinx students lack, this
study focuses on the community cultural resources Latinx students bring to their
education and careers. By mapping Latinx students’ social networks, measuring
their community cultural wealth (CCW), documenting their experiences with STEM
research, and tracking changes in their professional identity as they move from
their junior to senior year and then out into the work6force or into STEM
graduate programs, this project will advance the ways eight LSAMP institutions
can institutionalize supportive structures for undergraduate STEM education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will document the experiences and
relationships of a group of Latina/o students each fall over the course of 3
years, and will employ new quantitative techniques for assessing their CCW
during their college-to-career transition. The longitudinal mixed method design
is among the first to combine CCW with ego network analysis. This not only
expands the epistemologies and methodologies available to STEM education
researchers, but more broadly speaking, can inform institutions of higher
education as they develop the CCW- and social network-based STEM programming
that is critical to Latina/o undergraduate STEM education. Finally, this project
illustrates the importance of diversifying the range of institutions and
partnerships Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs) and emerging HSIs can have,
given they will continue to bear witness to the collective racialized
experiences of Latinx students pursuing their post-secondary
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project is funded through the
Racial Equity in STEM Education program (EHR Racial Equity). The program
supports research and practice projects that investigate how considerations of
racial equity factor into the improvement of science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center
the voices, knowledge, and experiences of the individuals, communities, and
institutions most impacted by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise.
This program aligns with NSF’s core value of supporting outstanding researchers
and innovative thinkers from across the Nation's diversity of demographic
groups, regions, and types of organizations. Funds for EHR Racial Equity are
pooled from programs across EHR in recognition of the alignment of its projects
with the collective research and development thrusts of the four divisions of
the directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.