* 2201630
* Expanding Advanced Renewable Energy Technician Education in a Technical College
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Justin Barrett, Lakeshore Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 336,650.00

The state of Wisconsin is diversifying its energy portfolio with the addition of
wind and solar power generation, while some fossil fuel plants are retired.
Lakeshore Technical College (LTC) is the only technical college provider of wind
energy education in the state, and this project will transform individuals to
strengthen their communities through innovative and accessible learning. Through
the Advanced Renewable Energy Technician Education project, LTC will address the
skills gaps and unmet demand for renewable energy technicians in Wisconsin.
Working with a Business and Industry Leadership Team (BILT) they will identify
opportunities to implement training in solar and/or energy storage that would
augment an existing wind energy program. The strategy of including additional
credentials in other energy dependent trainings, such as HVAC, will increase the
number of students that are prepared to interact with the growing and evolving
renewable energy sector. The goals of the program are to (1) establish a
renewable energy BILT to address entry level employment skills and workforce
gaps that can be addressed by LTC, (2) develop solar energy instructional labs
and provide professional development for faculty to support enhanced renewable
energy offerings, and (3) develop learner-focused and culturally responsive
curriculum to attract and produce renewable energy technicians that are
representative of the diversity of LTC’s service area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
BILT will work with LTC to conduct a gap analysis and determine the knowledge,
skills, and abilities needed for solar and energy storage technicians. When
changes are made, an external evaluator will assess industry satisfaction and
student learning within the renewable energy educational offerings. Faculty
professional development will take place through various trainings that will
prepare instructors to integrate new laboratory equipment into their courses. To
increase enrollment and awareness of the revised program, LTC will offer teacher
training workshops to prepare high school faculty to teach renewable energy and
prepare students to transfer into LTC’s program. An external evaluator will
measure the progress towards their goals. LTC will disseminate their findings
through regional and national meetings, in collaboration with the ATE CREATE
Energy Center which includes more than 900 faculty nationwide. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.