* 2201990
* AccelNet-Implementation: HSF-India - Research Software Networks in Physics
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Rafael Coelho Lopes de Sa, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 09/30/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

HSF-India will join networks in India to networks in the U.S. and Europe to
build the international research software collaborations required to reach the
science goals of experimental particle, nuclear and astroparticle physics
experiments. Unanswered questions within reach of scientists include the origin
of dark matter, properties of the Higgs Boson, the structural makeup of matter,
and the mechanism to explain neutrino mass. These are some of the highest
priority science drivers to be addressed by next-generation experimental
facilities including the high-luminosity Large Hadron Collider at CERN, the Deep
Underground Neutrino Experiment at Fermilab and the Electron Ion Collider at
Brookhaven National Laboratory. To fully realize their discovery potential a new
generation of software algorithms and approaches is required. Software is an
intellectual product of this research, not just a critical tool. It has become a
critical element to design and maximize the physics discovery potential of large
data intensive science projects. Building these research software collaborations
is challenging and inherently international matching the international nature of
the experimental undertakings themselves. HSF-India will provide U.S. students,
postdocs and early career personnel significant experience in international team
science through engagement in a diverse research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HSF-India will build international collaborative
structures to enable innovation in critical software areas for discovery in
particle, nuclear and astroparticle physics and lay the foundations for similar
international collaborations across the scientific spectrum. It will seed
research software collaborations on specific projects across its networks in the
U.S., Europe, and India by leveraging an international training network,
fellowships, and software-focused researcher exchanges. HSF-India will
iteratively build on these seeds towards a broad and sustainable international
research software collaboration with three key research themes: tools and
techniques on next-generation analysis approaches, novel simulation techniques,
and tools for Open Science. It will focus on opportunities for early-career
researchers and establish mentoring and co-mentoring relationships with more
senior researchers across the networks. By engaging with the data-science,
artificial intelligence, and broader computer science communities the project
will foster bottom-up alliances around research software, for physics and
beyond. HSF-India aims to establish an environment where researchers with
diverse backgrounds, skill sets and interests can come together and build
innovative collaborations that sustain novel tools and techniques while bridging
research gaps to enable future scientific facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Accelerating Research through International Network-to-Network Collaborations
(AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate the process of scientific discovery
and prepare the next generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international
collaborations. The AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S.
research networks and complementary networks abroad that will leverage research
and educational resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require
significant coordinated international efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.