* 2201231
* CC* Regional: You Can Get There from Here: Advancing Cyberinfrastructure Connectivity in Underserved Northern New England
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Bruce Segee, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 976,496.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a regional project led by
University of Maine to build 400 Gbps network connections to large research
computing centers in New England, the University of Massachusetts' Green HPC
Center and the Northern Crossroads Giga Point of Presence (PoP). It also offers
intermediate add/drop support in three other locations (including Keene State
College and University of Southern Maine), which would allow for future partners
to connect using the existing network. This project funds networking equipment
to create a geographically diverse 400 Gbps network connection from the
University of Maine to the Massachusetts Green High Performance Computing Center
and the Northern Crossroads GigaPoP with intermediate add/drop support in Keene,
New Hampshire and Portland, Maine to interconnect other northern New England
research partners in the future. These connections use the existing Dense
Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWDM) network to deliver more than 10 times
the prior capacity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has potential to improve
the ability to collaborate, share data, and share resources between Maine and
the rest of the world. The main beneficiaries will be researchers at small,
under-resourced institutions, typically with limited access to world-class
cyberinfrastructure. Additionally, because the networking updates from this
grant also has potential to increase the ability of others to reach Maine, the
infrastructure will help world-class researchers to reach Maine K-12 students.
This access to diverse leaders and innovative technology and research serves to
increase aspirations for Maine students. This effect is particularly significant
for rural and less affluent school districts. The project's Maine researchers
will leverage several highly valuable collaborations, including the Northeast
Cyberteam, the Eastern Regional Network, the Northeast Research and Education
Network, the Open Storage Network and the Open Science Grid, as well as many
personal contacts from these relationships. Maine borders only one other state
(New Hampshire) and no state or regional network has a strong reason to build
networking resources to reach or pass-through Maine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded through the collaborative efforts of the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure (OAC) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.