* 2201417
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Submarine record of disastrous earthquakes at a strain partitioned transpressional boundary: Haiti 2010 and 2021
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Leonardo Seeber, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 11/30/2023
* USD 97,296.00

Two earthquakes, M7.0 and M7.2, ruptured sections of the transform fault along
Haiti’s southern peninsula in 2010 and 2021. During this project a marine survey
in Jamaican waters offshore the recent earthquakes will be conducted to
investigate the tectonic and sedimentary effects of these and previous
earthquakes in the same region. Sediment cores and high-resolution sub-bottom
mapping will image active faults and sample earthquake-triggered sediment
deposits. The overarching goal of the project is to compare the new images and
samples with pre-existing data collected by the French in 2012 and by
collaborators from Jamaica. Results of the project will help improve
understanding of fault movement and the character of earthquake-generated
sediment deposits and provide insight into the complexities of this plate
boundary and the associated hazards. Some key evidence, such as sediment
suspended in abyssal water and isotopes that date the remobilized sediments, are
short-lived. Other records can be obliterated by erosion. Because of this, the
project is time sensitive. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained
during the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continental transform
boundaries cross heavily populated regions, and as in the M7.0 2010 and M7.2
2021 Haiti earthquakes, ruptures along these boundaries can cause catastrophic
damage and loss of life. Transform boundaries can accommodate only modest
changes in relative motion, even slightly oblique motion can make them
transpressional or transtensional. These boundaries can evolve into complex,
often poorly constrained, systems of faults. The Enriquillo-Plantain Garden
Fault (EPGF) is the main strand of a sinistral E-W transform along the southern
boundary of the Gonave microplate. The eastern EPGF traces a prominent ridge
that forms the 250 km long southern peninsula of Haiti and is rooted on a belt
of thrust faulting. The 2010 M7.0 &amp; 2021 M7.2 sequences ruptured the eastern
and western segments of this ridge, respectively. Both sequences feature
mainshocks that were nearly transcurrent, and thrust after-shocks primarily to
the north and west. Such coupling between distinct faults repeated in two
earthquake sequences along the same boundary strongly suggests that these faults
form a single strain-partitioned, transpressional fault system. The results of
the study will constrain whether this system extends to the Jamaica Passage,
whether it generates similar large earthquakes in the submarine part of the
boundary now loaded by recent earthquakes in Haiti, and the fidelity of the
sedimentary record for EPGF earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.