* 2201889
* Early Childhood Science, Technology, and Engineering Education: A Meta-analysis of Learning and Teaching Innovations
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Kathleen Lynch, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 06/30/2025
* USD 385,221.00

Sociodemographic inequities in children's science skills are already evident in
the early school grades, and early disparities may contribute to long-run gaps
in children's persistence and outcomes in STEM. To disrupt the nation’s long-
standing and substantial inequities in science education and careers,
interventions to strengthen early science learning are critical. This research
synthesizes the cumulative impact of science, technology and engineering
innovations on early childhood learning and attitudes, examining the roles that
critical moderators play in classroom instruction. By building basic knowledge
about the conditions under which innovations in early childhood science,
technology, and engineering education are most supportive of children’s science
learning, this research advances the goal of strengthening U.S. children’s
future STEM attainment and the nation’s science competitiveness. The completed
meta-analytic synthesis provides researchers, practitioners, and policy makers
with basic knowledge about the effectiveness of innovative approaches to early
childhood science, technology, engineering education. In sum, the study develops
knowledge that contributes to the national interest by conducting basic research
on the effectiveness of approaches to science (technology, and engineering)
instruction in early childhood. In addition, this project produces an open-
access, Web-based library of instrument information on all assessments that have
been used in controlled studies of early childhood science, technology, and
engineering education innovations. This repository allows researchers to build
on existing assessment efforts and thereby support the accumulation of knowledge
in the early childhood science, technology, and engineering
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project uses modern meta-analysis, a
statistical modeling tool, to combine the results of multiple scientific studies
about early childhood interventions on the learning of science, technology, and
engineering in kindergarten and first grade. The statistical approach provides
an estimate of the average effect across the interventions. Further, the meta-
analytic approach allows for the identification of patterns across studies and
the examination of sources of disagreement among the results, as well as an
examination of interesting relationships across the accumulated set of studies.
In particular, the research examines patterns in what types of early childhood
interventions work, for whom, and under what
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is supported by NSF's EHR
Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM
education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad, and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest
intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM interest,
education, learning and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.