* 2201295
* Advancing Earth Science Instruction across High School Life and Physical Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Alan Berkowitz, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,695,253.00

EarthX is a design-based research project that supports the integration of Earth
science into high school Biology, Chemistry, and Physics courses in Baltimore
City Public Schools, while also supporting the District’s transition to three-
dimensional (3D), ambitious and equitable science teaching aligned with the Next
Generation Science Standards (NGSS). As the district does not have a current
standalone Earth science course at the high school level, the project will
support the integration of Earth sciences into other disciplinary science
classes to meet the NGSS expectations for Earth science instruction in all grade
levels. All high school Biology, Chemistry, and Physics teachers in City Schools
(139 teachers) will use EarthX assessments and participate in EarthX
professional development (PD). The project will reach the entire, highly diverse
student population attending traditional City Schools. EarthX builds on the
success of the Integrating Chemistry and Earth Science (ICE) DRK-12 project -
which developed innovative Chemistry course curriculum materials and PD
strategies - to support Earth science integration into Biology and Physics
course curriculum development and 3D teaching. EarthX will develop, test, and
refine embedded and unit assessments for all three courses, along with providing
an online system for assessment administration; real-time reporting to teachers
and students; and provision of data to PD leaders, administrators, and
researchers for multiple purposes. Assessments will be 3D, featuring core
concepts from both Earth science and the course discipline combined with a
science or engineering practice and a crosscutting concept. Assessments will
support teaching and learning of phenomena in the local-to-global environment in
ways that are both engaging and accessible to Baltimore students and teachers.
Biology, Chemistry, and Physics teachers require these types of instructional
supports, along with ongoing PD that is collaborative both within schools across
disciplines and across schools within disciplines to succeed in the dual
challenge of achieving Earth science integration and 3D, ambitious and equitable
teaching. Many school districts around the nation are facing this same dual
challenge and will benefit from EarthX resources, strategies, insights, and
research findings, all of which will be disseminated and made widely
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EarthX will utilize a design-based research
approach to: 1) Build and nurture a strong Research-Practice Partnership,
employing best practices of partner engagement and empowerment, collaboration,
evidence-based improvement, and productivity. 2) Develop and test disciplinary
and cross-disciplinary PD strategies for supporting effective Earth science
teaching in high school Biology, Chemistry, and Physics courses. 3) Develop
learning progression-aligned, embedded, and summative 3D assessments of student
performances that can support ambitious and equitable teaching about phenomena
in the local-to-global environment at the interfaces between Earth science and
Biology, Chemistry, and Physics. 4) Bring EarthX strategies to scale, resulting
in transformative, phenomena-based 3D instruction across the District. In
meeting these goals, the project will address the following research questions:
How do multi-year professional learning experiences that support empowerment and
collaborative, reflective practice contribute to teachers’ growing understanding
and implementation of phenomena-based, 3D instruction? How does availability of
and experience with using student performance data (including near real-time
automated analyses) contribute to teachers’ growing capacity to implement
ambitious and equitable 3D instruction? How do teachers’ growing capacities to
enact 3D, ambitious, and equitable instruction impact student learning gains
(assessed with credible measures of 3D performances) over the course of a year
and over the three-year course sequence? Methods for addressing these goals and
research questions start with a Research-Practice Partnership with a diverse
team of district leaders, scientists, science education specialists and
researchers, teacher leaders, and the project evaluator, with critical and
ongoing engagement with the project advisory board. Development and use of
assessments of both teachers' practices and students’ performances are a central
feature of EarthX. Teacher PD will emphasize reflective practices through video-
and artifact-supported teacher reflection among cohorts of teachers that will
include both within-school and across-school communities of practice. Learning
progressions will be utilized and revised to frame analyses of student
performances to provide feedback to teachers and students, and to address the
student learning research question. EarthX will provide invaluable insights into
the integration, adoption, adaptation, and support of Earth science and 3D
pedagogy at the whole district scale. As a result of the EarthX project, tested
and refined PD strategies, summative and embedded 3D assessment systems, and
research findings related to teacher and student development will contribute to
the science education community’s growing understanding and support of district-
level adoption of NGSS-aligned teaching, learning, and reform. The Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning
and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by
preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.