* 2201843
* Algorithmic foundations of mathematical knowledge
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Steven Piantadosi, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 04/30/2027
* USD 947,115.00

From counting to computing derivatives, many mathematical skills that students
master rely on well-defined sequences of procedural steps, or algorithms. The
acquisition of specific algorithmic skills such as counting, small number
addition, and fractional reasoning have been intensely studied as cognitive
achievements in their own right. However, despite the key role that algorithms
play in early mathematics, very little is known about algorithmic cognition
itself. It is not known, for example, how children generally discover, remember,
and reason about algorithms. This project aims to advance our understanding of
algorithmic cognition, particularly with respect to early mathematics. That
said, algorithmic abilities are not limited to mathematics; algorithmic thinking
is ubiquitous in other domains like music, language, motor development, and
reasoning. Algorithmic abilities are thus likely to be part of humans' most
general learning repertoire. In creating a formal account of children's
algorithmic capacities, the research will advance understanding of cognitive
development generally, while illuminating cognitive mechanisms at play in much
of STEM learning more specifically. A formalized understanding of children's
algorithmic cognition will provide a theoretical foundation for learning
interventions targeting these systems. It will directly reveal specific
representations and algorithmic learning mechanisms as key targets for
intervention in early mathematical development. Experimental data and modeling
toolkits will be packaged for public use to encourage additional analysis and
minimize duplicated effort within the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will combine computational methods and behavioral experiments with two- to-
eight-year-olds to understand the development of algorithmic thinking and its
relation to mathematical thinking. It will specifically focus on the long-
standing question about how young children come to master counting and
understand cardinality. These early numerical skills are foundational for later
success in early math, yet the field has not reliably been able to identify the
core cognitive precursors of such skills. The researchers hypothesize
bidirectional influences between algorithmic and counting skills; that
improvement in children's algorithmic skills will immediately precede and thus
support learning to count, but that counting leads to revisions of those
algorithms. The experiments will target how children reason about the behavior
and outcome of algorithms they observe and infer, and how they spontaneously
improve algorithms during use. Algorithms interface with memory systems, core
cognition, and representations of physical and conceptual objects; they are also
executed by human beings whose goals, motivational states, and social contexts
vary and must therefore be taken into account. The project will thus be firmly
in the spirit of integrative accounts of STEM learning that emphasize the
multiple, complex pathways leading to successful acquisition. Recent advances in
computational modeling techniques in AI have developed formal models of how
algorithms may be acquired in specific domains. This work shows how humans may
understand the world by inferring the computational processes that generated the
data they observe. Building on these advances, the project will implement a
formal theory of early algorithmic cognition which will provide an extensible
theoretical foundation for future experimental work. This work will inform
theories of the conceptual resources children use to learn mathematics, with
implications for the design of targeted interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports
fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.