* 2201292
* Ratcheting Electrons with Silicon Geometric Diodes for Quasi-ballistic Terahertz Rectennas
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* James Cahoon, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 07/31/2025
* USD 410,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Diodes are a basic component of electric
circuits and are used to control the flow of current. They are vital to the
operation of nearly all electronic devices, from laptop computers to cameras.
Although diodes have existed for many decades, they typically have limitations
in terms of how easy they are to make and how quickly they can operate. In this
project, a relatively new type of diode termed a geometric diode will be
fabricated and tested. The diodes are relatively simple to fabricate and can
potentially operate at very high speeds. To create the diodes, microscopic wires
composed of silicon will be grown to have a funnel-like shape. These structures
will then be tested for their capacity to funnel current in one direction but
not in the opposite, an effect that is similar to a ratchet. The diodes will be
progressively tested at higher speeds to determine their ultimate performance
limits. Technology derived from the outcomes of this project has potential
applications in imaging, data transfer, communications, security screening, and
energy harvesting. The project will also train students at multiple grade
levels, and the results will be disseminated through publications, conferences,
and public outreach events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Ballistic rectifiers represent a special class of diode
typically fabricated in two-dimensional electron gas systems by designing an
asymmetric structure with high-resolution lithography. Two terminal silicon
nanowire geometric diodes are an alternate and unconventional strategy to
produce electrical diodes capable of high-frequency rectification. The diodes
are geometrically-asymmetric nanostructures that operate via a quasi-ballistic
mechanism, causing ballistic electrons to be directed through a constriction in
the forward direction but to be reflected backwards in the reverse. This
asymmetry in the flow of current causes the ratcheting of electrons and
generation of a direct current (DC) bias upon application of an alternating
current (AC) signal. Most importantly, the ballistic mechanism of operation
indicates that these structures can potentially rectify AC signals into the
terahertz (THz) regime. Through a combination of experiment and modeling, this
project will develop and demonstrate the design principles that govern the
performance of nanowire geometric diodes. The diodes will be tested in the THz
regime by fabricating single-nanowire rectennas and illuminating with THz
radiation. Overall, the studies will reveal fundamental characteristics of
nanowire geometric diodes and highlight their potential to serve as a new class
of high-frequency rectifier. The effort involves students at multiple
levels—from high-school through graduate—with a project that bridges the
interface between materials science, physics, and electrical engineering,
providing breadth of experience for the students
involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.