* 2201042
* Chemical Sensors Based Upon Metal Nanowires and Nanogaps in Metal Nanowires Transduced Using Impedance
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Reginald Penner, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Reginald Penner at the University of
California, Irvine is developing new concepts for configuring gold nanowires as
chemical sensors. Over the last twenty five years, nanoscience has provided new
building blocks - nanomaterials - for constructing small and highly sensitive
chemical sensors and biosensors. Such “nano-enabled” sensors have been used for
the measurement of heavy metals in aqueous solutions, and metabolites in bodily
fluids like blood and urine. The most important nanomaterials have been carbon
nanotubes, semiconductor (e.g., silicon) nanowires, and polymer (e.g.,
polyaniline) nanofibers. In contrast, almost no role for metal nanowires in
chemical sensing has been demonstrated. The only exception is for hydrogen gas
sensing, where palladium nanowires have been successfully applied. The
applicability of metal nanowires as sensors is limited because the significant
electrical conductivity of these structures is hardly affected by the
composition of the metal surface. The Penner research group has described two
new concepts for configuring gold nanowires as chemical sensors. The key for
both concepts is the application of an alternating current measurement of the
nanowire resistance that is designed to probe the composition of a solution in
close proximity to the nanowire surface. This project seeks to redefine the
capabilities of metal nanowires for functioning as sensors for analytes such as
metal ions (Fe3+), proteins (e.g., thrombin binding protein), and
pH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical and bio-sensors based upon carbon nanotubes,
semiconductor nanowires, and metal oxide nanowires have each been described in
thousands of publications, but virtually no applications of analogous metal
nanowire-based sensors have been reported. In this project, two new types of
chemical sensors based upon single metal nanowires will be developed. The two
types are solid metal nanowires (1), and metal nanowires containing a single
nanogap (2). Nanogaps in metal nanowire, with widths of 5 – 40 nm, will be
produced using automated, feedback-controlled, electromigration. The concept of
metal nanowire-based sensing is made possible by a new modality for transducing
the signal produced by analyte species captured at the surfaces of these metal
nanowires, involving the use of through-wire electrical impedance spectroscopy
(EIS). EIS measures the perturbation of the capacitance of these metal nanowire
structures when analyte species are present at wire surfaces. A single
“universal” equivalent circuit describes the EIS response of both types of
nanowire sensors under investigation. This project is designed to elucidate the
fundamental capabilities of these two metal nanowire architectures, but also to
develop practical nanowire-based sensors for analytes such as metal ions (Fe3+),
proteins (e.g., thrombin binding protein), and pH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.