* 2201196
* Using Integrated, Place-based Watershed Curriculum to Increase Teacher Self-efficacy with Culturally Relevant STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Kathy Smart, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2025
* USD 449,999.00

This project will design and research a professional development (PD) model in
which elementary teachers experience integrated, place-based, culturally
sustaining STEM curriculum focused on local watersheds and grounded in local
Native American cultural values and knowledge. The teachers will then design and
implement their own culturally relevant STEM unit, guided by the PD, which is
situated within their local watershed and Indigenous community. Few studies have
examined the impact of PD that focuses specifically on such approaches on
teachers’ self-efficacy in culturally relevant STEM or, further, on the impact
STEM curriculum that embeds Native American values and knowledge has on student
engagement and interest. The PD is designed for teachers across a range of
school settings and cultural contexts in North Dakota with materials developed
for their communities’ unique regions and cultures. North Dakota is home to
diverse Indigenous communities, with five federally recognized tribes. The PD
will include promising, but often isolated, elements of prior PD models to give
teachers: a) culturally relevant pedagogy inclusive of Indigenous students, b)
pedagogical content knowledge, c) a supportive professional learning community,
d) place-based watershed curriculum, e) and structured time for teachers to
collaborate on creating units for implementation. The project will disseminate
findings to local and state school communities, the greater public, and the STEM
education community via presentations and peer-reviewed publications. The
project model will be shared more broadly with educators so that it may be
widely used, including adapting elements of PD and integrating it in pre-service
teacher methods coursework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effectiveness of this PD
approach and its impact on students will be evaluated by exploring the following
research questions: (1) How do teachers engage with STEM professional learning
experiences that immerse them in the cultures of the Native American communities
in North Dakota? (2) What is the impact of PD that integrates culturally
relevant pedagogy and local Indigenous community connections on teachers’
culturally relevant STEM self-efficacy? (3) How do teachers integrate culturally
relevant approaches and adapt them to effectively link to NGSS introduced in the
PD? and (4) How does culturally responsive, place-based curriculum impact
students’ attitudes, interest, and engagement with STEM? A flexible, mixed-
methods research design using quantitative and qualitative data collection and
analysis will be used to explore teacher perceptions, experiences, changes in
self-efficacy and changes in teacher practice as well as student responses and
outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.