* 2201723
* Trans-modal Analysis: A Mathematical and Computational Framework for Equity Assessment of Multi-modal STEM Learning Processes
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,09/30/2027
* David Shaffer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2027
* USD 957,097.00

In modern classrooms, students learn science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) through interactions not only with teachers and textbooks but
also with computer games and simulations, automated tutors, and online
resources. Education researchers thus have access to large amounts of data about
students’ STEM learning processes, from classroom or online conversations to
detailed records of student activity in educational apps. Despite the potential
of such rich data for curriculum development and personalized assessment, there
are significant technical and conceptual challenges to analyzing data that come
from different sources or modalities. To address these challenges, this project
will develop and test trans-modal analysis (TMA). TMA is a statistical technique
and software package that will help researchers better and more easily integrate
multiple types of data into analyses of STEM learning. This will enable more
accurate understanding of students’ STEM learning processes, and in turn help
identify potential inequities in assessment of student learning, informing
education policy and practice for diverse learners. This project will include
post-doctoral scholars, graduate student researchers, and undergraduate research
interns, who will develop skills and experience in data science, learning
analytics, software development, and scientific communication, providing
training and mentoring for the next generation of education researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although most analyses of learning processes are based on
a single type or modality of data, STEM learning typically takes place in a
multimodal setting. Models of STEM learning processes thus need to account for
multiple sources and types of data to account for complex interactions between
learners and the setting(s) in which they learn. For example, there are
different types of events (questions from a teacher, chats with a peer, views of
a resource) and different properties of events (gender of a person gesturing,
linguistic fluency of a speaker, reading level of a person reading a document)
that may influence future events with more or less impact over time. In
addition, the structure of a learning environment creates a horizon of
observation for each student, making some events (e.g., a conversation in
another group of students) more or less visible. Finally, different
characteristics of students (age, cultural or ethnic background, gender
identification, whether instruction is in their native language or a non-native
language) may lead them to respond to events in different ways. Extant learning
analytic techniques account for the influence of prior events by lagging: for
example, using some fixed number of prior events to predict future events. TMA
will enable those same techniques to operate not on properties of the events
themselves but on underlying functions that represent claims or hypotheses about
the interaction between different learning modalities, the structure of the
learning environment, and the ways in which students might systematically differ
as STEM learners. The project team hypothesizes that TMA models will provide a
more nuanced, more accurate, and more equitable view of STEM learning processes
for diverse learners. This approach will expand the understanding of effective
multi-modal STEM learning processes and allow researchers to account for
diversity and address questions of equity in multi-modal STEM learning. TMA will
be developed and tested first as a set of algorithms for conducting trans-modal
analyses with three widely used learning analytic tools: process mining,
epistemic network analysis, and dynamic Bayesian networks. The investigators aim
to use simulation studies and the analysis of actual STEM learning datasets to
address two fundamental research questions regarding the science of learning:
(1) Under what conditions (if any) are trans-modal models of STEM learning
processes more informative than uni-modal models? And (2) Can TMA model
meaningful differences in trans-modal learning processes for minoritized groups
of STEM learners?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR
Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM
education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest
intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.