* 2201928
* Developing a Scalable Measure of Inclusive STEM Teaching Practices for Diverse Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Kali Trzesniewski, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2025
* USD 863,113.00

Recently, psychological research on broadening participation in STEM has shifted
from student-focused interventions (e.g., belonging or growth mindset
interventions given to students) to context-focused interventions (aimed at
instructors to create cultures of belonging or growth). Tools for evaluating the
changes in instructors’ practices induced by these programs have been lacking,
however. Popular self-report methods for instructors can be biased due to faulty
recall or social desirability bias, while more intensive observational methods
are cumbersome and difficult to sustain. In addition, existing measures tend to
be developed within one type of institution and may underemphasize inclusive
practices from instructors at historically Black colleges and universities and
Hispanic-serving institutions. These limitations have slowed progress toward the
discovery of programs that could broaden participation in STEM. The present
proposal seeks to develop a scalable, trustworthy system of instructor- and
student-reports that could be the backbone for research evaluating the next
generation of context-focused interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop novel measures of inclusive postsecondary STEM teaching practices
that create an experience of belonging and motivation for members of minoritized
groups. Measures of inclusive practices will be developed using optimal survey
design, including semi-structured interviews and cognitive pretesting co-
developed with both instructors and students. The measures will be
simultaneously developed and refined across three universities: at a
predominantly white-serving institution, a predominantly Hispanic-serving
institution, and a historically-Black university. This cross-site validation
will ensure that measures are sensitive to the variability in students’
experiences and increase their potential application. The sensitivity of these
measures in capturing the frequency and quality of practices will be validated
using third-party observations, repeated student-report surveys, and course
completion outcomes. A machine-learning algorithm, Bayesian Additive Regression
Trees (BART), will inform the choice of the optimal number of practices items
that minimize respondent burden while maximizing prediction. The resulting
measures will be widely disseminated to unlock the creative potential of
scientists and practitioners developing inclusive practices by allowing them to
learn what is working, and why.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental
STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest
intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.