* 2201177
* Supporting Reasoning with Multidimensional Datasets: Leveraging Student Intuitions Through Collaborative Data Production
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Daniel Damelin, Concord Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 08/31/2025
* USD 995,408.00

It is increasingly vital that people be able to make sense of scientific data
and extract information from public datasets in order to inform their decisions
about everything from ballot initiatives on climate policy to personal choices
about vaccines. The project has a long-term goal of broadening participation in
STEM by making data literacy attainable by more students. The project will
develop instructional design supports for high school students that build on
their novice intuitions for visualizing and interacting with complex datasets.
The project will also develop design principles to guide technology developers,
curricular developers, and researchers in creating environments more conducive
to promoting data literacy for all learners, including those who are not
confident math learners and those interested in further work in STEM. These
results will inform future efforts aimed at helping students better understand
how to interact with data. The project will also produce working examples of
open-source software and technological supports in CODAP (Common Online Data
Analysis Platform) based on the design principles it
develops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project research will explore two broad
conjectures about how technological and instructional supports for interrogating
multidimensional data can improve studentsâ€™ abilities to make sense of their
world and empower them to use data personally and professionally. First, the
project envisions that providing students with resources to represent and
visualize multidimensional data in ways that build on novice intuitions will
allow them more agency in transforming data structures to answer their own
questions. Second, the project posits that working collaboratively to build a
multidimensional dataset can help students develop rich associations, which
contribute to robust and flexible mental models of data structure that students
can then apply to datasets more broadly. Research methods include think-aloud
interviews and instructional sessions with small groups of students to explore
their intuitive notions about data structure and how these intuitive notions can
be leveraged to offer support for visualizing and transforming data. Project
research will result in a) theoretical insights into how novices intuitively
represent and interact with multidimensional data; b) design principles for
constructing user interfaces and educational experiences that can support
student understanding and use of multidimensional datasets; and c) tested
examples of software user interfaces and instructional activities that exemplify
the design principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's
EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM
education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest
intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.