* 2201984
* RUI: Biochemical Comparison of Type II Polyketide Biosynthetic Enzymes Across Phyla for Expanded Access to Chemical Diversity
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2022,02/28/2026
* Louise Charkoudian, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 02/28/2026
* USD 447,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Dr. Louise Charkoudian and her team from Haverford College will
investigate how assemblies of bacterial proteins can be leveraged to synthesize
molecules that benefit society. Bacteria have evolved the ability to express
protein assemblies that catalyze the manufacture of very complicated molecules.
If understood at the molecular level, these protein assemblies hold tremendous
potential to provide sustainable access to important chemical commodities. This
project will engage undergraduate students in the study of the evolution of
these assemblies, in identifying the features that confer function and stability
upon these assemblies, and in the engineering of new assemblies that have the
potential to catalyze the synthesis of novel molecules. The research will
provide information about protein assemblies that have never been studied in the
laboratory. Tools to facilitate future discovery and engineering efforts will
also be developed. The undergraduate students engaged in this research will gain
scientific knowledge and learn research skills. They will also learn how to
develop professional networks and about different institutions and career paths
in a “Symbiotic Professional Development Seminar Series”. This series will also
be open to graduate students from research universities. To spark scientific
appreciation and foster engagement of the community in discussions of scientific
topics, Dr. Charkoudian will develop a “BioArt Greeting Cards” project in which
photographs of student-made pieces of biological art are turned into greeting
cards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Type II polyketide synthases (PKSs) are powerful
biocatalysts in reactions that produce structurally complex and diverse
molecules. Progress towards reconstituting type II PKSs in vitro has been
stymied by the lack of a robust heterologous expression system for obtaining key
type II PKS components. In this project, bioinformatics will be used to create
an updated catalogue of type II PKS biosynthetic gene clusters and to identify
those ripe for characterization based on phylogeny of origin, inferred
evolutionary history, and other sequence patterns. Non-actinomycete bacterial
species will be evaluated as a source of type II PKS enzymes that can be
expressed in E. coli as stable, active proteins. Specifically, ketosynthase
chain length factors (KSCLFs), acyl carrier proteins (ACPs) and
phosphopantetheinyl transferases (PPTases) will be characterized to determine
the features that influence their stability and function. The compatibility of
type II PKS ACPs with PPTases across different PKSs will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.