* 2201793
* Collaborative Research: Facilitating Change in Undergraduate STEM:  A multidisciplinary, multimethod metasynthesis mapping a decade of growth
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Scott Simkins, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2025
* USD 66,950.00

Research has shown that the use of evidence-based, student-centered
instructional strategies helps to increase learning, retention, and equity in
undergraduate science, technology, engineering, and mathematics courses.
However, it is also clear that commonly used change efforts have not made
research-based instruction the norm in U.S. institutions of higher education.
Outcomes from this synthetic research will be used to guide efforts to improve
undergraduate STEM instruction to generate and support important instructional
change within university and college departments and across institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This synthetic research reviews the effects of
instructional interventions in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
courses at the undergraduate level between the years 2010 and 2021. The review
also includes all of social science undergraduate instruction. The specific
focus is on efforts to better support student learning of STEM content through
instructional change. The review will use a meta-synthesis to identify themes
and advances in the literature using a framework synthesis approach. The
literature search process is informed by current research on search strategies
and represents best practice in synthesis methods. The project uses AI-assisted
approaches to identify general themes in the literature. While this is an
emerging area of research in systematic review, the plan also builds in a test
of the AI-assisted coding against human qualitative
coding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is supported by NSF's EHR
Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM
education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad, and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest
intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM interest,
education, learning and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.