* 2201474
* CC* PLANNING: RE-CONSTRUCTING THE CAMPUS CYBERINFRASTRUCTURE OF A SMALL, LIBERAL ARTS HBCU IN ORDER TO MAXIMIZE STEM INNOVATION AND INTEGRATION
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Sohel Quazi, Texas College
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Texas College is undertaking a planning activity allowing it to complete an
assessment of its current infrastructure, to identify the elements needed to
evolve campus cyberinfrastructure (CI) to better support STEM research and
education, to understand and document campus-wide CI needs of researchers and
students driving future CI improvements, and to produce an initial campus CI
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact of this planning grant extends beyond Texas
Collegeâ€™s need for a carefully researched and prepared roadmap for technological
infrastructure enabling a more advanced future. This activity also is an initial
step toward improving the quality of the STEM and non-STEM education produced at
Texas College. Alternate learning styles can be accommodated via technology.
Students with STEM knowledge gaps can experience near-instant remediation.
Culturally concordant examples can be tailored to reflect various sociocultural
backgrounds within a classroom. Flight simulations can be used to teach Physics
and Physical Sciences. With a sufficient cyberinfrastructure, major barriers are
removed from the intellectual expansion in how teaching and learning
occurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.