* 2201209
* Examining Transfer Between Programming Languages in Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Bryan Matlen, WestEd
* Continuing Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 07/31/2026
* USD 645,429.00

Over the last decade, the Computer Science for All movement has worked to
broaden participation in computer science for students in every grade band. The
Computer Science for All movement popularized visual, or block-based,
programming languages. These languages allow students to program through a
graphical user interface, dragging and dropping blocks of code into place.
Because students do not have to type or memorize syntax, block-based languages
can make programming more accessible to younger students. Although block-based
languages are commonly used when teaching young students, there is currently no
standardization around what programming languages students learn, and there is a
wide variety of curricula that teach different languages. As a result, students
may be asked to learn multiple block-based languages over time. Each programming
language can have a distinct look and feel (i.e., the colors and shapes of the
blocks) and a distinct syntax, and there can be underlying structural and
conceptual similarities and differences between languages. A perennial issue in
computer science education, then, is that learners at all ages frequently need
to be able to use and navigate between a variety of different languages (this is
true among older students and text-based languages as well). This project seeks
to understand how to help students connect concepts they learned in one
programming language to related concepts in a new programming language. Many
studies in computer science education have examined how students perform when
their coursework transitions from one programming language to another. However,
the field still lacks a well-specified theory of how and when conceptual
knowledge successfully transfers in the context of programming that can be used
to inform teacher professional development and instructional design. This
project broadly aims to develop and use such a computer science-specific theory
in the context of middle school students as they engage with three different
block-based programming languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three goals
for this project: 1) Conduct a longitudinal study of diverse middle school
students as they progress through a three-language course sequence; 2) Develop a
computer science-specific theory of transfer to describe how students connect
knowledge from previously-learned programming languages to new programming
languages; and 3) Use the theory of transfer to develop and pilot-test an
instructional module that facilitates students’ knowledge transfer from one
programming language to another. The investigation will occur in the San
Francisco Unified School District, in which many schools currently teach a
sequence of three middle school computer science classes with three different
block-based programming languages. Further, the project aims to investigate both
student and teacher experiences across multiple courses. In this way, the
specific research setting will facilitate the longitudinal nature of the study.
This project seeks to contribute to the field in three important ways. First, a
computer science-specific theory of transfer would add to the body of research
on students’ learning of computer science concepts in the context of different
programming language, highlighting features of languages that students find
particularly salient or important. Second, the theory would guide computer
science teachers and curriculum developers in designing instruction to help
students transfer knowledge from previously learned programming languages, thus
potentially improving student achievement in computer science. Third, the theory
would also guide computer science assessment developers. The multilingual nature
of K-12 computer science education pathways presents a challenge for assessing
student growth over time, as students may perform differently on conceptually
identical items depending on what programming language is being used to assess.
A computer science-specific theory of transfer would guide assessment developers
in creating items and measurement models that could estimate language-specific
programming knowledge and language-independent conceptual
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform
efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and
innovations to address persistent challenges in
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.