* 2201558
* CC* Compute: Accelerating Compute Driven Science Through a Sharable High Performance Computing Cluster in Kent State Multi-Campus System
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Javed Khan, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

This project will add an agile locally and globally sharable HPCC (High-
Performance Computing Cluster) hosted in a ScienceDMZ enclave, integrated with
national science computing facilities, including the Open Science Grid (OSG), by
creatively using recent advances in federated science networking and distributed
systems’ virtualization open to regional faculty. The system is composed of 18
nodes with dual Intel Xeon Gold 6242R class CPUs (20 core), 192GB RAM, and an
NVIDIA A30 class GPUs. Storage is spread across the nodes using
CEPH&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project supports several interesting newly
emerging collaborative HPCC workflows- scienceware as-a-service (SAS) and
science-data-lakes (SDL), and intense real-time-computing (iRTC) besides
supporting the HPC and HTC workflows. NSF-funded resources in this project are
open to all faculty researchers in northeast Ohio colleges and their
collaborators, including the faculty of all eight campuses of Kent who are in
the network’s latency proximity and engaged in data-intensive collaborative
workflows. In order to support high throughput and collaborative computing, the
ScienceDMZ exercises a new model of unimpeded host-centric cauterized and
federated security, as opposed to the traditional perimeter focused security
approach. It is already fronted by a 100-Gbps Data Transfer Node (DTN) capable
of ‘friction-free’ long-haul transferring massive datasets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project directly contributes to NSF’s goals to foster
innovation, integration, and engineering of new campus-level networking and
cyberinfrastructure that can assertively support widely collaborative, multi-
campus distributed massive-data driven research and harness largely untapped
potential to share unused compute cycles and resources across the entire
academic fabric, while leveraging a compelling set of science projects from a
wide variety of disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.