* 2201943
* Immersive, Interdisciplinary, Identity-based Team Science Experiences for Indigenous Graduate Scholars
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Michelle Hale, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,325,986.00

This project aims to re-imagine the structure and outcomes of STEM research at
the graduate level, by providing Immersive, Interdisciplinary, Identity-based
Team Science Experiences (IIITSEs) to solve challenges that have emerged as
human activity has led to significant impacts on the planet's climate and
ecosystems. IIITSEs are collaborative, culturally affirming, and solutions-
oriented research projects that center diverse knowledge systems to respond to
community needs, support cohorts of racially diverse faculty and students, and
promote a just, equitable, diverse, and inclusive campus and community within
and beyond the STEM disciplines. The current societal moment has laid bare
structural inequities and injustice within the academy. In particular, the
system for graduate education in STEM does not foster an environment for
Indigenous scholars to thrive. To address this problem, diverse identities,
critical scholarship, sovereignty, and self-determination must be centered. This
project will engage Indigenous graduate students at Arizona State University in
immersive learning experiences led by a faculty cohort of predominantly
Indigenous and Latinx scholars. These immersive learning experiences will allow
students to develop critical skills in collaboration, communication, and problem
solving while also cultivating a space for deep reflection, cultural
affirmation, and empowerment. The learning community aims to 1) promote
interdisciplinary collaboration in STEM, 2) elevate Indigenous faculty
collaboration across disciplines and across the institution, and 3) support
culturally affirming research experiences for graduate students in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IIITSE concept is underpinned by the inclusive
pedagogical approach of the “Four R’s” (Respect, Relevance, Reciprocity,
Responsibility) framework for Indigenous student success in higher education.
Integration of the 4Rs framework into STEM pedagogy can take many forms,
including classroom and research curricula that use cultural knowledge and
practices. Such approaches produce positive outcomes of Indigenous student
success in undergraduate STEM courses; however, it remains unclear how
transferring these principles to graduate-level STEM research will influence
student perceptions and outcomes, or how it might translate into lasting
institutional changes that support racial equity for Indigenous scholars. This
project aims to answer an overarching research question: How does integration of
the 4Rs framework into graduate research via IIITSEs improve outcomes and
increase racial equity for Indigenous people? The project will evaluate how well
the program adheres to the 4Rs, and how the 4Rs relate to racial equity in STEM
for graduate Indigenous scholars. Qualitative methods will include interviews of
students, faculty, staff, and community members who participate in the IIITSE
program. Using the 4Rs approach, racial equity will be enacted through all parts
of the research process, while simultaneously studying the progress and sharing
findings so that changes to research initiatives can be implemented and
transformation of graduate education can be
accelerated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Racial Equity in
STEM Education program (EHR Racial Equity). The program supports projects that
promote racial equity in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) education and workforce development through research and practice.
Awarded projects center the voices, knowledge, and experiences of the
individuals, communities, and institutions most impacted by the inequities
caused by systemic racism in STEM fields. This program aligns with NSF’s core
value of supporting outstanding researchers and innovative thinkers from across
the Nation's diversity of demographic groups, regions, and types of
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.