* 2201361
* Self-Healing Polymers in Complex Water Matrices: Towards Smart Materials for the Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Bezawit Getachew, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2025
* USD 399,449.00

Responsible environmental stewardship requires reducing the environmental burden
of synthetic polymers, which are accumulating in natural water bodies. At the
same time, modern life relies heavily on synthetic polymers to perform
increasingly complex functions across many industries, including textiles,
transportation, medical, water treatment, and electronics industries. Self-
healing polymers are materials that can recover from physical or chemical damage
autonomously. These polymers offer an untapped opportunity to mitigate the
environmental burden of plastics by reducing waste, while also exceeding the
capabilities of current synthetic polymers. However, most self-healing materials
are designed to operate in inert, moisture-free environments, and their
performance in real-world, complex environments is poorly understood. This
research project will examine how common ions in natural waters impact the self-
healing process. The fundamental knowledge that is gained will be used to
engineer new polymers that can self-heal under a wide range of conditions.
Concepts in polymer materials science and smart materials will be incorporated
into the undergraduate and graduate environmental engineering curriculum at Rice
University. This educational aim will fortify interdisciplinary skills
development at the intersection of materials science and environmental
engineering. Existing programs at Rice University will be leveraged to recruit
and mentor undergraduate students from underrepresented groups and contribute to
the development of a diverse STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this project is to understand the key factors that determine
the performance of self-healing polymers in complex water matrices. The most
widely used mechanisms for self-healing rely on the capacity of polymeric chains
at a damage interface to diffuse, reorganize, and re-form bonds with one
another. This project will investigate the primary variables that impact this
intrinsic capacity to re-form secondary bonds. The specific objectives are to 1)
determine the impact of water quality parameters – hardness, salinity, and total
organic carbon – on intrinsic self-healing mechanisms, 2) derive mechanistic
understanding of how water constituents alter self-healing behavior, and 3)
establish synthetically controllable parameters that maximize self-healing
performance (i.e., 100% recovery) in complex environments. Model polymers that
self-heal via hydrogen bonding and ionic interactions will be synthesized, and
bulk mechanical testing and microscopic profiling in the presence of complex
water matrices will be applied to quantify self-healing as a function of
different water constituents. Dynamic mechanical analysis, quartz crystal
microbalance with dissipation experiments, and spectroscopic chemical analysis
will be used to gain mechanistic understanding of changes in self-healing
behavior. Sidechain length and crosslinking density for each model polymer will
be varied to identify conditions that maximize self-healing in complex
environments. The successful completion of this project will help establish
design principles for smart and responsive polymeric materials that address
pressing environmental challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.