* 2201467
* AccelNet-Design: International Networks Towards Future U.S. Urban Resilience (Resilient-NET)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Linyin Cheng, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,905.00

AccelNet-Design: International Networks Towards Future U.S. Urban Resilience
(Resilient-NET)&lt;br/&gt;OISE #2201467 LIU&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban
resilience is a global issue that requires a global solution, but existing
networks on urban resilience research are often shaped by their regional,
institutional, disciplinary, and social contexts. Resilient-NET takes an
integrated technical-social-climate perspective to bring together disparate
disciplines and traditionally isolated networks to address the multitude of
challenges faced by urban dwellers. This network integrates climate models into
risk and urban logistics models, addresses reliability and logistics problems
associated with supply chains, and explores coupling among climate,
infrastructural and social systems. Resilient-NET catalyzes new cross-
disciplinary global collaborations, synergizes complementary scientific
expertise, and provides critical access to one-of-its-kind pilot projects, data,
platforms, and research capabilities for U.S. researchers to make global impacts
and strengthen their leadership roles on emerging challenges in building
resilience into future urban socio-technical systems. Resilient-NET creates a
roadmap towards future resilient urban ecosystems, to generate societal impacts
on the livability and economic viability of American cities. Participating
networks include world-renowned research centers on urban resilience from Asia
and Europe, cross-disciplinary U.S. research communities, NSF-funded networks on
Extreme Events Research, United Nations’ Habitat Program, and stakeholders from
the industry sectors of IoT, Smart Cities technologies and National
Labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration identifies key research gaps and
enabling capabilities in building urban resilience through an integrated
technical-social-climate approach. The design activities are organized into
three clusters. Cluster 1 focuses on how digital space—the skeletons of future
urban cybernetic organisms—can be enhanced and used to improve future urban
resilience research; Cluster 2 identifies the new types of convergence research
structures needed to improve social resilience in urban environments and address
coupled infrastructure and social systems; and Cluster 3 accelerates the
understanding of the impacts of extreme events on future urban social-technical
systems, and identify the missing capabilities that enable future resilience of
dense urban environments evolving with climate change, infrastructure
redevelopment, and digitization of physical infrastructure. Addressing these
societally important challenges fosters convergence research from data science,
logistics, social science, civil engineering, geosciences, and climatology, with
a scope and magnitude beyond the capabilities of a single research community.
International networks established via Resilient-NET are essential to
accelerating the discovery of knowledge in this space through early access to
new data and platforms currently only available from global partners and through
collaborative efforts which promote knowledge, data, and best practice
sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through International
Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate
the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next generation of U.S.
researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The AccelNet program
supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and complementary
networks abroad that will leverage research and educational resources to tackle
grand scientific challenges that require significant coordinated international
efforts. This project is funded by the Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.