* 2201039
* Completing the Development of the Electronic Test of Early Numeracy (e-TEN)
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Arthur Baroody, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,375,798.00

This project is funded by the Discovery Research Pre-K-12 Program, which funds
research and development of STEM innovations and approaches in assessment,
teaching, and learning. The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models, and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project continues and completes the development
and refinement of an electronic Test of Early Numeracy (e-TEN) in English and
Spanish, focused on number and operations for young learners. The assessment
incorporates a learning trajectory approach that describes students' development
of the understanding of number. The electronic assessment allows for the test to
adapt to students' responses and incorporate games increasing children's
engagement with the tasks. These features take advantage of the electronic
format. The achievement test is designed to be efficient, user-friendly,
affordable, and accessible for a variety of learning environments and a broad
age range of students (3 to 8 years old). The goal of the assessment design is
to create a measure that is more accurate, more accessible to a wider range of
children, and easier to administer than existing measures. The proposed
activities also include establishing 10 separate but equated computer adaptive
tests to produce a complete commonly scaled construct for ages 3-8, capturing
change in numeracy ability across 10 six-month intervals. These efforts will be
validated in both English and Spanish with national norms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The e-TEN assesses informal and formal knowledge of number
and operations in domains including verbal counting, numbering, numerical
relationships, as well as mental addition and subtraction. The items are
designed using domain-based learning trajectories that describe students'
development of understanding of the numerical topics. The test is designed with
some key characteristics. It is semi-adaptive over six-month age spans. It has
an electronic format that allows for uniform implementation and an efficient,
user-friendly administration. The test is accessible to Spanish speakers using
an inclusive assessment model across a number of platforms. The game-based
aspect increases children's engagement and presents more meaningful tasks. The
user-friendly aspect includes simplifying the assessment process compared to
other tests of numeracy in early childhood. The first phase of the development
tests a preliminary version of the e-TEN to test its functionality and
feasibility. These later phases norm the items, and examines its reliability and
validity characteristics. Reliability is assessed using Item Response Theory
methods and test-retest reliability measures. Validity examines criterion-
prediction validity and other aspects of construct validity. The final phase of
the work includes creating a Spanish version of the test including collecting
data from bilingual children using both versions of the e-TEN numeracy
measure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.