* 2201561
* CC* Compute: OneOklahoma Cyberinfrastructure Initiative Research Accelerator for Machine Learning (OneOCII-RAML)
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* David Ebert, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the University of
Oklahoma (OU) aims to acquire a GPU powered Artificial Intelligence/Machine
Learning HPC resource, “OneOklahoma Cyberinfrastructure Initiative Research
Accelerator for Machine Learning (OneOCII-RAML)”. OneOCII-RAML is a 7 node
cluster, with each node configured with an NVIDIA HGX A100 4-GPU (28 A100 GPUs
total). The system will directly support several active research projects,
educational programming to grow the use of AI/ML in research beyond Computer
Science disciplines, and would be a state-wide resource via the OneOklahoma
Friction Free Network (OFFN). OneOCII-RAML would be integrated with an in-
progress supercomputer deployment at OU. OneOCII-RAML's role is to accelerate
Oklahoma's strategic research in many STEM disciplines, including: trustworthy
AI in weather, climate and coastal oceanography; the ATLAS high energy physics
collaboration; smoking cessation; bioinformatics and medical physics imaging;
human brain signals; mobile network design; reservoir rock typing; natural
language processing; and quasar feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This University
of Oklahoma (OU) project focuses on acquiring, deploying and maintaining a large
scale Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning (AI/ML) computer system -- the
OneOklahoma Cyberinfrastructure Initiative Research Accelerator for Machine
Learning (OneOCII-RAML). The computer system will enable researchers
(undergraduates, graduate students, postdocs, staff, faculty) at OU and non-
commercial institutions across Oklahoma to pursue AI/ML-based research and
education via Graphics Processing Units (GPUs). OneOCII-RAML's hardware platform
is a set of GPU server computers with NVIDIA Ampere Next GPUs, integrated into
OSCER's new supercomputer. The project will also teach researchers how to use
GPUs for AI/ML. OSCER's Research Computing Facilitators will be the mechanism
for working one-on-one with each research team on how to use these GPUs.
Eighteen research teams have been identified that are already using GPUs for
AI/ML and fifty-one research teams aspire to do so. A rapidly growing portfolio
of transformative Science, Technology, Engineering &amp; Mathematics (STEM)
research is based on AI/ML calculations, which increasingly depend on
accelerators such as GPUs for reducing time-to-science. The project makes a
strong case for science-driven needs for this GPU-based addition to OU compute
resources with high probability of use and impact throughout the
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the collaborative
efforts of the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (OAC) and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.