* 2201590
* Spanning Structures in Random Graphs
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Xavier Perez Gimenez, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 224,894.00

Random graphs are graphs of typically large size generated by a random mechanism
associated to a probability distribution. They provide simplified abstract
models for large complex networks — such as telecommunication networks, social
networks, the Internet, and neural networks — for which an explicit
deterministic description is often impractical or not available. Interest in the
subject has grown in recent years due to the ubiquitous proliferation of such
networks and the need of a theoretical framework for their analysis. Many
fundamental properties of graphs can be formulated in terms of their spanning
substructures — such as spanning trees, Hamilton cycles and perfect matchings.
Such structures are quintessential in graph theory and play a central role in
other fields such as computer science, combinatorial optimization, and
statistical physics. This research project aims to extend mathematical
understanding of spanning structures in several models of random graphs by
addressing fundamental open questions in the field. In addition, this project
provides research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of spanning structures in random
graphs is a central theme with a long tradition in probabilistic combinatorics.
However, many basic questions that are well understood for the classical Erdős-
Rényi graphs remain wide open for other fundamental models of random graphs. The
investigator plans to settle some of these open questions concerning the
existence, emergence, and packing of spanning structures (and their rainbow
counterparts) in several models of random graphs, including random geometric
graphs, preferential attachment graphs, and random lifts. The constrained nature
of these models makes their analysis significantly different from (and often
more challenging than) that of Erdős-Rényi graphs. To overcome these obstacles,
the research incorporates novel approaches that combine geometric,
probabilistic, and combinatorial ingredients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the Combinatorics program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.