* 2201387
* Categorical and Diagrammatic Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Benjamin Elias, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2025
* USD 88,912.00

Representation theory is the study of symmetries. Symmetry groups arise
frequently in physics (e.g. rotations of a sphere), chemistry (e.g.
crystallography), and other scientific fields. Data related to the objects
possessing symmetry can often be encoded in an object called a representation.
Mathematicians study the relationships between representations, and how bigger
representations can be built from simple, indivisible ones, much as a molecule
is built from indivisible atoms. Many properties of these simple
representations, such as their dimensions, are unknown and the topic of intense
research. The representations and their structure can be packaged in a
collection called a category. An extremely fruitful tool of the last half
century has been to identify categories in representation theory with categories
from algebraic geometry, allowing the use of powerful geometric tools. But
geometry also has its limits, especially when it comes to matters of explicit
computation. In past work, the PI has found new and explicit descriptions of
categories from representation theory and geometry, using diagrammatic methods.
In diagrammatics, a very large matrix or a structure from geometry could be
encoded as a picture and manipulated graphically. These descriptions make once-
difficult categories accessible computer algebra systems. Computer calculations
performed by the PI's collaborator Williamson have led to the first
breakthroughs in computing dimensions of simple representations in decades. The
PI will continue to develop diagrammatic methods to study representation theory
and geometry, providing explicit constructions of new categories, structures,
and tools which are beyond the current scope of other approaches. This project
provides research training opportunities for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
concretely, this proposal will support four related projects. The first is to
provide general tools for studying generically semisimple monoidal categories
diagrammatically using a cellular basis called the branching basis, akin to
several bases previously constructed by the PI and collaborators. These tools
will then be applied to the categories of singular Soergel bimodules,
representations of symplectic groups, and representations of McKay groups. The
second project is to introduce K-theoretic Soergel bimodules and to study their
relationship to the quantum geometric Satake equivalence. The third is to
produce a generalization of Khovanov-Lauda-Rouquier algebras, which has the
potential to categorify other Nichols algebras. The fourth is to study the
actions of lie algebras on various important categories, which were previously
constructed by the PI and Qi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.