* 2201822
* CC* Regional: SD-REDI:  The South Dakota Research and Education Data Interchange
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Alyssa Kiesow, South Dakota Board of Regents
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 998,750.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The South Dakota Research &amp;
Education Data Interchange (SD-REDI) project creates a statewide friction-free
network for high-speed access to advanced computing and data storage resources
from all public higher education institutions in South Dakota. The project seeks
to connect a broad set of constituent schools to a secure, high-performance
science DMZ regional network across South Dakota. Participating institutions
include University of South Dakota, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology,
Black Hills State University, Northern State University (NSU), South Dakota
State University, Dakota State University. NSU will be upgraded to 100Gbps
connectivity as part of this project as well. The project will support research
innovation and advancing education across their science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) portfolios. SD-REDI creates a structure of
opportunity to accelerate the adoption and utilization of advanced
cyberinfrastructure (CI) and elevate STEM research and education productivity
throughout South Dakota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Led by a cross-institutional team
of technology and research leaders, SD-REDI accomplishes the following key
objectives: (1) Links together critical resources and CI capabilities at all
participating institutions via a secure, high-performance Regional DMZ, using
the extant SD REED (Research, Education, and Economic Development) network as a
backplane, ensuring secure and performant data movement for research and
distance learning applications; (2) Addresses institutional capability gaps and
augmenting campus network capacity to ensure uniform experience and access to
advanced CI within the region and outward to national resources; (3) Cultivates
a workforce literate in CI and advanced digital resources for STEM; and (4)
Supports streamlined end-to-end distance learning experiences for STEM
education. The project supports an emerging model in which South Dakota State
University and the University of South Dakota will serve as formal CI providers
for researchers and other constituents throughout South Dakotaâ€™s public higher
education system. This centralized CI model is critical in expanding research
and STEM education opportunities at South Dakota
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the
collaborative efforts of the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (OAC) and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.