* 2201974
* Conference: Banff International Research Station
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Malabika Pramanik, University of British Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 03/31/2028
* USD 866,668.00

This award provides fund to support participation of US-based mathematical
scientists in activities conducted at BIRS. The Banff International Research
Station (BIRS) is a research infrastructure dedicated to all aspects of
mathematical sciences, including pure and applied math, computer science,
statistics, physics, biology, data science and their myriad synergies. Its
mission is to facilitate mathematical innovation and discovery at the highest
international level through collaborative research and cross-disciplinary
synergy. It also plays an important role in talent development, by creating
impactful meetings between the future STEM workforce and academic, industrial
and government leaders in their fields. Since its inception in 2003, BIRS has
expanded into five centers, with primary location in Banff, Alberta. It
maintains a presence in four different countries (Canada, Mexico, China and
Spain). A cherished meeting place for scientists, educators and scholars, BIRS's
intense and immersive programs have acquired global distinction as incubators of
transformative ideas and breakthroughs at the frontiers of research. Its unique
environment promotes creativity, innovation and exchange of knowledge. BIRS
programming reaches far beyond the traditional model of workshops and
conferences; it builds bridges between academia, industry and government, with
lasting impact on the scientific landscape. Best practices in equity, diversity
and inclusion, facilitation of training and mentorship are incorporated in every
aspect of BIRS operations, from proposal selection to program delivery, ensuring
a balanced representation of groups, expertise and career stages in each
cohort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BIRS's post-COVID planning involves
programming expansion and development in a number of new directions. Transition
to the hybrid format has resulted in global access to all BIRS programs. The new
"BIRS Now!'' has generated a nimble way to create high impact collision venues
on topics that demand rapid response from research. Such topics include climate
change, clean energy, infectious disease modelling, vaccine distribution and
fairness, national quantum strategy, responsible development of artificial
intelligence, cybersecurity, blockchain and others. The regularly offered
"Career and Innovation Hub" introduces students and early career researchers to
emerging career opportunities in science and technology sectors. Annual summer
schools, some in partnership with other institutes, train undergraduate and
graduate students in emerging areas following recent breakthroughs that have
potential for future growth. Programs like "Focused Research Groups", "Research
in Teams" and "Group follow-ons" provide opportunities of distraction-free
research to small teams of collaborators, sometimes for projects started at
other BIRS events. In 2022-2027, at least 3943 US scientists are expected to
visit BIRS. This award, which has been deemed worthy of support through peer-
reviewed evaluation using NSF's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria, will be used exclusively for supporting participation of US-based
mathematicians at BIRS activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.