* 2201087
* Examining an On-line, International Exchange Professional Development Program for High School Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Patricio Herbst, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,263,409.00

This project is concerned with investigating the potential that online, cross-
national teacher collaboration has for improving professional development that
supports mathematics teachers in learning from practice and from one another.
Designing professional development that leverages teachers’ experiences and
knowledge is one way to support teachers’ professional learning, as it allows
teachers to focus on developing skills that are integrated into the
particularities of their practice. By collaborating with one another to design
and revise lessons, mathematics teachers can support one another’s learning in
many ways, including asking questions, suggesting alternatives, and detailing
considerations based on their varying professional experiences and knowledge.
This project aims to elaborate a structure for practice-oriented, collaborative
professional development that increases the capacities for collaborative
learning by facilitating teacher-to-teacher interactions within and across
cultural contexts. By convening international groups of teachers to design
lessons and provide and respond to commentaries on their lesson designs, the
project introduces possibilities for surfacing and disrupting common
experiences, assumptions, and norms in US mathematics teaching. Specifically,
the project will leverage an innovative form of professional development for
secondary mathematics teachers called StoryCircles as a context for teacher-to-
teacher interaction within and across cultures. StoryCircles is a practice-based
form of professional education that gathers teachers to collectively and
iteratively design and revise a lesson. The broader impacts of this project lie
in the possibility to scale an innovative, practice-based, lesson-centered model
of professional development with large numbers of teachers that can be
institutionalized at relatively low cost and implemented completely online.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will unfold across three interconnected
studies that aim to describe and explain how intra- and cross-cultural
annotations of lessons, serve to intervene on: (1) the professional development
interactions among secondary mathematics teachers engaged in US-based
StoryCircles; (2) the set of lesson artifacts constructed by secondary
mathematics teachers engaged in US-based StoryCircles; and (3) the professional
noticing of secondary mathematics teachers in the US and abroad who were
otherwise uninvolved in the lesson’s production. The project will convene eight
StoryCircles groups (made up of 6 inservice teachers drawn from the US) who will
work together to design algebra and geometry lessons for sharing with other
teachers. Each lesson will be reviewed by teams of practicing teachers both in
the US and abroad who will leave comments for the authoring team to consider.
Once these commentaries are completed, the StoryCircles groups will reconvene to
consider the commentaries and make revisions to their lesson storyboards.
Project researchers will draw on artifacts collected across the StoryCircles
interactions (including video, storyboarded lessons, and lesson commentaries) as
well as responses gathered from all project participants to scenario-based
surveys to explore aspects of the rationality of mathematics teaching, such as:
How are various personal resources of teachers and social resources of the
profession assembled in arguments for or against decisions relevant to teaching
with open, novel problems? How do those teachers’ arguments for practice vary
across national contexts of mathematics teaching? How can that variance be
leveraged to support the surfacing, challenging, and disrupting of US teachers’
cultural assumptions about mathematics teaching and
learning?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.