* 2202169
* Grant Insights through Research &amp; Development (GIRD):  Using Big Data Centered Mixed Methods to Explain Variances in Grant Funding and Outcomes at Two-Year Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Rassoul Dastmozd, IMPACT ALLIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2025
* USD 797,040.00

Recognizing disparities in external funding across two-year institutions in
advanced technological education programs and the need to build institutional
capacity to address these disparities, this research is designed to surface
factors and characteristics of institutions that are associated with successful
efforts to secure external funds. Descriptive information derived from this
investigation will form the basis for a set of empirically derived best
practices associated with success in securing funding. The central research
question is, "What characteristics and factors differentiate colleges with
varying levels of external funding?" The research team will conduct a mixed
methods research study that combines a rich set of data: (1) algorithm-derived
meta-data on two-year college characteristics and performance; (2) public and
campus institutional data; (3) surveys of college and program faculty and
administrators; and (4) in-depth interviews with college and program faculty and
administrators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will adapt quantitative research
methods, such as big data algorithms, cluster analyses, and decisions support
systems, commonly employed by the financial and health care sectors, and apply
them to higher education. In an effort to support skilled technical workforce
development in advanced-technology fields through fostering institutional
capacity, the goal of the investigation is to establish viable pathways and
impactful practices by which less grant-active, two-year colleges can utilize
external funding resources to better meet the needs of diverse student
populations, faculty, and institutions in advanced technological programs.
Additionally, the project will apply and test an innovative use of quantitative
research approaches to answer questions that now can be examined using large
data sets and data science methods in combination with more traditional data
collection methodologies. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced
technology fields that drive the Nationâ€™s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.