* 2202913
* P2C2: Testing Interpretations of the Oxygen Isotopic Composition of Asian Cave Calcite at Abrupt, Millennial, and Orbital Timescales
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* R. Lawrence Edwards, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2026
* USD 495,062.00

The general research aim of this project is to further explore the Asian Monsoon
from a previously constructed 640,000-year long, high-resolution record of the
oxygen isotopic composition of cave calcite from the region of China currently
affected by Asian monsoon rainfall. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
specifically seeks to examine several issues related to the Asian monsoon to
better understand the mechanisms that cause abrupt, millennial-scale, and
orbital-scale changes in Asian Monsoon rainfall through questions such as: (1)
where across Asia have inferred changes in rainfall taken place; (2) to what
extent have changes in the position of the sub-tropical jet affected Asian
monsoon rainfall east of Tibet; and (3) were inferred changes in climate for
portions of Central Asia north and west of the Tibetan Plateau caused by changes
in winter or summer precipitation. Answers to these questions aim to understand
the mechanisms that cause abrupt, millennial-scale, and orbital-scale changes in
Asian Monsoon rainfall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts
include a better understanding of the Asian Monsoon, international collaboration
with Chinese scientists of mutual benefit to the United States and China, and
support for a post-doctoral scholar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.