* 2202039
* I-Corps:  Next-generation Microfluidics-based Drug Testing Platform
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* John McDevitt, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a microfluidics-based diagnostic device that facilitates lab-
quality analytics in a compact platform that may be operated outside of the
laboratory environment. The proposed technology is especially ideal for roadside
drug detection, first responders, emergency medicine, sports anti-doping, pain
management, rehab centers, onsite workforce drug testing and other applications.
The drug abuse testing market is projected to be $11.83B globally by 2025. The
legalization of marijuana for medical and recreational use, the opioid crisis,
and emerging dangerous designer drugs have generated high interest in
technologies that reduce the economic impact and public health burden of drug
abuse in the US and abroad. The initial target market is law enforcement drug
testing, which has minimal regulatory burden, immediate need and high growth
potential, with planned expansion into workforce and clinical drug testing
market segments over time. This technology also has utility in the wider point-
of-care diagnostics market, which is projected to be more than $50B globally by
2026. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
a microfluidics device that facilitates the recirculation of fluid in a
microfluidic channel. The proposed approach is key to detecting low abundance
targets in small volumes of fluid. Recirculation is achieved by a pump
incorporated into the disposable microfluidic device that is actuated by a
stepper motor in the reader. Depression and withdrawal of the actuator creates a
pulsatile flow across a biosensor. Sample, reagents, and wash buffers may be
recirculated at the desired rate and time interval needed for optimal assay
performance. The proposed recirculation flow method is packaged into a fully
integrated lab-on-a-chip device capable of processing small volumes of whole
blood, oral fluid, and other biological matrices. The fluidic layout facilitates
processing complex multistep immunoassay sequences. The lab-on-a-chip device is
outfitted with a high-density microarray biosensor for unparalleled multiplexing
capability. In addition, the platform includes a compact, highly portable,
battery-powered reader to work with the cartridge. Fluorescent images of the
sensor response are captured by a CCD inside the instrument. Data is
automatically analyzed and reported to the user on screen on the instrument and
transmitted to a mobile App.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.