* 2202667
* A paleoclimate reanalysis of the coupled Greenland Ice Sheet--climate evolution during the Last Interglacial
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Jessica Tierney, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Frank R. Rack
* 07/31/2025
* USD 387,546.00

This project will reconstruct the size and shape of the Greenland Ice Sheet
(GrIS) across the Last Interglacial period, a warm climate period
127,000-119,000 years ago. During this time, the GrIS melted substantially
contributing several meters of sea level rise, but the exact amount of melting
is not known. There is a need to define this more precisely because the GrIS is
expected continue to melt in the coming years and this melting will accelerate
under continued greenhouse gas emissions. Understanding the sensitivity of the
GrIS to melting under warm climates can help constrain how much sea level rise
could occur by 2100 and beyond. One outcome of this project will be interactive
maps illustrating what the GrIS looked like through time, which can be used for
teaching and science communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a
technique called data assimilation to achieve its goal. This technique is
commonly used for weather forecasting but has not been applied yet to
reconstruct the coupled evolution of climate and the GrIS. The researchers will
combine transient simulations conducted with a new coupled climate-ice model
(e.g., the Community Earth System Model v2 with the Community Ice Sheet Model
v2) with geological proxy data for sea-surface temperature and conditions on the
GrIS (i.e., ice core thickness and isotopes) in the data assimilation framework
to produce a hybrid model-data product. The result will be a data-informed
reconstruction of GrIS size and shape, which will allow for a more precise
quantification of the contribution of the GrIS to global sea level rise. Broader
Impacts associated with this award include the creation of an interactive
visualization of GrIS evolution through geological time, support for a
postdoctoral scholar and undergraduates at the University of Arizona, and
partnership with the Southern Arizona Research, Science, and Engineering
Foundation to develop climate learning and engagement activities for local K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.