* 2202578
* Collaborative Research: Seeing Science: Using Computer Vision to Explore the Scientific Principles Behind Everyday Objects
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Carl Vondrick, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 06/30/2025
* USD 425,000.00

Understanding science is critical for preparing students to make sense of the
world around them, make informed decisions, and participate in civic society and
in the workforce. However, for many youth, science is a mysterious body of
knowledge that feels disconnected from their lives. This project aims to bring
science into middle school students’ homes, allowing them to see the science
behind everyday objects and transforming lived environments into engaging
learning spaces. Students will work on inquiry-based learning units on mobile
phones that explore STEM phenomena topics like diffusion, electricity, and
simple machines that are present in their kitchens, bedrooms, and local parks.
They will be able to take photos and videos of their home and neighborhood, and
computer vision algorithms will augment these images with diagrams, models, and
simulations that illustrate the principles and mechanisms that explain the STEM
phenomena. These overlays will allow students to observe, experiment with, and
make predictions for phenomena such as tea diffusing in hot water or heat
traveling through walls. The project will capitalize on existing technological
devices, such as camera phones, to create “lenses” which enable students to see
the science that is all around them.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;By committing to such
low-cost solutions, the project aims to make science education accessible to
more students, and enable at-home learning while avoiding undue pressures on
family resources. Operating in diverse, low-resource environments motivates
fundamental advances in computer vision: First, algorithms must automatically
build up a 3D and temporal representation of a scene of a given physical
phenomenon. Second, the system must expose hooks for educators to decide which
graphics should be overlaid at which time and in which place atop this scene.
Further, the project will engage in human-centered design to bring cutting-edge
technologies to youth in ways that are accessible, easy to use, and achieve
educational goals. Investigators will conduct extensive interviews with parents,
students, and teachers about the aspects of students’ out-of-school lives that
they would be willing to share with researchers, peers, and teachers. These data
will enable the team to realize the benefits of equitable science education that
builds on students’ lives and cultures. This research will help foster the
development of a more agentic, inclusive way of engaging in science inquiry at
home, encouraging students to have a personal connection with science from a
young age. This is particularly important for students most at risk to perceive
science as disconnected from their lives, and whom can benefit most from seeing
science at work in their lives and community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.