* 2202737
* Emergent Mechanics of Auxetic Layered Anisotropic Composite Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Barry Davidson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2025
* USD 380,663.00

Auxetics are a special class of materials, which when stretched in one
direction, expand in the other one or two directions, unlike conventional
materials which contract. Auxetic materials and structures may be produced by
laminating fiber reinforced composite layers in certain specific orientations
and sequences. Producing auxetic composite structures significantly enhances
their energy absorbing capability and delamination resistance, in comparison to
equivalent non-auxetic structures. Although some experimental evidence exists,
fundamental understanding of the underlying deformation mechanisms is severely
lacking to use auxeticity for achieving optimum performance enhancements without
compromising other properties. This award supports fundamental research to
understand the mechanical behavior of auxetic layered composite structures with
the help of an integrated experimental-modeling approach. Knowledge gained will
enable composite structures with substantially improved toughness and damage
tolerance for aircraft structures, automotives, and marine applications, while
simultaneously providing weight, cost, and energy savings. New usages of
auxetics facilitated by this research may extend to improved artificial bone
implants, prosthetics, and dent-resistant laminated flooring. Furthermore, this
award will facilitate recruitment and education of middle and high school
students and foster their excitement about STEM fields. At the same time,
undergraduate and graduate students will perform original research and attain
new skills and talents in this critical area. In the conduct of these
activities, the recruitment of women and minorities will be prioritized by
leveraging institutional programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The performance
enhancements of auxetic layered anisotropic composite structures are
fundamentally attributed to the underlying triaxial states of stress and the
unique mechanics that lead to failure. To understand these issues, the
constitutive and failure behaviors of auxetic composites (carbon fiber and
carbon nanotube reinforced polymer matrix laminates) at varying levels of
auxeticity will be examined through targeted experiments using state-of-the-art
characterization and imaging. This will provide insights into the deformation
and failure mechanisms at the microscopic level. Complementary micromechanical
approaches will be used to model the observed stiffness degradation and to
develop cohesive laws that reflect the physically observed behaviors. These
experimentally validated micromechanical models will be integrated into an
impact model developed using an energy-based phase field approach. The physical
insights from this model, along with the ability to predict the response of
auxetic structures under various loadings, will enable implementation of a
science-based method of using auxeticity as a configuration constraint for
achieving controllable performance enhancements of layered composite structures
in various applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.