* 2202070
* Incorporating a course-based research experience in high school and community college courses in Southeast Nebraska
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Tracy Niday, Southeast Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2025
* USD 617,232.00

Centered around an accessible and generally well-loved companion animal, dogs,
this project will increase scientific literacy and engagement with science and
technology by high school and college students and their teachers. A summer
workshop for biology and agriculture teachers will focus on the content and
training in laboratory techniques to implement the canine course-based research
experience. Canine (K-9) kits containing all the supplies and equipment needed
for the activity will be available for teachers to check out and use in their
classrooms. To directly connect biotechnology to the student’s lives, students
will collect DNA samples from their own pets as they engaged in the course-based
research project aimed to examine the role a dog’s genes play in its social
behavior. This project provides a model for supporting high school teachers,
including those in resource-limited areas, as they incorporate new engaging
curricula. It also serves as a model for partnering with industry and other
organizations to increase awareness, knowledge, and skills related to
biotechnology careers important to developing a competitive STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will extend the capacity building
and infrastructure established over the past five years that has led to
Southeast Community College (SCC) offering three stackable credentials in
biotechnology. Within the context of biotechnology, authentic research
experiences developed in collaboration with industry have the potential to
attract high school student interest in this high-growth field. This project
will leverage existing partnerships with Nebraska’s regional bioscience industry
and educational associations to expand implementation of such a research
experience, offering insight into the rules of life in dogs. Ultimately, it is
expected that outreach activities targeted to high school and SCC students will
foster an interest in biotechnician careers in the region and greater Nebraska.
Graduates from SCC’s biotechnology program will be prepared to work in a
regulated environment and fill the need for middle-skilled technicians, critical
to the Nebraska and global economy. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.