* 2202337
* Geometry of Curves and Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Mohammad Ghomi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2025
* USD 315,000.00

Curves and surfaces are to geometry what numbers are to algebra. They form the
basic ingredients of our visual perception and inspire the development of far-
reaching mathematical tools. Yet there are still many fundamental open questions
in this area that are strikingly intuitive and elementary to state. Studying
these questions may stimulate useful developments in pure mathematics and lead
to wider applications in science and technology. For instance, the isoperimetric
inequality has numerous applications due to its connections with a host of other
important inequalities, including the Sobolev inequality in mathematical
analysis and the Faber-Krahn inequality in spectral analysis. Furthermore, the
rigidity of surfaces may have applications for stability of complicated domes in
modern architecture, while the medial axis, or cut locus of distance functions,
is an important tool in shape recognition, which is of interest in computer
graphics and mathematical biology. These questions are ideal for introducing the
public to the exciting world of modern mathematics and arousing the interest of
beginning students in geometry. This project will engage in a range of
activities, including accessible public lectures and articles, to promote these
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is concerned with curves and surfaces,
and more broadly Riemannian submanifolds, spanning a wide range of topics and
tools including isoperimetric problems, isometric embeddings, geometric knot
theory, polyhedral approximations, h-principle theory, and curvature flows. Some
recurring themes throughout these investigations, which the PI conducts in joint
work with his students and collaborators, are various notions of convexity or
optimization and the interaction between geometric and topological concepts, or
local versus global properties of submanifolds. More specifically, a typical
question is how restrictions on curvature, intrinsic metric, or various boundary
conditions influence the global shape of a curve or a hypersurface or allow an
isometric embedding of that object in a space of low codimension. For instance,
the PI recently established Zalgaller’s conjecture on the length and shape of
the shortest closed curve that contains the unit sphere in its convex hull.
Other projects include rigidity of isometric embeddings, unfoldability of convex
polyhedra or Durer’s conjecture, optimization problems for space curves, and the
study of the cut locus of distance functions, or medial axis, of contractible
regions in Riemannian manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.