* 2202142
* Design Enhancement Through Advanced Integrative Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Hans Mikelson, Chippewa Valley Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 554,550.00

Design for Manufacturing and Assembly (DFMA) is a critical part of the product
development cycle in any manufacturing field. The idea behind DFMA is to design
parts in a way that allows them to be easily manufactured. If an individual is
designing parts with no understanding of what will be required to produce those
parts, product flaws and costly redesigns can arise. Focusing on design
optimization reduces the cost of manufacturing and is therefore critical to any
manufacturing company. Regional stakeholders indicated the need for employees
with experience in DFMA. To help regional stakeholdersâ€™ need for employees with
knowledge of DFMA, Chippewa Valley Technical College (CVTC) will work with
industry partners to develop Project Based Learning (PBL) activities that will
provide secondary and post-secondary students opportunities to solve real-life
DFMA problems. The project will leverage the CVTC Prototype Lab, developed
through a previous NSF Advanced Technological Education award, to provide
students and community members a space to take their designs from concept to
reality. Increasing opportunities to experience the complex field of
manufacturing through hands-on, contextualized problems will lead to increased
enrollment in related post-secondary programs and subsequent entry into high-
demand, high-skilled manufacturing careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
this project are to: (1) prepare technicians for manufacturing and engineering
through applied education of DFMA processes and concepts, and (2) increase the
capacity of rural secondary teachers to provide instruction in DFMA. Through
completion of PBL activities and design workshops, students will demonstrate
mastery of core competencies related to DFMA. PBL activities will be developed
with direct assistance from industry partners and incorporated into various
courses throughout the Mechanical Design Technology and Manufacturing
Engineering Technologist programs. PBL activities will focus on a variety of
topics, including simple machines, tool design, mechanisms, robotic tools, and
surface design. During capstone experiences, post-secondary students will engage
directly with industry partners as they respond to real-world business problems
related to DFMA. Introduction at the secondary level will involve incorporation
of PBL activities into several courses and a regional design competition.
Specific professional development and mentoring geared toward high school
faculty will benefit future students for years to come. The project will include
evaluation by an external expert. Results of this evaluation could inform other
institutions about effective approaches to recruiting and educating technicians
for DFMA jobs. In addition, via an interactive website, project partners and
community members will be kept apprised of project progress and success. This
website will also provide a place for other institutions to access the PBL
activities developed. The CVTC Prototype Lab will continue to provide a space to
inspire makers and entrepreneurs from the community to turn their ideas into new
products, creating a culture of innovation and invention in the Chippewa Valley.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.