* 2202152
* Atlanta Technical College Bioscience Emerging Technicians Project
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Amanda Daniels, Atlanta Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 346,002.00

The overall vision of the Bioscience Emerging Technician project at Atlanta
Technical College is to increase the knowledge of emerging bioscience career
opportunities among groups historically underserved in STEM in the metropolitan
Atlanta area. This three-year project plans to engage dual-enrollment students
in unique summer workshops, support an industry speaker’s series, provide tours
of biotechnology companies, and develop a first-year experience seminar course.
These experiences will be designed to teach students the skills they will need
for employment in the field. Students who complete the three-semester program
can earn a Bioscience Technology Technical Certificate of Credit (TCC). The
Bioscience Emerging Technicians Project will facilitate the direct connection
between students and individuals employed in biotechnology companies in the
greater Atlanta area. Overall this project will support the state's growing
bioscience industry with an expanded pool of highly skilled individuals for
technician-level workforce needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bioscience Emerging
Technicians project aims to increase the number of dual enrollment students in
the field of bioscience by connecting them early with industry representatives
and on-site experiences. The project goals are to 1) recruit and enroll dual-
enrollment students in the bioscience technology program, 2) increase awareness
of bioscience career opportunities through specialized activities, and 3)
increase the graduation rate of Bioscience Emerging Technician Program students
in comparison to the college's graduation rate. Activities to reach these goals
include open-houses for families to learn about the program, the creation of a
summer bioscience workshop, the revision of laboratory exercises and the
establishment of a first-year seminar focused on biotechnology career
exploration. The project will also increase engagement with bioscience industry
via a speaker’s series and on-site tours of facilities and the creation of a
Bioscience business and industry leadership team (BILT). This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.