* 2202087
* NSF-ANR: DynamoLINC: Dynamics, Nanoscale Organization and Modeling of LINC Under Mechanical Stress
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Fabien Pinaud, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 12/31/2024
* USD 687,449.00

In response to mechanical cues and forces, cells deform their nucleus to perform
critical functions such as migration, gene expression or cell fate decision, but
the fundamental biophysical mechanisms underlying force sensing and adaptive
nuclear shape deformation remain elusive. This project integrates state-of-the-
art microscopies, molecular force measurements and theoretical biophysics to
quantitatively measure and model the nanoscale processes allowing the cell
nucleus to respond and adapt to mechanical forces. The research is expected to
yield novel insights into nuclear mechanics and original optical tools to
measure cellular forces for a broad range of research applications. Training of
diverse early career scientists is central to the proposed project, providing
Ph.D. students, undergraduate and STEM high-school students with a unique
interdisciplinary training experience at the intersection of physics and biology
and with expertise in studying the patterns in living
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will establish the nanoscale
structural and molecular organizations of the Linker of Nucleoskeleton and
Cytoskeleton (LINC) complexes, which serve as crucial mechanotransducing hubs
within the nuclear envelope in cells. It will also involve the development of
novel optical force sensors to quantitatively define the architectural
adaptability of LINC complexes in response to specific forces at the nuclear
membrane. It will additionally provide physical models of LINC complex functions
as force-sensing centers, via a close interplay of theory and experiments. The
research will be implemented through a highly multidisciplinary approach that
integrates super-resolution and lifetime microscopy imaging, nanomanipulation,
engineering of biomaterials to mechanically challenge cells and their nucleus,
the development of novel sensor for mechanobiology and theoretical modeling. It
will generate fundamental insights into the mechanisms underlying normal and
defective nuclear functions and will yield quantitative descriptions of the LINC
complex as a force sensing and force transducing apparatus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/France project is supported by the
US National Science Foundation and the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche,
where NSF funds the US investigator and ANR funds the partners in
France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.