* 2202361
* RCN: Wastewater Surveillance for SARS-CoV-2 and Emerging Public Health Threats
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Alexandria Boehm, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic remains an urgent national and global threat to
public health. Wastewater surveillance (WWS) has emerged as a versatile and
complementary platform to existing clinical tools for monitoring and tracking
the spread and transmission of COVID-19 in communities. The basic premise of WSS
is that the detection and quantification of microbial and viral biomarkers
extracted from samples of untreated wastewater can be used to monitor the onset,
spread and community transmission of infectious pathogens such as the SARS-CoV-2
virus and its variants. The overarching goal of this Research Coordination
Network (RCN) is to support the large community of practitioners and
stakeholders that employ WWS as a public health monitoring tool. To advance this
goal, the core investigators of this RCN and their national/international
partners will integrate their expertise and leverage their resources to address
critical knowledge gaps and needs in WSS including improved analytical and
sampling methods and more effective collaboration, communication and information
sharing protocols/tools among researchers, practitioners, and public health
stakeholders. The successful completion of this project will benefit society
through the development and dissemination of new tools and protocols to support
the large community of practitioners that employ WWS to monitor SARS-CoV-2 and
other pathogens, including those capable of causing future pandemics. Additional
benefits to society will be achieved through workforce development including the
mentoring of two post-doctoral research fellows at the University of Notre Dame
and Howard University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Early success in the use of
wastewater surveillance (WSS) during the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States
has led to the establishment of a National Wastewater Surveillance System.
Although the use of WWS has provided critical data and valuable insight into the
spread and transmission of SARS-CoV-2, much work remains to be done to enable
quantitative estimates, predictions, and actionable public health
recommendations from the analysis of the data collected during a community
wastewater surveillance program. This NSF Research Coordination Network (RCN)
will address these critical knowledge gaps. The RCN builds upon the
accomplishments of a previous NSF EAGER award that established a network of WWS
researchers and practitioners from academia, government agencies, non-
governmental organizations, and industry. The new RCN will advance its research,
education, and workforce development goals through the implementation of five
synergistic activities including 1) Monthly seminar series, 2) Quarterly topical
workshops, 3) Development of a community-led ‘Wiki’ on the state of the science
of WWS, 4) Annual wastewater surveillance training bootcamp, and 5) Annual
virtual RCN conference with researchers, practitioners, and public health
decision-makers. Through this award, the RCN investigators and their partners
will facilitate and promote collaboration and communication among researchers,
practitioners, and public health policy and decision-makers to advance next
generation WWS for pandemic preparedness and
prevention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.