* 2202406
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Reconstructing Southern Rocky Mountains Warm Season Temperature for the Past 2000 Years
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Connie Woodhouse, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2025
* USD 271,417.00

The general goal of the research is to use bristlecone pine from the Rio Grande
Headwaters region to develop a temperature reconstruction spanning 2,000 years,
augmented with updated and new hydroclimate reconstructions, to evaluate long-
term, regional temperature and hydroclimate
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anomalously warm summer temperatures reduce
runoff by increasing the rates of evapotranspiration and by decreasing soil
moisture, which has a persistent effect into winter and the following summer.
However, there is disagreement to the extent to which recent warming has
influenced upper Rio Grande flows. This project will address changes in runoff
efficiency (the proportion of precipitation that becomes runoff) over time using
instrumental datasets, an updated Rio Grande streamflow reconstruction, and a
local precipitation reconstruction to assess the role of temperature in
modulating runoff efficiency during droughts and
pluvials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rio Grande supplies surface water to over 2
million acres of agriculture and over 6 million people. Predominantly supporting
agriculture and rural economies, the Rio Grande also serves urban centers
including Albuquerque, El Paso, and Ciudad Ju√°rez. Ongoing drought has led to
severe water shortages, yet the Rio Grande has been understudied compared to the
upper Colorado River basin, possibly due to the proportion of poorly-represented
communities the river serves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project moves toward
placing paleoclimate information into practice by engaging with upper Rio Grande
water stakeholders in order to understand their water supply and management
concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include greater
understanding of water resources in the southwestern United States, support for
a post-doctoral researcher, and substantive interaction with water resource
managers and stakeholders in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.