* 2202457
* Digitally Inoculating Viewers Against Visual Misinformation With a Perceptual Training
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Martina Rau, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2025
* USD 849,761.00

Misinformation impedes people’s ability to make informed decisions in many
areas, for example politics, health care, purchasing, or investing.
Misinformation can be created by accident or intentionally. Misleading graphs
are a particularly dangerous form of misinformation because they can make false
information more believable and reach viewers faster. To combat misinformation
in graphs, one needs to consider two aspects of graph comprehension: conceptual
reasoning and perception. Prior research has focused on conceptual reasoning
about graphs. Yet, because perception is automatic it is especially prone to
false information in misleading graphs. This project focuses on perception. The
investigators will develop a perceptual training method that helps viewers to
extract correct information from misleading graphs. The perceptual training
method will be provided as a web browser plugin. It will provide feedback as
viewers see misleading graphs on the web. The investigators will use machine
learning algorithms to design the perceptual training method. The project will
advance scientific understanding of perception in graph comprehension. It will
also develop machine learning algorithms for educational purposes. The project
will provide new tools for addressing issues of misinformation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Misinformation poses a severe risk to society. Misleading
graphs are a type of visual misinformation that can quickly convey false
information to viewers. While existing interventions for visual misinformation
target conceptual processes, perceptual processes also play an important role.
Perceptual processes are automatic and prone to biases. Visual misinformation
often targets perceptual over conceptual processing. Therefore, this project
directly targets perceptual processes. Investigators will develop a perceptual
training method that will teach viewers to extract correct information from
misleading graphs so that they become “immune” against visual misinformation.
The perceptual training method will be delivered as a web browser plugin and
will have two components. First, upon installing the browser plugin, viewers
will receive a 2-minute massed training that will serve as the initial “vaccine”
against misleading graphs. Second, the browser plugin will deliver a spaced
training by giving feedback when viewers encounter misleading graphs on the web,
which serves as a “booster” for their immunity. The investigators will use
machine learning algorithms to decide which type of feedback the perceptual
training should offer and how often such feedback should be provided. Two
randomized experiments will evaluate components of the perceptual training
method while participants browse the web. This project will advance scientific
understanding of perceptual learning, educational applications of machine
learning algorithms, and will develop novel approaches to combat
misinformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.