* 2202155
* Geospatial Remote Sensing Hawaii
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Orlo Steele, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2025
* USD 643,865.00

Remote sensing of geographic features has become increasingly important with the
availability of affordable Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAS), along with improved
imagery and computing capabilities. These technologies have been used to enhance
the assessment of natural disasters, ecosystem changes, sources of pollution,
and general infrastructure challenges. In Hawaii, UAS is currently being used by
several federal and state agencies to collect remote data for a wide variety of
applications such as monitoring cyclone damage, volcanic eruptions, forest
ecosystem health, sources of pollution and the integrity of the infrastructure.
This local workforce need presents a significant opportunity to better prepare
students to secure high paying jobs on the island of Hawaii. To accomplish this,
a new technical education certificate program will be developed that focuses on
skill development in geospatial agriculture technologies. Completion of the
certificate will provide students with a foundation in aerodynamics, the skills
to practice safe and responsible operations of unmanned aerial vehicles and the
experience to be competitive for industry positions in the region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to create a new
certificate program that focuses on preparing students to enter the workforce
with skills in the collection and management of remote sensing data used in
geospatial analysis. Three primary activities will be carried out to achieve
this goal: 1) develop four new courses in geospatial agriculture technologies,
2) expand established partnerships with local high schools to create a dual
enrollment program for pre-college students, and 3) share project results and
resources both locally and with the geospatial community at the national level.
Each course will be designed to provide opportunities for skill development
through lab activities, field work and experiential learning projects.
Additionally, relevant geospatial equipment used by many companies and
government agencies in the region will be embedded throughout the program.
Project results will include an increased number of skilled technicians for
local partners in the geospatial industry and new course curriculum shared with
the technical education community at the national level. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.