* 2202812
* Stratosphere-troposphere Exchange of Ozone and its Changes in the Future
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Qiang Fu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2025
* USD 622,435.00

Ozone causes breathing problems and damages vegetation, thus there is
considerable interest in understanding the sources of ozone in the troposphere
and how they change over time. Because ozone concentration is higher in the
stratosphere than the troposophere the mixing of air between the two, referred
to as stratosphere-troposphere exchange (STE), is an important source of
tropospheric ozone. But the stratospheric contribution is hard to quantify and
direct estimates of ozone STE from reanalysis products differ from estimates
based on tropospheric ozone budget residuals. A further concern is that
estimates of the 40-year STE trend from two prominent reanalysis products (ERA5
and MERRA2) show substantial differences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently the
Principal Investigator (PI) found a potentially important shortcoming of ozone
STE calculations, which is that they only consider STE in the middle and high
latitudes, where the direction of ozone transport is downward into the
troposphere and where the bulk of the ozone STE occurs. Contrary to expectations
he found that the tropical ozone STE, which is upward and thus a loss for the
troposphere, cannot be neglected as it reduces the global ozone STE by about
35%. This finding, along with the availability of relevant high-quality
satellite observations, warrants a reexamination of ozone STE addressing three
questions: 1) what is the ozone STE and associated uncertainty based on
observational data? 2) what are the main factors responsible for the large
discrepancies in ozone STE from different reanalysis products? 3) How will ozone
STE change in a changing climate?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STE calculations use
a methodology in which the tropical tropopause is assumed to lie on an
isentropic surface (the 380K isentrope in present-day climate) while the
extratropical tropopause lies on a potential vorticity surface (3.5PVU) below
the 380K isentrope. The project uses data from satellite missions including
CloudSat, CALYPSO, MODIS, and COSMIC, in combination with radiative transfer
codes, to calculate the heating rates and atmospheric density needed to create
observational STE estimates. The work on future STE change examines climate
simulations from the Chemistry-Climate Model Initiative. One concern is that the
stratospheric overturning circulation (the Brewer-Dobson circulation) is
expected to strengthen due to greenhouse gas increases, which could lead to an
increase in downward ozone STE in the middle and high latitudes. Another is that
the tropical tropopause is expected to rise, which could reduce the loss of
ozone to the stratosphere through tropical STE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is
of societal interest given the harmful effects of ground-level ozone and the
practical value of better estimates of its sources and likely future evolution.
In addition, the PI conducts public outreach including multiple events focusing
on K-12 engagement in science. The PI has also been active in developing data
visualization software and techniques, some of which were featured in the
American Geophysical Union Data Visualization Competition. In addition, the
project provides support and training to two graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.