* 2202043
* Navigating Students to In-Demand Tech Careers in Secure Mobile Programming in the NYC Region
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Ching-Song Wei, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 615,608.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by establishing a pipeline
program for students from historically underrepresented groups to gain technical
skills in the high demand field of advanced mobile programming, with an emphasis
on cybersecurity and secure programming. As the cybersecurity risks to mobile
applications proliferate, there is a persistent shortage of secure mobile
application development talents in both the regional and national workforce. In
addition, the information technology field has not reflected the diverse
population of New York City (NYC) or the Nation. Borough of Manhattan Community
College (BMCC) is a minority serving institution in NYC. As a minority serving
institution, BMCC has an important role to play in increasing access to
technical careers for students from groups underrepresented in STEM and
specifically cybersecurity careers. BMCC will partner with Manhattan Bridges
High School as well as several NYC local IT companies to foster diversity,
inclusion, and excellence for the local next generation advanced technology
workforce. The proposed core pedagogical innovation has the potential to become
a model for associate degree granting institutions
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team intends to : (1) improve
faculty development and students' learning in the rapidly growing field of
secure mobile programming at a high school and a community college in NYC; (2)
support students in gaining both technical programming skills and core
competencies around critical thinking, collaboration, and design; (3) build,
expand and sustain industry partnerships that will provide students with
professional internship opportunities in the secure mobile computing industry in
NYC, thus paving the way for students to secure high quality jobs. The project
has the potential to fill a critical local workforce gap. An external evaluator
will lead the project evaluation including both formative and summative
assessments. Both quantitative and qualitative tools will be used to evaluate
the objectives of the project. The project team plans to share findings and
project results at technical colloquia and seminars, Advanced Technology
Education conferences and other networking platforms. This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.