* 2202477
* Collision-Resilient Insect-scale Soft Aerial Robots for Collective Flights in Cluttered Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Yufeng Chen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 06/30/2025
* USD 400,000.00

This grant will support research on millimeter-scale to centimeter-scale soft
aerial robots capable of collective flight in cluttered environments. Unlike
flying insects that can navigate in natural environments and perform complex
tasks such as pollination, most existing flapping-wing micro aerial robots are
fragile to collisions and are limited to flying in open spaces. This award
supports the fundamental study of the collision dynamics of insect-scale robots,
the design of fast collision-sensing methods and collision-recovery flight
controllers, and the creation of new aerial microrobot capabilities, including
swarm flight and the ability to perch on compliant or moving objects such as
flowers. This research will provide economic and societal benefits by enabling
potential new applications such as assisted pollination in vertical farming and
inspection of highly cluttered and inaccessible spaces. In addition, the muscle-
like soft actuators developed in this work may find applications in other types
of mobile robots, in wearable haptic devices, and in microfluidic systems. This
project has broader impacts in the education and training of graduate and
undergraduate students. The bio-inspired robots will be used for STEM education
outreach, including to underrepresented minority communities. This project will
also support the development of educational multimedia materials and summer
internships for high-school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to achieve collision resilience comparable to flying insects, and to
further enable new capabilities for sub-gram flapping-wing micro-aerial-
vehicles. These include swarm flight, exploration of cluttered natural
environments, and pollination. This work combines analytical and experimental
approaches and focuses on the following three directions: 1) formulate dynamic
models and design experiments to measure collision impacts on sub-gram aerial
robots; (2) substantially reduce collision detection time and design a
feedforward reflexive recovery controller; and (3) demonstrate robust robot
interactions with compliant and moving obstacles. The outcome of this study will
result in novel flight demonstrations unseen in previous aerial robots. The new
robot will be able to fly near walls, ceilings, and compliant objects such as
flowers and leaves. Multiple robots will fly collectively in a cluttered space
while demonstrating collision tolerance. The project will also validate the
advantages of muscle-like resilient soft actuators for aerial robots.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-directorate
Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and funded by the
Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.