* 2202076
* Automotive Technician Training for Electric Vehicles
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* John Porter, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2025
* USD 602,424.00

The transportation sector is in the midst of a major transition to electric
vehicles as automotive manufacturers have launched large electric vehicle
development programs. Automotive technician training programs will need to
adjust to these changes by providing technical education that focuses on
electric vehicle technologies. Students need to learn how to diagnose a new set
of problems and how to use equipment and tools to maintain these vehicles. This
project will develop a new certificate program in hybrid and electric vehicle
technology leading to an associate degree in automotive technology. Technician
training will focus on the theory, operation, diagnosis, service, and repair of
systems related to the propulsion of electric vehicles. Professional development
workshops will be provided for postsecondary educators so that they can upgrade
their automotive technology programs. During the workshop, participants will
learn about battery technology, electric motors, and safety procedures through
classroom instruction and hands-on learning experiences with electric vehicles
and service equipment. High school students will have the opportunity to learn
about careers in automotive technology through summer camps in which students
will learn the hands-on basics of vehicle maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goal of this project is to help develop the technician workforce that
can support the new infrastructure for electric vehicles. This project aims to
increase the capacity of faculty to prepare automotive technicians to repair and
service electric vehicles, the number of automotive technician graduates with
the knowledge and skills needed to diagnose and repair electric vehicles, and
the number of high school students enrolling in automotive technology degree and
certificate programs. Faculty in automotive technology programs at two-year
institutions will be recruited to participate in a summer workshop on electric
vehicle technologies. Workshop participants will have hands-on learning
opportunities focused on diagnostics, testing, and repair procedures. The
project will develop a new certificate program that will provide students with
advanced training in high-voltage safety systems, removing/replacing batteries,
servicing electric drive motors, diagnosing electric power convertors, and other
skills needed to service battery electric vehicles. Technician training will
focus on the theory, operation, diagnosis, service, and repair of vehicle
systems. The project will recruit high school students from traditionally
underrepresented groups for automotive summer camps designed to increase
students’ interest in taking automotive technician courses. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.