* 2202525
* A Convergence Study to Determine to the Role of Pressure Solution Creep Mechanisms in Driving Cold Sintering in Functional Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Clive Randall, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 08/31/2026
* USD 341,884.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cold sintering is a recently
introduced processing technique that has been demonstrated to be applicable to
sintering a broad number of ceramic and ceramic composites. The temperatures
that drive densification are an order of magnitude lower than the conventional
thermal processes that are used in ceramic manufacturing across the world. The
mechanisms enabling these extremely low temperatures use a mechano-chemical
process with the use of a transient chemical phase. This investigation considers
the theories and geophysical science that drive the formation of sedimentary
rock and looks to test its relevance to the cold sintering process that are now
being applied to the fabrication of advanced ceramic materials. Through
understanding these processes, a broader impact is considered for cold sintering
of architectural bricks and tiles. Through a partnership with the United Nations
Global Buildings Network and the African MRS, demonstration and education of the
cold sintering processes for local brick making in rural areas in Africa will be
made. Undergraduate researchers will be involved in this engineering aspect of
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sedimentary rock densifies over many years with a
process known as pressure solution creep. This process involves pressure induced
dissolution, transport, and precipitation. Cold sintering is a relatively new
introduction to a sustainable manufacturing process. This study will embrace the
non-equilibrium geophysics of rock formation and correlate the densification and
grain growth process of conventional sintering. Conventional sintering is a
process that thermodynamically drives the minimization of excess surface energy
at temperatures an order of magnitude higher than the cold sintering process.
The proposed study here will experimentally and theoretically test the
understanding of the geophysics of the pressure solution creep and consider its
applicability to understanding the densification kinetics to cold sintering.
There are various sequential processes that enable the low temperature
densification including chemo-mechanical dissolution, grain boundary dissolution
and precipitation and of which can be the rate limiting step. The proposed study
will access these phenomena in model systems to better understand the cold
sintering process from a new fundamental perspective and converging material
science and geoscience. From a broader impact perspective an investigation will
use the cold sintering process to the application of brick formation in rural
areas of Africa. This will involve a partnership with both the Global Building
Network and the African Materials Research Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.