* 2202389
* CDS&amp;E: Enabling Quantum Technology Design Optimization Using Large-Scale Quantum Information Preserving Computational Electromagnetics Methods
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Weng Chew, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 415,000.00

This project explores the development of first-of-their-kind rigorous numerical
modeling techniques that can leverage large-scale scientific computing resources
to improve the design process of quantum electromagnetic devices used in quantum
sensing and quantum computing systems. Numerical modeling has revolutionized the
design and performance of classical electromagnetic devices, like antennas and
high-speed analog and digital circuits, which have contributed to revolutionary
advancements in wireless communication, remote sensing, and computing systems
that impact many aspects of daily life. Similarly, it is expected that advanced
numerical modeling will play a key role in designing quantum sensors and quantum
computers that achieve their much-anticipated potential in a broad range of
areas. This includes improving individual’s well-being through faster
pharmaceutical discovery and increasing national security through better
logistics and encryption breaking. The developed numerical modeling techniques
will support these goals by being able to explicitly account for realistic
material properties and complicated physical structures of devices being
designed, which has not been possible with existing state-of-the-art methods. By
addressing this modeling gap, designers will be able to perform virtual
prototyping and engineering optimization of practical quantum devices prior to
fabrication, reducing the time and cost it will take to overcome current
technical limitations. This project will also engage undergraduate and graduate
students in a vertically integrated project structure that has been shown to
contribute to the development of a diverse STEM workforce better than
traditional research structures. This will help fill the human resource gap in
the area of quantum technologies, which has been identified as an urgent
national need by many government and industry groups in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new class of numerical modeling techniques developed
in this research build on quantum information preserving computational
electromagnetics methods. These methods describe an electromagnetic system of
interest in the Hamiltonian framework to derive a continuum generalized
Hermitian eigenvalue problem. Computational electromagnetics methods project the
continuum one into a finite-dimensional linear system to find numerical
eigenmodes. The resulting numerical eigenmodes are then used in the subsequent
canonical quantization procedure and the quantum state equation to evaluate
properties of non-classical photon states. These methods are theoretically and
numerically well-grounded for analyzing systems with arbitrary physical layouts
with the use of more sophisticated computational electromagnetics tools. This
project extends these numerical methods to include interactions between
quantized electromagnetic fields and various kinds of qubits (e.g., atoms or
superconducting circuits), and the effects of dissipative materials on quantum
coherence. These physical processes are fundamental to the operation of many
experimentally popular quantum sensing and quantum computing systems. However,
existing state-of-the-art modeling methods are predominantly analytical and rely
on numerous approximations that involve omitting many practical features of a
design to maintain a tractable theoretical model. As a result, there has been a
significant knowledge gap in the design of practical quantum electromagnetic
devices due in part to an inability to accurately analyze practical systems. By
developing rigorous numerical modeling techniques applicable to real-world
devices, this research will gain new physical insight into the performance of
realistic quantum electromagnetic technologies. The outcomes of this project
will help spur new developments in this important field, while also providing a
set of tools for the optimization of quantum system
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.