* 2202664
* I-Corps:  Plant-made antimicrobials used as a produce wash for vegetables and fruits
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Bibiana Law, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a commercial-scale natural wash solution for produce. The goal is
to meet the needs of consumers for greener, environmentally sustainable products
for safe, natural processing of agriculture products, food, and beverages.
Consumers are requesting that sanitizers in food processing meet two key
metrics: 1) they need to lead to a safer food supply, and 2) they need to be
more environmentally friendly, and ideally derived from natural (non-chemical)
sources. The proposed technology is designed to fill this gap as the
formulations have durable activity for higher efficacy, conserve water, and
enhance safety and shelf-life by greater reduction of foodborne pathogens and
spoilage bacteria during transportation and storage. Target customers, such as
large crop producers and processing / packaging / distribution companies,
already deploy sanitizers, yet are often not satisfied with the current
solutions. This project seeks to discover how best to partner and meet
customersâ€™ need, with benefits of significant water savings, extended shelf-
life, environmental sustainability, and possibly fewer recalls for produce as
well as reduced illnesses and deaths from foodborne pathogens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
natural antimicrobial wash technology that has been tested to kill foodborne
pathogens such as Salmonella and E. coli O157:H7 on produce such as vegetables
and fruits. In addition, the technology is designed to conserve wash water due
to the recyclability of the wash water, and increase shelf-life of the produce,
which may be considered eco-friendly. This technology combines plant extracts
with emulsifiers to create synergistic effects that are active at very low
concentrations to achieve these benefits. Processing houses are highly complex
and adapted to each type of crop in the various steps such as coring, cutting,
cleaning/sanitizing, and bagging of the produce. Customer discovery interviews
and visits will allow development of a business model around the proposed
technology to evaluate product-market fit. Overall, the proposed project will
significantly advance the understanding of the pain points surrounding produce
washing and how this natural plant-made antimicrobial wash technology may be
implemented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.