* 2202231
* Preparing students for cybersecurity professions using real-world experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Hugh Nguyen, Rancho Santiago Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 03/31/2025
* USD 350,000.00

Cybersecurity is critical to the protection of computer systems and networks.
Many businesses and organizations need to hire cybersecurity professionals to
protect their cyberinfrastructure from persistent and increasingly sophisticated
cyberattacks. Although the global cybersecurity skills shortage has fallen, the
size of the workforce is still 65% below what it needs to be. This project will
study how to create seamless continuity from the classroom to the cybersecurity
workforce by integrating cybersecurity competitions and job-readiness modules
into existing coursework and providing opportunities for students to apply
cybersecurity skills learned in their courses in real-world settings. The
project leverages a partnership with the Information Technology Disaster
Resource Center (ITDRC), a national non-profit entity with a presence in Orange
County, to provide students with the opportunity to join the ITDRC and be
involved with specific disaster pre-planning activities and potential disaster
recovery efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create an incident
response cybersecurity program aligned with critical business and federal
requirements by integrating FEMA courses related to disaster response and
incident command structure into existing coursework. Mapping the curriculum to
federal standards will help position Santa Ana College to become a Center of
Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense (CAE-CD). Students will take part in in
rigorous job-readiness and work-based learning that will result in employment
through partnerships with committed industry and community partners. Project
evaluation will consist of an analysis of quantitative and qualitative data to
provide a structured review of program implementation to ensure that the project
is progressing as planned and to analyze the level of attainment of project
objectives, targets, and goals. This project has the potential to increase
program enrollment, retention, and completion of an Associate of Science Degree
in IT Cybersecurity Operations, especially among students from populations
underrepresented in the cybersecurity workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.