* 2202630
* Multi-modal Learning for Enhanced Engagement and Presence
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Richard Gerkin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 05/31/2025
* USD 849,998.00

The sense of smell plays a central role in how people navigate many common
workplace situations. Despite this, contemporary educational approaches have
only recently begun to explore using olfaction to improve education, and
research on multimedia learning has almost completely overlooked it. As
researchers, policy makers, and educators continue to expand digital platforms
for teaching and learning, the failure to understand the role played by
situational cues such as smell threatens the effectiveness of implementing STEM
learning in digital environments. This integrative transdisciplinary project
draws together insights from engineering, computational neurosciences,
neurobiology, teaching and learning sciences, and the social sciences to advance
understanding of the role that olfaction plays in learning in virtual learning
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate the role of olfaction into
virtual learning environments, the project team will design software platforms
that integrate control of hardware that delivers a physical olfactory stimulus
into real-time 3D virtual environments. This project will advance learning and
teaching technologies by: (i) developing portable hardware and software systems
to reliably synthesize virtual odors through miniaturized physical apparatuses,
(ii) designing principles of easy-to-use development tools for virtual odor
space design, and (iii) developing cloud-powered systems to model complex odor
propagation. This project aims to advance understanding of the role that
explicit olfactory training plays in improving a learner’s ability to identify,
localize, and describe odors. By exploring how incorporating odor affects
cognitive and procedural learning and its impact on learning transfer for tasks
related to olfactory identification, this research will expand understanding of
multimedia learning theory. Insights from this research will be used to develop
pedagogical teaching approaches for domains where olfaction is important and
aligns with vocational skills. By infusing olfaction into virtual reality
education spaces, this project aims to create broadly accessible education
opportunities around overlooked sensory cues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.