* 2202379
* ICE-TI:  Addressing the Socio-Economic needs of the Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate with a bachelor's of science in Behavioral Sciences
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Vincent Owen, Sisseton Wahpeton Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 04/30/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities for their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover may serve as a model and impetus for similar
institutions of higher education to develop degree programs in the behavioral
sciences. The connection of faculty to the development of novel opportunities
for programs of study that ensure successful transfer to local employment,
particularly tribal employment, or to post-baccalaureate studies at nearby
universities will demonstrate the essentiality of engaging full-time,
credentialed STEM faculty devoted to a specific strand of study and preparation.
Moreover, for those students entering the workforce directly from a tribal
college it is crucially important that they have a well-defined skill set in
mathematics, science, and technology for entry into the STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides an accredited STEM bachelor's of
science (BS) degree option in the behavioral sciences at Sisseton Wahpeton
College (SWC) for students who may then transfer to a local university for
graduate studies or be prepared for employment at local, particularly tribal,
service organizations. The BS project builds on a well established associate
degree (AS) in behavioral sciences, which has been a popular degree choice for
SWC students. The increase in specialized STEM faculty ensures the curricular
offerings have relevance to related programs of study, ensuring the option for
students to minor as well as major in the behavioral sciences, and provides
sufficient breadth in the degree coursework to prepare students for a broad
range of employment positions available on the Lake Traverse Reservation.
Strengthening the mathematics and language arts assists student success in many
programs of study, not only those in STEM. This project also increases the
number of the Nationâ€™s tribal colleges that offer accredited BS
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.