* 2202117
* Improving Technician Training in Battery Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Samuel Fischer, Florida State College at Jacksonville
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 05/31/2025
* USD 378,987.00

Companies and their customers are transitioning to the use of electric vehicles
that are powered by battery technologies. Technician education needs to keep
pace with this trend to help support the infrastructure that will manufacture
and maintain these vehicles. Technicians will need to understand the technology
of battery packs, how to use diagnostic tools to identify failures, and how to
maintain battery packs. The project team will collaborate with industry
professionals to identify the knowledge and skills that technicians will need to
be successful in the electric vehicle technician workforce. New instructional
materials will be developed to integrate the new knowledge and skills in
automotive technology and aviation technology degree programs. The project will
build on best practices from previous ATE projects to recruit and retain
students from underrepresented groups to broaden participation in the technician
workforce. A new lab facility will be developed in which students can learn to
perform hands-on vehicle repairs related to specific course content and how to
use diagnostic technology to identify battery problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to address industry needs for technician education on
battery technologies for electric vehicles. A Business and Industry Leadership
Team will guide the job skills analysis for automotive and aviation technicians.
The results will be used to develop and revise curricula for the automotive and
aviation technology degree programs. The project team will develop a new battery
technology credit course tied to a relevant industry credential from the
national automotive credentialing organization (Automotive Service Excellence L3
â€“ Light Duty Hybrid /Electric Vehicle Specialist). Battery technology module
content will be developed for an existing Basic Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS)
Drone Training course that prepares students for FAA certification and Aviation
Science credit courses. A new course will be developed that focuses on Aviation
and UAS battery technology. The project team will create a new lab facility to
provide students with hands-on learning using electric/hybrid vehicle diagnostic
trainers, lithium battery packs and chargers, hydrogen car kits, electric
drones, and buildable electric vehicle kits. Hands-on mobile mini-labs focused
on electric vehicle and UAS technologies will be developed to provide secondary
school curricula for students and professional development for teachers. Using
institutional data, the project will assess the effectiveness of recruitment and
retention efforts in broadening participation in the technician degree programs.
Evaluation findings, program models, curricula and data will be shared through
open access online repositories, discipline-specific publications and
conferences, and technician education peer networks. This project is funded by
the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.