* 2202134
* Collaborative Research: Revolutionizing Electric Vehicle Education
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Kapil Chalil Madathil, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,017,893.00

The United States is facing an unprecedented need for a new generation of
technological talent to respond to international competition for an automotive
workforce with diverse, up-to-date skill sets driven by electric vehicles (EV),
autonomous vehicles (AV), and the cybersecurity associated with software-driven
vehicles. The internal combustion engine is being phased out and replaced by
electricity, setting the stage for an increased demand for autonomous and EV
technologies. This changing technological climate and the resultant concurrent
global competition necessitate transformation at every level of automotive
development – from EV designers to EV technicians. The demand for skilled EV
manufacturing and service industry technicians is substantial and is predicted
to increase at a rate where demand outpaces quantity. Workers aging out of the
workforce, the lack of advanced STEM skills for those currently in the
workforce, and increased economic expansion are contributing factors to this
deficit. Collaboration among educators and employers must occur to advance the
understanding of workforce challenges and opportunities. To meet the need, a
faculty-driven consortium of two-year Institutions of Higher Education (IHEs),
other ATE projects and centers, and industry will collaborate to address the
next generation cross-disciplinary workforce needs of the Electric Vehicle (EV)
manufacturing and service industry through an innovative hybrid virtual and
augmented reality (VR/AR) education approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
consortium project partners include: Volvo, Daimler, BMW, Proterra, Bosch, Duke
Energy, Michelin, the Upstate SC Alliance, the South Carolina Manufacturing
Extension Partnership, the South Carolina Technical College System, the National
Center for Autonomous Technologies, the National Cybersecurity Training and
Education Center, the Regional Center for Nuclear Education, and the Northwest
Engineering and Vehicle Technology Exchange. The project goals will address
current and future EV manufacturing and service industry needs for both two-year
college students and incumbent workers. Goal 1: Identify current and future
education and workforce needs required by the migration of the transportation
industry from traditional fuels to battery-powered electric vehicles. Goal 2:
Create, deploy, and assess an innovative, creative, and informed cross-
disciplinary EV manufacturing and service industry technician education hybrid
curricula incorporating classroom, virtual, and experiential learning.
Strategies will be implemented to support participation and persistence in EV
manufacturing and service technician education for students including those who
are rural, veterans, and those historically underserved in STEM career pathways.
Goal 3: Develop and/or strengthen partnerships with consortium members, ATE
projects and centers, and industry to leverage and share expertise and best
practices for maximum impact and sustainability within and across fields and
institutions. Goal 4: Provide professional development addressing the new EV
curricula to ensure widespread use, dissemination, and faculty leadership
development. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.