* 2202280
* Collaborative Research: Single Photon Emission in Lanthanide-Doped 2D Materials &amp; Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Yu-Chuan Lin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2025
* USD 303,000.00

Technologies are being developed at a much greater pace than ever using the
quantum properties of materials. These peculiar behaviors, which for many
decades were just an intellectual curiosity, are now set to transform the
technologies we use in our daily lives. At the forefront of this is the
development of light sources that can produce individual photons “on demand”,
known as single-photon emitters (SPE). Rare-earth elements, such as cerium and
erbium, embedded into two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors, such as molybdenum
disulfide (MoS2), could enable a quantum optical platform that matches the
requirements for direct insertion into traditional optical communication
infrastructure. Therefore, the principal investigators will evaluate the impact
of incorporating rare-earth elements into 2D semiconductors and explore how to
tune their properties for controllable light generation. Beyond the scientific
impact, this collaborative project will provide interdisciplinary research
training for female and underrepresented minority graduate students, which
directly impacts the need to broaden participation in STEM programs. Finally,
this program will enable them to participate in a range of outreach activities
that connect their research and training to the educational mission of the
Universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description. Quantum communication
technologies are advancing at a continually increasing pace and are now set to
transform the technologies we use in our daily lives. A key building block for
this advancement is the single-photon emitter (SPE). Solid-state SPEs based on
point defects, especially those with energies that match telecommunication
requirements (i.e., near infrared (NIR): 1320-1550 nm), could dramatically
change how we connect to one another in the future. The utilization of
lanthanide (Ln) (rare-earth) elements as SPEs could enable a quantum optical
platform that matches the requirements for direct insertion into traditional
optical communication infrastructure. The principal investigators will employ a
closely coupled combination of experimental methods to understand light emission
from Ln-doped 2D semiconductor structures. They will evaluate the impact of
2D/substrate interface properties, element choice, and compound transformation
processes on the 2D photonic and electronic properties through a series of
interlocking objectives that include controlled doping of Ln elements in
semiconducting 2D materials and correlating this with atomic-scale structural
defects, semiconductor band structure, optical emission, and charge transport
properties. Ultimately, the project aims to demonstrate electrically driven SPE
devices based on Ln-doped 2D layer p/n homojunctions and benchmark
optoelectronic performance. The success of this work will establish an
understanding of the physical phenomena that enables controlled optical emission
in 2D layers in the NIR, laying the groundwork for engineered 2D photonic
crystals that are compatible with current semiconductor fabrication and optical
communication technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.