* 2202944
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing bottom water temperatures from bivalves on the continental shelf: Holocene history as a window to the future in the Mid-Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Roger Mann, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2025
* USD 93,916.00

Reconstructing bottom water temperatures from bivalves on the continental shelf:
Holocene history as a window to the future in the Mid-
Atlantic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ocean waters of the Middle Atlantic
continental shelf off the east coast of the United States are warming rapidly.
These continental shelf waters have a unique feature, the cold pool, that is
formed when summer warming of surface waters traps cold winter water along the
bottom. The cold pool is extensive but the area it covers is expected to shrink
as shelf waters warm. The cold pool is home to two bottom dwelling clam species,
ocean quahogs and Atlantic surfclams. These animals, especially ocean quahogs,
are long lived. Records of growth and the temperature the clams experienced are
preserved in their shells, similar to tree rings. The shells of live and fossil
clams from the cold pool will be used to estimate bottom water temperature over
the past ~5000 years. The bottom temperatures will be linked to past climate
periods and known climate variability that influence the Middle Atlantic.
Understanding cold pool changes is important for studying past climate change
and projecting future changes for the Middle Atlantic region. The bottom water
temperatures from the clam shells will show how clam distributions might change
in response to climate warming. Changes in distribution are important because of
possible economic impacts on the clam fishery. Training undergraduate and
graduate students will be part of this project and will foster linkages between
oceanography and paleoclimate science. Educational outreach programs for K-8
students and a science-related art initiative through the Synergy project
organized by Art League RI will highlight the novel approach of asking clams to
reveal changes in ocean bottom water temperature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The history of climate change on the Middle
Atlantic continental shelf is recorded by the shells of two long-lived bivalves,
the Atlantic surfclam, Spisula solidissima, and the ocean quahog, Arctica
islandica. Shell is deposited in layers as these clams grow. Analysis of the
ratios of carbon (C12/C14) and oxygen (O16/O18) isotopes along the growth axes
of the shell indicates the temperatures that were encountered by the growing
clam hundreds to thousands of years ago, and also how this varied seasonally.
The accumulation of fossil shells is termed a death assemblage. The temperature
time series obtained from the living and fossil shells will be used to develop
spatial-temporal reconstructions of bottom water temperatures on the Middle
Atlantic shelf for the past ~5000 years. A cold pool of water forms each summer
when stratification traps cold winter water along the shelf bottom below a layer
of warmer water. Particular attention will be paid to variability in this cold
pool. Understanding the history of climate change on the continental shelf will
provide important information on past climatic changes in this region, the
impact of these changes on ongoing range shifts of the two clam species, and
allow projection of future range distributions. Analyses of the reconstructed
bottom water temperatures will determine the historical frequency and, where
possible, rapidity of major climatic changes and corresponding range shifts
since the beginning of the Neoglacial Period. Potential climate drivers
associated with the range changes will be determined from the reconstructed
bottom-water temperatures and compared with other North Atlantic
reconstructions. The influence of bottom water temperature changes on the timing
of clam mortality events will be assessed. The reconstructed bottom water
temperature records will extend inputs for retrospective models and be related
to changing species distributions (from collection location records) in the
Middle Atlantic region. In turn these reconstructions provide the basis for
forward projections with implications for continued warming on ecological
processes and fishery production. This effort brings together scientists with a
broad range of expertise, and notably includes both young investigators as lead
investigators, and students at both the graduate and undergraduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.