* 2202373
* The Nature of the Dark, Diffuse Interstellar Medium in the Local Group
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Michael Busch, Busch, Michael Peter
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2025
* USD 210,000.00

Michael Busch is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Fellowship to carry
out a program of research and education at the University of California, San
Diego. Busch will perform radio astronomical observations of the hydroxyl
radical (OH) to study the properties and molecular hydrogen (H2) content of the
interstellar medium (ISM) of nearby galaxies. The observations will complement
observations of carbon monoxide (CO) – a widely used probe of H2 – to shed light
on “dark H2” gas that cannot be studied using CO, as well as those of atomic
hydrogen (HI). Results from the study will allow astronomers to understand how
atomic gas undergoes the transition to molecular gas. For the education
component of this project, Busch will develop a workshop on using a portable
planetarium to increase astronomy engagement with grade school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will generate large maps of
OH allowing reliable inference of the distribution of diffuse dark H2 in two
representative local group galaxies. Combined with CO and HI observations, this
will enable a thorough characterization of the environment, mass, and kinematics
of the ISM. The observations and analyses will help elucidate the nature of dark
H2 in unprecedented detail, yielding unique insight into the transition between
the atomic and molecular gas in the ISM. Data from this project will also be
useful for studies of astrochemistry, star formation, and galactic
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.