* 2202150
* Expanding the Cell Science and Immunological Testing Workforce by Developing a Diverse and Inclusive Credentialed Biotechnology Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Thomas Chen, Santa Monica College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 348,925.00

The life sciences/biotechnology sector has continued to remain resilient during
the COVID-19 pandemic, with the Los Angeles region generating $60.8 billion in
economic activity in 2020 and hosting more than 1,000 life science innovation
companies. It is projected that 16,000 regional technical jobs will be added to
this rapidly growing sector within the next three years. The acceleration of the
widening supply-and-demand gap, along with the growing awareness that community
colleges produce competitive and highly skilled technicians, emphasizes the
necessity to develop projects that focus on life sciences/biotechnology
technician education to prepare students to become the next generation of highly
skilled workers in this dynamic sector. Therefore, this project focusing on Cell
Science and Immunological Testing will recruit and train 30 students from
diverse and traditionally untapped pools of talent, including system impacted
and justice involved students, resulting in 30 industry internship matches and
award up to 60 certificates that are part of a career education pathway
consisting of two stackable certificates. The project will align academic
offerings with industry needs based on the input from an advisory council.
Students will be trained in a curriculum that focuses on essential knowledge,
state-of-the-art technical skills, and industry-required soft skills. Students
will also receive an introduction to nanobiotechnology concepts and their
applications in the cell science/gene therapy and immunological testing
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Santa Monica College (SMC)
will: 1) produce two stackable certificates that will enable students to
successfully enter the rapidly growing life sciences/biotechnology industries in
the greater Los Angeles region, 2) expand outreach, recruitment, and retention
efforts to students from traditionally untapped pools of talent and communities,
and 3) grow a diverse and talented workforce while reducing the training,
mentorship, and employment equity gaps often associated with the life
science/biotechnology industry. Students benefiting from this project will
complete 22 units (5 courses) to earn their first stackable certificate and can
opt to complete 15 additional units (4 courses) to obtain a second certificate.
Regardless of their academic pathway, all participating students will receive an
industry appointed mentor and complete an internship. The scope of this project
also aims to inform 40 SMC students from special counseling programs, 150 pre-
college educators, and four full-time SMC career and academic counselors about
the biotechnology industry through planned outreach activities. Finally, mobile
biotechnology exploration days will provide 210 pre-college students who are
justice-involved or from low-income communities with hands-on activities,
information about this project, and employment opportunities available to them
in the life sciences/biotechnology sector. The results generated from this
project will be disseminated through regional and national conferences, NSF ATE
Center platforms, and the California Community College network. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.