* 2202038
* GeoTech Geospatial Resource Center
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Vincent DiNoto, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,649,295.00

Geospatial Science and Technology (GST) integrates innovative tools and
techniques to enable users to visualize, analyze, query, and predict temporal,
spatial and critical relationships. GST helps to solve problems by looking at
data in a way that is readily displayed, can be spatially analyzed, and easily
shared. It is a science that includes Geographic Information Systems (GIS),
remote sensing and image analysis, mapping and cartography, spatial analysis,
and data collection tools such as global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) and
unmanned aircraft systems (UAS). Whether it is the map on a smart phone or the
navigation system in a car, the base-map in a video game, or the maps that one
sees on TV, “geospatial” is all around. The science of GST is being used in
resource management, environmental studies, urban planning, criminology,
homeland security, military analysis, archaeology, precision agriculture, health
sciences, political science, public safety and emergency response, physical
sciences, earth sciences, marketing, logistics, economics, business, history,
and virtually any other field that has a spatial and/or temporal component. Due
to the ubiquitous nature of GST and the need for spatial analysis across many
disciplines, instructors from middle school through college are embedding GST
into their curriculum (including web-based mapping tools) to promote spatial
thinking, or are offering GST specific courses or programs at their respective
institutions to prepare students to successfully enter the workforce. The
GeoTech National ATE Center is proposing to transition from a national center to
a national Resource Center. The GeoTech Resource Center will focus on
researching evolving workforce geospatial competencies and career pathways,
curriculum modification based on changes/revisions to workforce geospatial
competencies, curriculum especially designed for historically underserved
populations, and professional development opportunities for secondary and post-
secondary educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals for the GeoTech Geospatial
Resource Center are: 1) Research, create, and aggregate competencies that will
support careers and programs. 2) Create and disseminate curriculum resources in
an easily searchable resource repository, and 3) Provide professional
development opportunities in face- to-face and virtual synchronous and
asynchronous modalities to prepare educators to teach standards- based
curriculum. These goals will provide the geospatial community of users
(educators and industry professionals alike) curricular offerings in cutting
edge GST, which is crucial in creating a well-prepared geospatial technician and
technologist workforce. An evaluative process will be implemented to continually
review workforce competencies, improve the educational materials produced, and
enrich innovative professional development offerings. Learning modules will
developed and will be contextual and relevant to historically underserved
populations to excite them about GST careers and applications. Lessons will
address a wide spectrum of social justice issues for people of color, women,
tribal institutions, the LGBTQ community, and historical lessons such as redline
maps. Environmental current events such as climate change and wildfires will
also be addressed. The curriculum will be modularized and portable to different
learning environments and therefore designed to reach a large cohort of users.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.