* 2202621
* CAS-MNP: Assessing the Controls of Plastic Photochemical Reactivity in the Surface Ocean
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Collin Ward, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/2025
* USD 449,385.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry at NSF, Collin Ward and Taylor Nelson at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution (WHOI) will study the fate of plastics in the sunlit surface ocean.
Despite sustained attention from stakeholders, the ultimate fate of consumer
plastics in the ocean remains an open question. Exposure to sunlight is a key
degradation process (i.e., photo-degradation) for most consumer plastics but the
controls that affect the rates and extents of plastic photo-degradation in the
ocean are not well understood. This study aims to determine the factors that
control photochemical degradation of consumer plastics and thus their fate in
the ocean. The basic knowledge gained from this research will inform fate and
transport models that estimate the amount, location, and persistence of plastics
in the ocean, as well as their potential impacts on ecosystem processes. This
project supports engagement with the Lincoln Laboratory Beaver Works Summer
Institute and the Build a CubeSat Challenge, opportunities for high school
students across the country to learn about marine plastic pollution. Moreover,
numerous undergraduate, and graduate students will be trained and participate on
this research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is widely understood that
sunlight chemically transforms plastics in the ocean into a suite of polymer-,
dissolved-, and gas-phase products. However, the governing controls of these
photochemical processes are poorly constrained. This research will deconvolute
the relative importance of varying controls on the photochemical reactivity of
consumer plastics at sea, including particle size, plastic formulation (i.e.,
base polymer + inorganic additives such as titanium dioxide and zinc oxide), and
sunlight wavelength. Specific measures to be tested include oxidation (molecular
oxygen consumption), chain scission (decrease in molecular weight), and the
production of dissolved organics. This project supports outreach activities with
high school students, and the training of undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.