* 2202065
* Addressing Student Skills Gaps in Water Treatment Operator Education Utilizing Virtual Reality Enabled Curriculum Resources
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Joshua Castleberry, Central Carolina Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2025
* USD 349,431.00

Water operators are frontline environmental health and safety workers who
perform the essential service of ensuring the nation's citizens have access to
safe water sources. It is estimated that 30-50% of the nation's water operators
will retire within five years and only 5% of operators are under age 25. This
project will address the critical infrastructure need for licensed water
technicians by expanding the quality and capacity of training available for this
field. In alignment with the mission of the Advanced Technological Education
(ATE) program, this project will advance the delivery of technician education by
creating high-quality, cost-effective, technology-based online resources for
water operator technology. These new virtual resources will supplement the
existing high-quality training offered by the South Carolina Environmental
Training Center at Central Carolina Technical College (CCTC) with virtual
reality (VR) modules developed collaboratively with Clemson University as a tool
to enrich curriculum components identified as the greatest barriers to water
operator licensure. This project also benefits operators in rural environments
who have less access to professional development and training. Availability of
virtual labs will further enable women, veterans, persons from groups
underrepresented in the field, and persons with disabilities to obtain
certifications. Unlike immersive VR, these systems require no additional
equipment as they are designed to run simulations on a standard laptop using a
keyboard and mouse. Project outcomes include increasing: 1) the number of water
operators prepared for the transition from learning to workforce, 2) recruitment
and mentoring material to attract people from underrepresented groups to water
treatment technology; and 3) the assessment of the use of these technologies
with diverse groups of students in different educational settings. This work
will contribute to the NSF's Big Ideas, including "The Future of Work at the
Human-Technology Frontier" and “Growing Convergent Research” by conducting
fundamental research investigating the benefits and risks of integrating virtual
labs in educational settings for water treatment
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to: 1) Design,
integrate, and develop VR enabled curriculum resources for water treatment
training to address workforce preparedness and close the skills gap based on
current and future workplace needs. 2) Implement the developed resources for
online and hybrid approach, conduct rigorous evidence-based assessment of these
modules, and provide the content to the ATE community. 3) Recruit and retain
students including women, veterans, and persons from groups historically
underrepresented in advanced-technology fields. 4) Create professional
development resources and conduct workshops for water technology educators. The
project will provide alternatives for place-bound and capacity-constrained water
treatment programs via technology resources. Virtual labs will allow students
access to realistic lab experiences in highly engaging VR environments that will
address the most prevalent educational barriers to licensure. Key stakeholders
from Association of Boards of Certification, community partners, NSF ATE
centers, two-year partner institutions, and industry will guide the content
development to ensure its relevancy. Evaluation and assessment will be led by an
external evaluator who will provide both formative and summative evaluation of
the implementation of the virtual resources in CCTC's existing curriculum
utilizing Kirkpatrick's four-level model. Both the pre- and post-surveys will
utilize the following validated constructs: perceived learning outcomes,
engagement, usability, and satisfaction and perception. The community of
educators in water treatment technology, along with the broader technician
education community, will receive implementation information on the modules
created. Conferences for dissemination include an annual symposium hosted by
CCTC, water treatment conferences, Technology Education Conferences, the NSF ATE
Principal Investigators conference, and other professional association
conferences. The findings will also be disseminated as journal papers, webinars,
and presentations at professional development workshops. All materials developed
will be distributed through ATE Central, CCTC's learning management system, and
the EducateWorkforce portal hosted by Clemson University. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.