* 2202514
* Static and Dynamic Properties of Magnetic Skyrmions and Their Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Gang Xiao, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2025
* USD 651,300.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports experimental
research and education to advance basic knowledge in spintronics and magnetism.
Spintronics uses electron spin to construct highly performing electronic devices
beyond the conventional semiconductor chips. The magnetic entities or particles
that the research team investigates are called magnetic skyrmions, tiny magnetic
swirls that arise in two-dimensional materials that can be used for computing
and information storage. Through the research efforts, the team can effectively
control the motion of skyrmions and construct skyrmionic devices, thereby
providing a research platform to train the next generation of scientists in
spintronics. The principal investigator (PI) plans to develop new fabrication
processes and characterization techniques that could lead to revolutionary
computing, security, and sensing devices. The PI uses the most sophisticated
high resolution magnetic imaging and electronic measurement techniques to
uncover new spin-based physical phenomena. The PI plans to train diverse groups
of students in materials/devices processing and characterization. The research
team strives to make a lasting contribution to the science education of the
public and young people. Research on nanoscale physics and devices has positive
impacts on our society in areas of computing, information storage and
processing, quantum sensing, and medical diagnostics. Skyrmion-enabled devices
consume low power or less expensive materials, which mitigates climate change.
With great potential in discovery and invention, this research project furthers
the United States’ competitive edge in the electronics industry and help
maintain leadership in advanced research, manufacturing, and innovation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this project is to understand the static and dynamic properties of magnetic
skyrmions in magnetic multilayers, by exploring the interactions between
skyrmions and various excitations including the magnetic field and spin current.
The PI aims to achieve an understanding of the static, global and local dynamic
behavior of skyrmions, both individually and collectively as clusters. The
experimental approach utilizes state-of-the-art sample fabrication, submicron
lithography, advanced imaging techniques and highly sensitive electronic
measurements. The research team relies on micromagnetic simulations, electron
magnetotransport theory, and condensed matter physics on spin-orbit coupling.
The team plans to develop new device paradigms with advantages over existing
designs in non-volatility of information, probabilistic computing, low power
consumption, nanoscale scalability, ultrafast operation, and thermal stability.
The project advances basic knowledge in spintronics and physics of topological
magnetism. The team plans to develop understanding about single-skyrmion
behavior, skyrmion-skyrmion interactions and their interactions with external
controls and local variations in the spatial energy landscape. Through the
research efforts, the team can effectively control skyrmions and construct
skyrmionic devices, providing a research platform to train the next generation
of scientists in the critical technological area of spintronics. The PI plans to
train and educate diverse groups of students in their acquisition of condensed
matter physics knowledge and experimental skills in materials/devices processing
and characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.