* 2202632
* Enhancing Programming and Machine Learning Education for Students with Visual Impairments through the Use of Compilers, AI and Cloud Technologies
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Wei Wang, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 05/31/2025
* USD 770,939.00

Attractive high-paying and highly flexible Computer Science careers should be
more readily accessible for people with blindness or visual impairments (BVI).
Unfortunately, teaching the required computer programming and data science
skills to students with BVI is extremely challenging due to two major
difficulties. The first difficulty comes from the limited capability of current
screen readers to properly read computer codes that are a mix of English
letters, digits, and punctuation marks. The specialized set of keystrokes used
in programming is also not conveniently read by screen readers (e.g., spaces and
tabs). The second difficulty comes from time-consuming and frustrating code
navigation, whereby students with BVI must repeatedly use screen readers to read
every line to locate the desired line for editing. Partnering with San Antonio
Lighthouse for the Blind and Vision Impaired, the project will develop new
accessibility tools, including a program syntax- and semantics-aware screen
reader and a voice-command-based code navigation framework to address the above
two difficulties. These accessibility tools will be offered through cloud-based
web interfaces to provide nationwide access to students and educators. The
success of this project will improve the effectiveness of teaching computer
programming and data science to students with BVI, which in turn will increase
accessibility for more individuals with BVI to participate in Computing Science
with high-paying career opportunities and could lead to a more-diverse Computer
Science workforce. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These accessibility tools will use
compilers, Artificial Intelligence (AI), and cloud technologies to read computer
code statements based on their meanings, rather than only reading one character
at a time. The screen reader will articulate the necessary information that
beginning coders need and help them more easily understand the lexicon and
semantics used in computer programming and data science. The voice-command-based
code navigation will employ speech recognition and natural language processing
so that students will be able to use their voice to easily locate a specific
statement (e.g., a variable declaration) within their code. These accessibility
tools will be integrated into Jupyter notebook and offered through the cloud
which will give nationwide access to students and educators. This cloud-based
solution will also allow sophisticated AI models to be employed without
requiring the students to have powerful and expensive computers to run these
accessibility tools. The project will conduct a systematic evaluation of these
accessibility tools using single-case research design to deepen the
understanding of how technologies, including compilers, AI, and cloud computing,
can be applied to teaching Computer Science skills to students with BVI. The
evaluation will also provide feedback on the effectiveness of different speech
styles and provide additional feedback for future improvements of these
accessibility tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.