* 2202639
* RCN: LEAPS Realizing Inclusion in Societies for Environmental Biology (RISE)
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Adrienne Sponberg, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Marenda
* 03/31/2024
* USD 199,883.00

Professional scientific society efforts to improve diversity, equity and
inclusion (DEI) in STEM have traditionally focused on programs for recruitment
of individuals from underrepresented groups. While these programs have achieved
some success, the demographics and culture of Environmental Biology societies
remain largely unchanged. Therefore, the societies on this planning proposal
will focus on leadership, examining the power structures within societies and
exploring best practices to create inclusive environments. Society leaders will
receive training and tools to help them identify and remove structural barriers
in their societies to create cultural change. Through this collaborative
proposal, each of the societies will bring insight from their past and current
efforts, building towards a shared understanding and intellectual exchange
around best practices for changing the culture of
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to cultivate an inclusive
environment in professional societies by building capacity of leaders of
societies to identify and to dismantle structural barriers in societies.
Participants in this project include three Environmental Biology societies
(Ecological Society of America, Society for Freshwater Sciences, The Wildlife
Society) and three societies dedicated to broadening participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM (American Indian Higher Education Consortium;
Society for Minorities in Agriculture, Natural Resources and Related Sciences;
and the Society for Advancing Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in
Science). Leaders from these societies will participate in activities designed
to strengthen collaborative relationships while building their capacity to
identify and remove structural barriers to inclusion in professional societies,
including: (1) Leadership Summits – regular convenings to build relationships
and trust, to discuss successes and challenges, and to participate in training
and identify synergies between existing programs, (2) Immersive Experiences at
Partner Conferences –society leaders will actively contribute to conferences
focused on broadening participation to strengthen society partnerships while
boosting cultural competency of leaders, and (3) AAAS SEA Change STEMM
Professional Societies DEI Self-Assessment – the societies will utilize this
tool to identify policies and procedures that create barriers to inclusion in
their programs and work together to develop solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.