* 2202226
* Building a data driven pathway in data science leading to student success
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Joachin Arias, Los Angeles Harbor College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2025
* USD 349,534.00

Businesses of all types recognize the transformational value of “big data” in
decision making and planning and are facing a growing need to hire employees
with data analytic skills. Guided by the expertise of industry leaders in the
areas of big data, data science, and data analytics, Los Angeles Harbor College
(LAHC) will create two stackable Data Analyst certificates designed to provide
technician-level skills for entry-level employment to address the demand for
employees with “big data” skills. Educational pathways will be developed that
will integrate several established traditional and non-traditional STEM degrees,
such as business, psychology, biology, and education, allowing community college
students to acquire a foundation in data analytics, increasing entry level
employability, and allowing them to work in sectors with “big data” needs. In
addition to preparing students for technician-level employment, the use of
credit-bearing, transferable coursework will allow LAHC to establish a data
science transfer pathway to a growing number of baccalaureate institutions
offering data science programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create a
Data Analyst certificate designed to provide foundational data science and
analysis skills that will increase the employability of any LAHC student. The
objectives of the project include: (1) identifying the knowledge and skill set
needed for employment in high demand data analytics technician jobs, (2)
developing a new industry-focused Data Analyst Certificate using existing,
credit-bearing courses to create new, industry-focused STEM pathway for students
at LAHC, and (3) recruiting and enrolling current and new students into the
program to complete the Data Analyst Certificate. A Data Science Advisory Board
will be formed to develop the learning outcomes for the program and to identify
internship sites to provide industry-based learning opportunities. To ensure the
courses and data analyst technician program objectives and outcomes align with
the current need in the industry, a data science analyst skills assessment will
be conducted. The evaluation plan will use a mixed methods approach, matching
the method to the outcome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.