* 2202526
* Reconstructing Earth Energy Imbalance
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Gregory Hakim, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2025
* USD 480,579.00

The net energy balance at the top of Earth’s atmosphere is critical for many
important problems in climate science (e.g., climate sensitivity to changing
greenhouse gas concentrations and modes of interaction between the atmosphere
and ocean). Despite this central role, Earth’s energy budget has only been well
observed for about the past 20 years. This short period of direct observation
leaves a limited sample for evaluating important questions about climate
variability, especially for distinguishing between variability that is
externally forced versus internal to the climate system. While these questions
can be approached using climate models, paleoclimate proxies provide the only
encoding of climate information before the instrumental era, and thus are
essential for quantifying climate variability, and particularly Earth’s energy
imbalance on interannual, decadal and longer timescales. This project proposes
to reconstruct Earth’s energy budget for the past 1000 years using paleoclimate
data assimilation (PDA) method. This approach combines information from
paleoclimate proxies with the physical constraints of climate models to
reconstruct climate fields that are not directly observed by the proxies. The
proposed research takes advantages of recent numerical simulations and
preliminary-proof-of concept calculations to achieve this
reconstruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the researchers will use an
offline PDA, where the stationary statistics of long climate model simulations
are used to supply physical constraints, and online PDA, where computationally
efficient emulators of the climate models add dynamical “memory” to the
reconstructions from proxies at earlier times. The researchers aim to construct
outgoing shortwave and longwave radiation at the top of the atmosphere, and
storage in terms of ocean heat content. The reconstructions will then be used to
address a hypothesis on the relationship between spatial patterns of sea-surface
temperature variability and energy imbalance. This project will provide a proxy-
constrained estimate of Earth’s energy imbalance, both in ocean heat content and
in the top-of-atmosphere radiative imbalance. A hierarchy of validation
experiments, using satellite measurements, instrumental measurements, and
historical simulations will provide confidence bounds on these estimates. The
proposed research directly addresses important open problems in climate science,
including pre-industrial energy imbalance needed for climate sensitivity, and
the contribution of patterns of Pacific temperature variability to the planetary
energy imbalance. The potential Broader Impacts include a gridded data product
synthesizing paleoclimate proxy and model data for the top-of-atmosphere energy
imbalance. Such a gridded millennial scale reconstruction will be made publicly
available to the wide paleoclimate community for a widespread climate research,
including detection and attribution-studies. This work will support the
scientific training and professional development of one graduate student at the
University of Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.