* 2202521
* Innovating Online Ethics Training Using a Dynamic Narrative Learning Environment
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Noah Wardrip-Fruin, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Eleni Miltsakaki
* 08/31/2025
* USD 849,964.00

Ethical dilemmas arise in all aspects of STEM research. To help mitigate the
problems associated with unethical research behavior, universities and granting
agencies, such as the NSF, require training in responsible conduct of research
(RCR). However, while there are a variety of approaches to teaching ethical
behavior, including case studies, workshops, and toolkits, ethics training
instruction is often reduced to simplified text-based online tutorials. Ethical
oversight agencies and training experts have emphasized the need for additional
RCR learning tools that are more engaging, scalable, and offer a hands-on
approach to exploring real world problems. This project explores the use of
artificial intelligence (AI) techniques within an educational game-based ethics
training tool to maximize player motivation and learning. Specifically, the AI
will be used to create realistic interactive ethical scenarios that adjust to
the player and choices they make. This research will provide a novel artificial
intelligence-based approach to learning ethics and produce an educational game-
based ethics training tool that is freely accessible and ready for incorporation
into responsible conduct of research training programs nationwide. Furthermore,
by enhancing methods used for training scientists to understand and engage in
ethical behavior, this research aims to drive improvements in the quality and
accuracy of STEM research as well as encourage healthier workplace practices
that support a diverse and inclusive environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address the need for engaging, scalable, and hands-on ethics
training by applying the Self-Determination Theory (SDT) of motivation through
an innovative combination of four state-of-the-art AI-based narrative systems:
1) a social simulation system, 2) a pedagogy manager, 3) a drama manager, and 4)
a dynamic content selection architecture (CSA) that dynamically selects texts
and options based on author goals and state maintained by the first three
systems. Compared to existing approaches to dynamic CSA, this approach enables
interactive stories with more flexible delivery of choice-based story content.
The project develops contributions in modeling complex ethical contexts and
facilitating learnersâ€™ feelings of autonomy, relatedness, and competence. The
forms of these contributions are AI-driven narrative techniques to maximize
diverse learner motivations, a novel dynamic CSA architecture, and a new
approach to ethics training that utilizes AI to improve learner engagement,
knowledge, and moral reasoning skill development. The project takes a design-
based research approach to iteratively build out each AI-based narrative system
and evaluates the impact this new AI narrative training architecture has on
player motivation, engagement, and learning outcomes for ethics training. A
randomized controlled trial will also be employed to compare the efficacy of the
adaptive interactive narrative game with dynamic CSA to a static narrative
version of the same game. The results are expected to advance understanding of
AI-based approaches to leveraging SDT within educational narratives and ethics
training, which will enable further innovations in learning
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.