* 2202353
* Developing quantitative continuum theories of composite active fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Aparna Baskaran, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2025
* USD 333,827.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical, computational,
and data-intensive research to develop a theory to describe flow phenomena in
biological and other fluids that contain self-powered elements. Flow phenomena
in nature and in engineered systems are typically driven by external forces such
as gravity and pressure gradients. Continuum mechanics is the mathematical
language that allows us to describe such flows and hence predict and design
them. In biological systems, such as the cell cytoskeleton, flow phenomena are
generated by internal driving, powered by proteins and other biochemical
machines that consume chemical energy. Continuum mechanical descriptions have
been developed and applied to such internally driven biological fluids in recent
years with great success. So far, efforts have centered around single-component
descriptions of these systems. In actuality, these are multicomponent systems.
Developing multicomponent continuum theories for internally driven fluids
requires overcoming several technical challenges. This project uses multi-scale
theory coupled with data driven techniques to address these technical challenges
and hence develop models for multi-component biological fluids.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a step toward understanding physical
mechanisms that lead to function in natural and synthetic biological systems.
From a practical perspective, designing and controlling internally driven fluids
is key to engineering rapidly reconfigurable life-like materials, with
applications in fields as diverse as robotics, microfluidics, and adaptive
optics. In addition to the science outcomes, the research is integrated with
education and outreach initiatives including : (i) content for an advanced
undergraduate course on soft materials theory – this fills a need in the
education of undergraduate students to undertake interdisciplinary research at
the interface of physics and biology and (ii) Diversity, Education and Inclusion
initiatives implemented, tested and benchmarked within the Brandeis community
that can be exported as models shared widely with the academic community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical, computational, and data-intensive research to develop a
theoretical framework for building predictive continuum descriptions of
composite active fluids. Active fluids are composed of microscopic entities that
consume energy and exert forces. This paradigm includes diverse systems from
bacterial suspensions to cytoskeletal filaments propelled by molecular motors
and synthetic diffusophoretic colloids. Continuum descriptions of the dynamics
of these fluids have been powerful in identifying transferable concepts that
allow us to understand, control, and even predictively design active fluids.
Research to date has focused on single component fluid dynamic descriptions of
active materials. But experimental phenomenology clearly shows the need for
multi-component descriptions that allow for density gradients in different
components. Building macroscopic theories of multi-component systems is
challenging even in the context of traditional equilibrating fluids. One needs
to invoke considerations of reciprocity and entropy production to determine
relationships between different fluxes in the dynamics of conserved quantities.
Active fluids, being inherently out of equilibrium are liberated from these
constraints. This project addresses these challenges by developing a multi-
pronged approach that integrates data driven model development with the standard
techniques of soft materials physics. On the one hand, phenomenological
continuum mechanics will be combined with systematic nonequilibrium statistical
mechanics to identify possible mechanisms at play in determining the emergent
behavior in composite active fluids. On the other hand, a complementary data-
driven approach is developed, that leverages experimental data from in-vitro
cytoskeletal suspension experiments to guide model
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed to yield fundamental
theoretical insights into non-reciprocal cross diffusion processes and their
role in emergent behavior in active composite fluids. This effort is a first
step in understanding physical mechanisms that lead to function in biological
systems. From a practical perspective, designing and controlling active stresses
is key to engineering rapidly reconfigurable life-like materials, with
applications in fields as diverse as robotics, microfluidics and adaptive
optics. The theoretical framework developed in this project will advance our
ability to engineer active stress in materials. Integrated with the research
effort, this project will produce impact in the community and in physics
education through the following initiatives: (i) The development and
distribution of content for an advanced undergraduate course on soft materials
theory – this fills a need in the education of our undergraduates to undertake
interdisciplinary research at the interface of physics and biology. (ii)
Outreach initiatives in the Waltham community and beyond – this allows us to
work with URM students and reach students in developing countries to expose them
to ongoing work in soft materials and biophysics. (iii) Diversity, Education and
Inclusion initiatives within the Brandeis community that will serve as a model
that can be shared with a wider audience for implementation at other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.