* 2202225
* Workforce for Water
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Meagan Jones, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,153,803.00

This project will support wastewater technician training, aligning education to
the rural technician needs across Hawai‘i and nationwide as the wastewater
treatment industry moves towards new and efficient technologies that protect
public health and the global environment. Traditional Pacific Island identity is
deeply rooted in sustainable water management, and a central focus of this
project is to build on the growing unique mālama ‘āina movement in Hawai’i, a
culture-based strategy for addressing environmental issues through land
stewardship. The project will address the critical technician workforce shortage
required to replace 88,000 cesspools with individual wastewater systems (IWS) by
2050, as mandated by the Hawai‘i state legislature Act 125. Hawai‘i’s cesspools
release over 53 million gallons of sewage into the ground daily, threatening
public health by contaminating the islands’ groundwater – the primary source of
Hawaii’s drinking water. Moreover, contaminated groundwater leaches out into the
ocean, disrupting coastal ecosystems that are a fundamental part of Hawaiian
cultural and economic identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hawai‘i Community College
(Hawai‘i CC) and the University of Hawai’I Maui College (UHMC) will leverage
alliances with 16 industry associations, employers and policy advocacy groups,
two ATE Centers, and three local and mainland ATE projects with similar foci, to
collaboratively develop an Advanced Professional Certificate (30 credit hours)
in wastewater management, effectively building and supporting a sustainable
talent pipeline in the recession-resilient emerging skilled trades and
technology sectors related to Individual Wastewater Systems (IWS). The project
will: 1) improve understanding of sustainable wastewater management systems in
unique contexts, 2) encourage industry collaboration and engagement in solving
wastewater problems, 3) integrate learning approaches that together enhance the
existing knowledge base on wastewater management education, 4) increase
recruitment, retention, and completion of students from groups underrepresented
in wastewater management education programs, including Native Hawaiians, and 5)
strengthen the available pool of skilled workers to meet the technical demand
for IWS implementation. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.