* 2202035
* Decadal Survey for Solar and Space Physics 2024-2033
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Colleen Hartman, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The National Academies’ decadal surveys in space science have been widely
praised for having a positive impact on federal agency planning and decision-
making, in addition to promoting unity within the space science community.
Decadal surveys are notable in their ability to sample thoroughly the research
interest, aspirations, and needs of a scientific community. Through a rigorous
process, a primary survey committee and thematic panels of community members
construct a prioritized program of science goals and objectives and define a
strategy that can achieve these objectives given anticipated budgetary and
technical resources. As with past decadal surveys, the next solar and space
physics decadal survey is designed to draw widespread community participation,
engage the community in consensus-building, and set specific discipline-specific
science targets and priorities for the coming decade. The study will provide
scientific direction for the field of solar and space physics; organize the
scientific community and the relevant agencies, particularly NASA, NSF, and
NOAA; inform other decision-makers in the legislative and executive branches
(particularly OMB and OSTP); document the needs for a scientifically- and
technically-trained workforce in solar and space physics; and communicate the
societal benefits of solar and space physics (e.g., interdisciplinary
connections, education, workforce training, public outreach). The survey report
will also contribute to the general public’s greater understanding of recent
accomplishments and future goals in solar and space physics. The new decadal
survey will update and extend the 2013 decadal survey that resulted in the
report, Solar and Space Physics, A Science for a Technological Society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project funds the Space Studies Board (SSB) of the
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine to establish a decadal
survey committee to develop a comprehensive science and mission strategy for
solar and space physics (heliophysics) research for a ten-year period beginning
in approximately 2024. The Survey Committee, numbering approximately 18 members
and constituted according to Academy guidelines for expertise and diversity
along a number of axes, will be responsible for the overall organization and
execution of the study, as well as the production of a final consensus report
that will undergo the usual National Academies review processes. The Committee
will be informed in its work by up to six specialized study panels—each with
12-14 members—with allocation of the domain of study among them to be determined
by the Survey Committee and the Space Studies Board. The proposed activity will
be used by NSF and other federal agencies in formulating plans for future
investments in solar and space physics-research and observational
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.