* 2202185
* Differential Susceptibility for Adolescents’ Development of Risk-Taking Behavior:  A Time-Varying Approach
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Emma Armstrong-Carter, Armstrong-Carter, Emma
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the
SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Eva H Telzer
at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, this postdoctoral fellowship
award supports an early career scientist, Dr. Emma Armstrong-Carter, studying
the development of adolescent’ risk-taking behavior. Adolescents are renowned
for engaging in high levels of risk-taking behavior such as unsafe driving,
alcohol and drug use, and risky sexual behaviors that can compromise their
physical, emotional, and academic wellbeing. Adolescents who grow up in contexts
of socioeconomic disadvantage are more likely to engage in heightened risk-
taking behaviors due to environmental stressors and resource limitations.
However, little is known about which factors protect adolescents or make
adolescents particularly susceptible to heightened risk-taking behavior in
contexts of socioeconomic disadvantage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
advance fundamental scientific knowledge about adolescent’ risk-taking behavior
by investigating whether adolescents are more neurologically susceptible for
risk taking at some time points compared to others. Specifically, we will
investigate whether differential neural susceptibility for risk-taking behavior
(1) varies within adolescents across years, and (2) varies within adolescents
across days. We will use a novel longitudinal, within-subjects research design
with repeated neuroimaging and electroencephalogram measurements. By integrating
cognitive neuroscience methods and adolescents’ behavioral assessments, this
project will help to shed light on a crucial and ongoing social problem: how to
reduce the effects of persistent inequalities on youth, and promote adolescents’
positive development across contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.