* 2202204
* Expanding Geographic Information Science Technology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Christina Friedle, Portland Community College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 06/30/2025
* USD 650,000.00

The use of Geographic Information Science Technology (GIST) is expanding in many
fields and occupations in the Pacific Northwest and across the country as more
sophisticated commercial uses are developed and implemented. This
interdisciplinary field, which encompasses geography, computer science, and
mathematics in spatial problem solving, is used in governmental agencies and
private companies to solve many U.S. and global societal challenges. As
employees within these companies retire or as these industries expand, employees
with the most current knowledge of technologies and practices are needed. This
project will support the growing need for well-educated surveying/mapping
technicians in the region. Since STEM fields have not historically attracted
many women, students of color, and low-income students, this project will focus
on evidence-based interventions that support student recruitment, retention, and
program completion for people from groups underrepresented in STEM. To recruit
more diverse students the project will partner with culturally relevant
community-based organizations (CBOs) and women STEM educators to identify high
school and community college students interested in geospatial technology.
Project-based learning using geospatial technology and paid internships will
engage students in work-based skill development. This project will provide
innovative opportunities for students, who never considered working in this STEM
field, to enter an exciting new career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to improve student recruitment, retention, and program
completion in the Geospatial program, and position the program for future growth
with regional GIST partners. The strategies that provide the foundation for this
work include: 1) expanding partnerships with community-based organizations, 2)
increasing recruitment efforts of specific student populations on campus and in
the community, 3) conducting summer institutes for high school teachers and
community college faculty in geospatial technologies, 4) creating a "Women in
Geospatial Careers" workshop series, 5) redesigning a capstone course to
incorporate more advanced technical skills, 6) expanding partnerships with
regional industries, 7) collaborating with a regional geospatial association to
provide mentors for the GIST students, and 8) equipping classrooms and labs with
appropriate equipment and software to address the competencies needed for this
emerging technical workforce. Results of the project will be made available to
other community colleges and GIST partners to demonstrate the value of the
recruitment and retention strategies and how they can be incorporated into
existing pedagogical approaches. This project has potential to advance knowledge
in the evolving GIST fields by implementing recruitment and retention strategies
that have the greatest impact on individuals from groups underrepresented in
geospatial programs. This project is funded by NSFâ€™s Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.