* 2202431
* Designing Mixed Reality Experiences to Support Participatory Complex Systems Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Aditi Wagh, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 08/31/2025
* USD 850,000.00

This project explores a new technologically assisted method of engaging learners
with complex systems content. The project will make use of passthrough Augmented
Reality (AR) on Virtual Reality (VR) headsets to create a Mixed Reality (MR)
immersive participatory simulation for classroom use. This participatory
simulation will be a shared “system of systems,” wherein small groups of
students each work collaboratively with a subsystem, each of which is
interconnected with other subsystems, such that changes in one subsystem can
impact the behavior of other subsystems, or impact the system as a whole. This
way of representing systems is well-suited to illustrate the complexity of real-
world systems like watersheds and fisheries, and engaging learners with real-
world problem solving by undertaking the roles of people like civil engineers
and fishery managers. The MR system will overlay a simulated setting on top of
the classroom space, and further allow learners to access specialized
informational displays that support their role-based engagement with the
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will use: (1) a mix of techniques
(interaction analysis, qualitative coding, and small case studies) to understand
the learning processes undertaken by the students and how they intersect with
designed elements of the learning experience; (2) surveys to gauge students’
engagement with and immersion in the experience; (3) pre-post interviews, tests,
and attitude surveys to measure changes in students’ complex systems reasoning
and attitudes towards STEM; and (4) a grounded theory approach to coding a mix
of observational notes and feedback data gathered from students and teachers to
identify what types of social, technological, and pedagogical supports are
needed to engage learners in complex systems reasoning within an immersive MR
participatory simulation. The contribution of the project lies in its ability to
shed light on the value of a novel method of engaging learners with complex
systems, and on the technological strides it will make contributions towards
developing a platform that allows a classroom of learners to be simultaneously
engaged in a shared, spatially- mixed reality simulation. The results will
advance understanding of integrating mixed reality into classroom settings. The
developed platform, two participatory simulations, support materials, and a
design Wiki will be made publicly available for others to use, or to replicate
or construct similar simulation experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.