* 2202156
* A Cybersecurity Preparation Academy (C-PREP) for Buffalo Students and Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Daniel Neville, Trocaire College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2025
* USD 336,458.00

Companies in the Buffalo metropolitan area employ more than 37,000 workers in
the software, IT, cybersecurity, networking, and data analytics fields. These
companies rely on cybersecurity technicians to protect computer systems and
networks from theft and damage. There is an acute need in the region for
cybersecurity technicians since supply has not kept pace with the rapidly
growing demand. The goal of this project is to create an educational pathway, in
a high-poverty region, to produce cybersecurity technicians who can help address
this workforce need. This will be accomplished by designing and implementing
dual enrollment courses in two partnering high schools that will lead to
matriculation in a postsecondary cybersecurity program. Upon graduation students
will have earned either a postsecondary certificate or an AAS degree in
cybersecurity qualifying them for employment as technicians in the cybersecurity
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project include (1) implementing
dual enrollment courses with high school partners, (2) providing professional
development for high school and college faculty to improve technician education,
(3) marketing the program, (4) enrolling students in a pathway of stackable
industry certifications, (5) fostering student success through individualized
support and mentoring, and (6) strengthening student connections to the
workforce through work-based learning opportunities. A qualitative study will
examine student perceptions of the benefits of the dual enrollment program to
accelerate entry into the workforce and the effectiveness of peer supports
targeted to underrepresented groups. This project was developed in consultation
with NCyTE, an ATE center for cybersecurity, whose broad reach will be leveraged
to disseminate project materials and findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.