* 2202694
* Linking terrestrial and marine carbon cycling across the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum via intermediate complexity Earth system modeling
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Sandra Turner, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 169,869.00

The Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM) was a global warming event
approximately 56 million years ago. The PETM was caused by the release of
greenhouse gases (including carbon dioxide and/or methane) to the atmosphere and
oceans. Earth system models have been employed to constrain the magnitude,
timing, and impacts of PETM carbon emissions. However, the contribution of
carbon cycle feedbacks to the severity of environmental changes across the PETM
remains unclear. One key gap is how the terrestrial carbon cycle responded to
PETM global change. This project will add a representation of the terrestrial
carbon cycle to an intermediate complexity Earth system model. That model will
simulate the cycling of carbon dioxide and methane between vegetation, soils,
the atmosphere, and the oceans. This study will place new constraints on the
sensitivity of Earth’s carbon cycle to carbon release and global warming. In
addition, this project will support research experiences at UC Riverside for
undergraduate students from Riverside Community College. These internships are a
cornerstone of UC Riverside’s Geoscience Development program. That program
targets the critical juncture between community college and 4-year programs with
the goal of building a diverse population of undergraduates in the geosciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon cycle feedbacks are a key source of uncertainty in
future climate change projections. Study of past global warming episodes, like
the PETM, has the potential to provide crucial insight into the operation of
these feedbacks on a warm Earth. By adding a representation of the terrestrial
carbon cycle to an intermediate complexity Earth system model configured for the
late Paleocene, the proposed research will allow evaluation of the time-
dependent response of potential carbon cycle feedbacks in response to higher
atmospheric CO2 and higher global temperature. In addition, the proposed
research will update a current representation of ocean and atmosphere methane
cycling with a modeled representation of the terrestrial production and
oxidation of methane. This updated model, cGENIE-ENTS, will be used to evaluate
multiple proposed PETM carbon emissions scenarios, including comparison of model
output against available proxy datasets. The computational efficiency of the
cGENIE-ENTS model will allow experiments to be run for the entire ~200 kyr PETM
duration and thus evaluate not only the potential for terrestrial carbon cycle
feedbacks during the onset of the event, but also their potential role in
determining the timescale of Earth system recovery. All model components will be
coupled during model integration, producing consistent output for the response
of both the terrestrial and marine carbon cycle through time. New PETM
simulations will provide revised estimates for PETM carbon emissions and provide
constraints on the feedback behavior (both positive and negative) of the
terrestrial biosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.