* 2202666
* Controls on explosive basaltic eruptions within the San Francisco Volcanic Field: Constraints from seismic imaging and multiphase magma ascent modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Eric Kiser, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2025
* USD 447,895.00

Volcanic eruptions are major hazards that can cause significant socio-economic
effects on local populations and short-term changes to the climate that have a
global impact. Many eruptions are fed by a single conduit that brings magma to
the surface repeatedly over time producing major volcanic edifices associated
with volcanic arcs around the world. In contrast, volcanic fields are composed
of tens to hundreds of volcanic vents that are distributed over areas of 100 to
100,000 km2. These vents typically only produce a single eruption before
becoming inactive and the locations of subsequent eruptions can be unpredictable
and at significant distances from the previous events. Furthermore, the eruption
styles within these volcanic fields can vary between non-explosive lava flows to
violently explosive events that eject volcanic ash and gases tens of kilometers
into the atmosphere. The San Francisco Volcanic Field (SFVF) in Northern Arizona
exhibits these classic characteristics of a volcanic field and includes one of
the best documented examples of an explosive eruption within these settings at
Sunset Crater northeast of Flagstaff, AZ. The distribution of volcanic vents in
the SFVF and why significant variability exists in the eruption styles of the
volcanic field remain poorly understood. This is not only the case for the SFVF,
but for every volcanic field on Earth, making it difficult to understand
potential hazards these systems represent to local populations. This project
seeks to better understand this system by combining seismological and eruption
modeling approaches. Hundreds of instruments used for measuring ground motion
(seismometers) will be installed throughout the SFVF in order to detect signals
from local earthquakes. This seismological component of the project will be
complemented by the development of computer models that simulate volcanic
eruptions. In addition to exploring the general conditions necessary for
producing non-explosive and explosive eruptions in volcanic fields, this
component of the project will use the details of magma distribution beneath
Sunset Crater derived from the seismological work, to constrain the specific
conditions that led to this eruption. This will be the first project of its kind
to produce a detailed image of the magmatic system beneath an entire volcanic
field and directly use these constraints to improve eruption modeling. The work
will improve hazard assessment for local populations (e.g., Flagstaff, AZ), as
well as for population centers near other volcanic fields around the world
(e.g., Auckland, New Zealand). Students from Chandler-Gilbert Community College
in Arizona will participate in the research for this project and will be
recruited to come to the University of Arizona following completion of their
2-year degrees. Teaching modules related to volcanic hazards will also be
produced from this project and distributed to the broader academic
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The San Francisco Volcanic Field (SFVF) covers
an area approximately 5,000 km2 in northern Arizona and includes nearly 600
basaltic vents interspersed with a few, large-volume intermediate to silicic
volcanic centers. Over the past ~5-6 Myr, the locus of volcanism at the SFVF has
migrated eastward at a rate of 1-3 cm/yr with the 1085 CE eruption that produced
Sunset Crater being the youngest in this volcanic field. Though most of the
volcanic vents within the SFVF exhibit landforms common to the effusive eruption
styles of distributed volcanic fields, the Sunset Crater eruption was violently
explosive and significantly affected the indigenous population living in the
region at the time. Key to improving our understanding of the hazards of the
SFVF is better constraining the conditions that led to the sub-Plinian style
eruption at Sunset Crater which did not affect nearby volcanic vents. Existing
studies have indicated that a mid-crustal magma storage zone played a key role
in the Sunset Crater eruption, however, currently our understanding is limited
regarding how the properties of this storage zone (e.g., size, depth, melt
fraction, volatile content) influenced the eruption. Details of the crustal
magma storage system that have resulted in differing volcanic compositions
(mafic vs. felsic) within the SFVF are also unknown. By integrating seismic
imaging and eruption modeling, this project lays out a holistic approach to
better understand the subsurface magmatic plumbing system and processes that
drive volcanic activity within the SFVF. Specific components of this project
will include (1) detailed characterization of seismicity and the development of
high-resolution 3D seismic velocity models of the crust beneath the SFVF to
image current and past magmatic systems associated with this volcanic field, (2)
the development of coupled magma chamber pressurization and multiphase magma
ascent models to determine the conditions necessary to drive effusive to
explosive basaltic eruption styles, and (3) combining constraints from seismic
imaging work on the volumes and depths of crustal magma reservoirs with these
state-of-the-art eruption models to better understand the subsurface processes
that drove the violently explosive Sunset Crater
eruption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.