* 2202793
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing Climate Linkages Across the Tropical Oceans Over the Last Millennium
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Julia Cole, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 539,012.00

Year-to-year changes in the temperatures of the tropical oceans impact climate
and weather around the world. The clearest example of this is the El Niño-
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) system in the tropical Pacific. Warming and cooling
patterns related to ENSO have major effects on droughts, floods, and tropical
storms. The temperature of the tropical Atlantic and Indian also affects weather
in the same types of ways. Not only that, the three ocean basins can interact
with each other since the atmosphere connects them all. For example, warming in
the tropical Atlantic tends to lead to wind patterns that then cool off the
tropical Pacific. This means that to predict how climate variations may change
in the future, one must understand the connections between the tropical oceans.
However, those relationships are known to change over long timescales (multiple
decades), and temperature records are short and scarce in the tropics. As a
result, this problem is difficult to study with traditional observations (e.g.
thermometers). Instead, this project will produce records of temperature using
the geochemistry of long-lived corals. By comparing data from corals in the
Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian oceans, this research will show how these oceans
have interacted over the past several centuries. Comparison of the 20th century
with previous centuries will reveal the influence of recent warming. This work
explores whether these patterns appear in the climate models used to understand
future climate change, and what physical processes are involved. Several
different model groups will be used for comparison. Students and postdocs will
also participate in this research. Finally, the project will develop training
materials to make data and model results more accessible to those without a
highly technical background. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interannual to multidecadal
variability in the tropical oceans drives climate extremes that impact natural
and human systems around the world. The equatorial Pacific ENSO system is
particularly important, and recent work highlights that Atlantic and Indian
ocean variability impact the recurrence and intensity of ENSO extremes. Multiple
mechanisms drive these interactions, which are affected by natural and
anthropogenic forcing. Yet the relative importance of each mechanism remains
unknown, as does the time history of the inter-basin teleconnections. Closing
this knowledge gap is fundamental to understanding how inter-basin interactions
are influenced by external forcing and improving the accuracy of future model
projections in the tropics and beyond. This study will create new paleoclimate
records of sea surface temperature (SST) using the elemental and isotopic
composition of coral skeletal material, in cores from centuries-old colonies in
the Tropical North Atlantic (TNA) and Western Indian Ocean (WIO). These data
will be combined with published data to reconstruct pre-instrumental SST for
these regions and assess inter-basin interactions. The study will also explore
the relationship of these patterns to external forcing. The project will
evaluate the degree to which interbasin interactions are manifest across
relevant model simulations. Insights from coral proxies will be explored with
the ensemble of isotope-enabled Last Millennium Ensemble simulations: the study
will analyze existing iCESM output, including ‘single forcing’ experiments to
diagnose individual external influences on climate and isotopic variability, and
perform targeted sensitivity experiments isolating the isotopic signatures
associated with particular dynamical mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.