* 2202054
* I-Corps:  Airborne and Surface Disinfection Using Narrow Band Ultraviolet Light-Emitting Diodes
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2023
* Hieu Nguyen, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of airborne and surface disinfection using narrow band ultraviolet
light-emitting diodes (UV LEDs). UV emitters have a wide range of applications
in airborne and surface disinfection, bio-medical and analytical
instrumentation, fluorescence sensing, curing, and phototherapy. The traditional
sources of UV lamps contain either mercury, xenon, argon, deuterium, or an
excimer. All are considered unsatisfactory as they are bulky, fragile,
expensive, low efficiency, have a limited life span, toxic, and only capable of
emitting at a few specific wavelengths. Another alternative is the UV LED, which
combines compactness with a nontoxic material composition, a lower power
consumption, a quick response time, a long lifetime, and tunable emission across
the entire UV region. Additionally, the nanowire form factor is ideal for
integrating the light-emitter within the filter fabric for enhancing
antibacterial and particulate filtration in air/surface purification and
disinfection systems. Broad benefits to society including the new technologies,
socioeconomic and environmental impacts as well as commercial potential are
expected for such nanowire emitters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on the development of high-performance narrow band UV LEDs for airborne
and surface disinfection. The disinfection UV LED technology aims at
inactivating the spreading of microorganisms living in indoor spaces otherwise
people are at risk of infection. The current common disinfectants include
chemical sprays and hand and body washing. These approaches fail to kill
viruses, bacteria, fungi, and microbes in real time. The chemical substances
usually contain contaminants and raise health concerns. Disinfection UVC LEDs,
however, are a rapid tool for inactivation, and environmentally friendly. The
narrow band UVC LEDs are produced using the following steps: 1) synthesizing
nanowire UVC LED structures using molecular beam epitaxy; 2) integrating optical
bandpass filters into the LEDs to attain narrow band LEDs; and 3) combining
nanowire UVC LEDs with current white-light LEDs to form a smart disinfection
lighting-system. Like visible color LEDs that have revolutionized lighting and
display, UVC LEDs are set to provide disinfection solutions in both air and on
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.