* 2202049
* Collaborative Research: Improving Speech Technology for Better Learning Outcomes: The Case of AAE Child Speakers
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Mari Ostendorf, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 04/30/2025
* USD 260,147.00

The lack of reading proficiency seen in children of underserved school districts
has lasting impacts on students’ performances in various subjects. Low literacy
is an especially pressing issue for African American students. Interactive
spoken language systems offer the possibility of a powerful tool for assisting
in early childhood education, freeing up teachers’ time, and engaging students
in repeated opportunities for learning. These systems involve both Automatic
Speech Recognition and Text-to-Speech Systems. The goal of this research is to
improve the performance of such systems for young speakers of African American
English (AAE) such that automated oral literacy assessment can be developed. The
research has important societal and technological impacts. It will enhance the
usability of speech technology in early education for AAE speaking children,
providing a model for better supporting students with diverse dialects. Many
under-resourced children do not have access to adequate reading and language
assessments, and the proposed work will address these issues by creating methods
for adapting spoken language technology to AAE children, increasing fairness in
speech technology on a broader scale. The work has strong outreach and
dissemination programs and will train undergraduate and graduate students in
interdisciplinary research in Electrical and Computer Engineering, Linguistics,
Education, and Psychology.

Challenges facing children’s Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) are due to (1)
lack of child speech data and, hence, current models used for recognition are
trained using data collected from adult speakers, and (2) children display a
wider range of intra- and inter- speaker variability than adults. ASR
performance is especially poor for children who are non-native English speakers
or those who at times transition into dialects such as AAE that are different
from what ASR systems are typically trained on. In addition, most dialog systems
built on text-to-speech (TTS) technology are designed using General American
English (GAE) voices, which minority children may not identify with. In the
high-stakes area of education, these considerations impact the effectiveness of
technology for different groups. The work will utilize a new and continuously
developing database of AAE children's speech to research the impact of spoken
language systems on children’s learning outcomes. On the learning side, the
research will highlight the impact of dialect on literacy assessment. On the
technology side, the work will yield novel machine learning algorithms for low-
resource tasks. Specifically, this project will develop data augmentation
techniques that can increase the amount of training data available for low-
resource tasks, and data normalization techniques so that ASR performance is
improved for AAE child speakers. The work on TTS will explore new methods of
disentangling speaker and dialect impacts on spectral realization of phrases
that model dialect density (rather than treating dialect as a categorical
variable) and separately accounting for pronunciation and prosodic factors.
Methods found to be effective for TTS will be leveraged in the data augmentation
work for ASR and explored as a diagnostic in literacy assessment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.