* 2202130
* Career Accelerator Cybersecurity Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Christopher George, Amarillo College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2025
* USD 240,392.00

This project will address a critical need for workforce-ready cybersecurity
technicians in the Texas Panhandle. The cybersecurity industry has entered a
danger zone in which (1) cybercrime is becoming increasingly sophisticated, (2)
the systems and devices that need security are becoming ever more complex and
interconnected, and (3) the cybersecurity workforce is experiencing an
unprecedented shortage of qualified technicians. These issues highlight the need
for programs with focused curricula that enable students to quickly obtain the
fundamental skills and certifications considered essential by the cybersecurity
industry. To address this need, Amarillo College (AC) will create a
Cybersecurity Career Accelerator Program that will target two-year IHE students,
adult learners, and underrepresented minorities. Creating a diverse pipeline of
trained professionals in this field of study is not only important in the
private sector but is also a matter of national
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage existing curricula,
materials, and resources that will adapted to a nimble, 10-week, module-based
program that will provide students with the skills needed to gain entry-level
employment in the cybersecurity industry. AC will partner with a team of public
partners in education, workforce development, economic development, and industry
to seek input into the curriculum development process and stay abreast of
industry trends. The program will provide students with an accelerated pathway
to employment anywhere in the region, state, or country. The program will engage
area middle- and high schoolers to encourage pursuit of careers in computer
information systems (CIS) through a CIS Summer camp and Success 360. The project
will provide a model for accelerated pathways to gainful employment in high-
demand sectors and can be replicated for other industry certifications. Project
results, lessons learned, and new materials developed will be shared with the
cybersecurity and ATE communities, thereby contributing to the cybersecurity
education knowledge base. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.