* 2202693
* NSF Center for Computer-Assisted Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Olaf Wiest, University of Notre Dame
* Cooperative Agreement
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2027
* USD 4,000,000.00

The NSF Center for Computer Assisted Synthesis (CCAS) is a nexus of
collaboration, innovation, and education that brings together data science and
chemical synthesis. The highly interdisciplinary CCAS team, composed of
synthetic organic chemists, computational chemists, and computer scientists, is
developing data science tools and computational workflows that will likely shape
the future of synthetic chemistry and the fields it enables, such as medicine,
materials science, and energy research. This siteâ€™s impacts are being further
amplified by an extensive network of academic, industrial and non-profit
partners and research centers, and its data chemistry tools are being shared
with the research community through open-source clearinghouses. All of this
provides CCAS with a unique opportunity to develop, exchange, and evaluate ideas
in the field of data chemistry, and its shared tools and training will empower
students, practicing chemists, and the chemical industry to effectively apply
data science to their own chemical research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Led by organic
chemists at every stage, CCAS focuses on use-inspired data science research that
drives the development of new data types and machine learning (ML) methods that
enable the discovery of novel reactions and yield new scientific insights. The
four scientific thrusts include (i) developing effective ML tools for optimizing
chemical reactions, (ii) gaining mechanistic understanding through interpretable
statistical models and electronic structure calculations, (iii) predicting
reaction outcomes to anticipate and discover new reactivity and (iv) integrating
these tools for the efficient planning and execution of multistep syntheses of
complex molecules. To accomplish these goals, three themes are interwoven into
each of the thrusts: (a) new structured data types that are amenable to high-
throughput experimentation and predictive models from the ground up, going
beyond the information from commonly used databases, (b) molecular and reaction
representations that bridge descriptor-based and structure-based deep learning
paradigms, and (c) algorithms specifically designed for the low data regimes
prevalent throughout chemistry. Through these integrated research themes and
thrusts, CCAS constructs and shares data chemistry platforms that are expected
to enable chemists to tackle ambitious challenges that the field is currently
under-equipped to pursue. The data chemistry platform also will open up new
opportunities in undergraduate and graduate education, and through partnerships
with the Data Chemists Network and research opportunities for chemists with
disabilities, CCAS seeks to broaden the participation of researchers from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.