* 2202023
* ICE-TI:  Master of Science in Biology
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Donald Robinson, Dine College
* Continuing Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 07/31/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's Indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions increases the opportunities for their students to pursue
challenging, rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in
areas that may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and
generational appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project,
submitted by Diné College and titled “Master of Science in Biology” directly
aligns with that goal. Through a collaborative effort, the project establishes a
thesis-based Master of Science in Biology built on the solid foundation of the
college’s multiple STEM BS degrees, including Biology, its faculty members’
expertise, the knowledge of local cultural experts, and the college’s
substantive STEM infrastructure. The degree includes a rigorous slate of
courses, including field and laboratory courses, focused on STEM content
knowledge and research skills, as well as a strong cultural grounding to support
the success of Indigenous students. The project advances the degree offerings at
Diné College to include graduate study, enabling the matriculation of
researchers prepared to work in STEM professions in diverse
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Master of Science in Biology degree at Diné
College is designed to prepare Indigenous and other students with an advanced
understanding of biology concepts, research techniques, and sub-discipline-
specific expertise. Students will engage in the western graduate education
process to expand their knowledge vertically and horizontally through both
intellectual understanding and practical experience, enabling graduates to
advance to higher levels of employment and educational opportunities. By also
integrating Traditional Ecological Knowledge and developing their understanding
of the significance of cultural knowledge in scientific and social realms, the
program will have transformative effects, catalyzing graduates’ abilities to
apply their learning and interpret their work in culturally sensitive ways. The
project advances the degree offerings at Diné College to include graduate study,
enabling the matriculation of researchers prepared to work in STEM professions
in diverse settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.