* 2202007
* Preparing Students for the Industry 4.0 Technician Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Edward Garner, Wake Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2025
* USD 520,783.00

Manufacturers are implementing new Industry 4.0 technologies to improve the
performance of their production systems and supply chain. Highly skilled
technicians are essential for designing, programming, and maintaining software
and hardware used in these technologies. Technical education programs need to
keep pace with the new technologies that students will encounter when they enter
the workforce. This project will develop an Industry 4.0 hands-on training
program to prepare students in five technology degree programs for multiple
career pathways. Students will learn skills that cut across multiple disciplines
such as troubleshooting, preventative maintenance, and project management. The
project team will conduct an industry survey to determine what skills are needed
in an Industry 4.0 environment. Based on the survey results, a set of six
technology courses will be revised to create a new certificate program with
industry certifications. A new Industry 4.0 laboratory will be developed to
provide hands-on training on Industry 4.0 technologies. The project team will
implement best practices in recruiting strategies for students from
traditionally underrepresented groups to broaden participation in the technical
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals are to: (1) identify skills
needed for Industry 4.0 in collaboration with industry and existing ATE centers,
(2) revise six courses across multiple degree programs to create a new
certificate program, and (3) increase the number of students from
underrepresented groups in five technician degree programs. The project team
will collect data from industry in the region and two ATE centers using a skills
survey that is focused on Industry 4.0 technologies. Survey results will be used
to identify new skills requirements and revise six courses used in multiple
degree programs, namely, Programmable Logic Controllers, Environmental Health
and Safety, Introduction to Mechatronics, Circuit Analysis, Introduction to
Maintenance Procedures, and Bioprocess Equipment Maintenance. A new Industry 4.0
certificate program will be created using this set of courses. An Industry 4.0
laboratory will be developed with input from industry and two ATE centers. The
laboratory will provide hands-on learning experiences for students with multiple
automation stations that include the sensors, actuators, and controller
necessary for automating a process. The project team will implement effective
advising strategies for recruiting and retaining students from underrepresented
groups. The survey results, curriculum, and educational materials from this
project will be disseminated across the North Carolina Community College System
and at national technical education conferences. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.