* 2202413
* Seeing Virtually: Toward a Vision of Teaching Physics in 3-D Space
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Matthew Anderson, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 08/31/2025
* USD 849,786.00

One reason that students struggle in introductory physics classes, which are
often key entry points for science, technology, engineering, and math majors, is
that certain topics are difficult to mentally visualize and manipulate. For
example, vectors and fields are challenging in their own right, and even more so
when presented using static two-dimensional imagery. Conversely, in virtual
reality where students are able to be present in a tactile environment and use
familiar gestures to interact with objects, the potential for deeper learning is
enhanced. The scope of this project involves developing virtual reality-based
physics learning spaces in which students can explore models from multiple
angles, manipulate the components, and interact with an instructor who is also
engaged within the environment. A critical component of the design is inclusive
access, as the platform does not require expensive or complicated equipment. All
students will be able to participate from anywhere with nothing more than a
smartphone and a desire to learn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to develop spatial computing environments that are specialized for
undergraduate physics education. By leveraging expertise in educational research
and state-of-the-art technologies, the team will prototype, iteratively develop,
and optimize collaborative educational spaces where students can interact with
three-dimensional renderings of physics phenomena and engage with each other and
instructors in real time. The scope of this project involves (1) constructing
three fundamental learning spaces: electric fields, magnetic fields, and
electromagnetic waves, and (2) developing research-based theory regarding how
virtual reality experiences can improve students’ learning gains. The spaces
will include dynamic graphical elements relevant to the physics phenomenon,
interaction tools to modify those phenomena, a live instructor who can assume a
student’s perspective to see exactly what the student is viewing, and learning
assessment measures. The students’ actions in these virtual environments and
their learning gains will be studied in order to optimize the design and
implementation of this novel approach. Access to the environment will be
inclusive because it is platform-agnostic: while the instructor may use
sophisticated tools, students can join with a tablet or smartphone. This will
foster successful learning opportunities for all students, and particularly for
underrepresented minorities and at-risk students. Findings will advance
knowledge on embodied cognition in spatial computing learning environments by
investigating the ways in which various composition elements and tasks engage
students in deeper levels of visualization and conceptual
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.