* 2202050
* National Electric Vehicle Consortium (NEVC)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Kevin Cooper, Indian River State College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2025
* USD 2,735,771.00

The internal combustion engine has dominated the transportation industry and has
led to decreased environmental quality and increased health issues from engine
emissions. Today, an estimated one billion light duty vehicles are on the roads,
consuming one fourth of global primary oil and contributing 10% to the global
greenhouse gas emissions The adoption of electric vehicles (EV) can reduce
dependency on oil and significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions. However,
industry leaders agree that there is an immediate shortage of skilled technical
workers across almost every sector required to support the EV industry.
Workforce projections estimate that the all-EV industry will add 250,000 to
500,000 new high paying jobs by 2030. This project will establish a National
Electric Vehicle Consortium (NEVC) to support the collaboration of academic,
agency, and industry experts across all EV disciplines to help secure the
nationâ€™s EV workforce with partners from 15 community colleges, 19 industry
partners, two research universities, and ATE Centers and
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The consortium will focus on the following fields
within the EV sector: manufacturing; installation; operations, maintenance, and
repair; vehicle conversion; safety and standards; and emerging technological
advances in the sector. Goals for the consortia include: 1) provide a venue for
national collaboration to network training needs with training providers to
support broad scale outreach, community-building among educational institutions,
industry, professional, trade, and regulatory associations, educators, and
practicing technicians within the EV Ecosystem; 2) document workforce needs and
skills and competencies, for all areas of the emerging EV sector; 3) collect
data on academic programs and curricular resources across the EV sector; 4)
align academic programs and courses with the EV industry sector needs and
address programmatic gaps; 5) support institutions of higher education in
adapting legacy programs or establishing new EV programs. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.