* 2202166
* Flexible Technology Education to Upskill/Reskill for a Vacuum Technician Career
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Ruth Robinson, Normandale Community College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 05/31/2025
* USD 649,938.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving curricula that
address vacuum technology in a technician education program. Vacuum technology
is a critical enabling technology that combines complex concepts in mathematics,
chemistry and physics in support of advanced manufacturing and research. Vacuum
systems remove air and water vapor from an enclosed environment to create a
pressure condition many orders of magnitude less than atmospheric pressure.
Although vacuum technology plays an integral role in fields such as
semiconductor manufacturing and space technology and research, its significance
is largely unrecognized by the public. Manufacturing and research organizations
utilize expensive vacuum systems, equipment worth tens of millions of dollars,
with expectations that the systems function around the clock. Unanticipated
downtime due to a vacuum system malfunction is extremely costly. Organizations
rely on technicians who possess the knowledge and skills to maintain and repair
these systems. Technicians are responsible for quickly troubleshooting and
correctly diagnosing issues with the vacuum system performance in order to
minimize disruptions in system operation as well as preserve the integrity of
the process and product affected by the system. This project will enhance the
curricula in vacuum technology and create targeted support services to benefit
students, especially incumbent workers, so they are motivated to persist in this
program of study to develop the knowledge and skills valued by organizations
that utilize vacuum systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a
combination of activities in the areas of program development and improvement
and curriculum and educational materials development. The disciplinary focus is
vacuum technology, an area of study vital to semiconductor fabrication,
nanotechnology, advanced manufacturing and research. The objectives of the
project are to: 1) Incorporate cross-disciplinary learning opportunities into
the curriculum to better prepare technicians for the future of work; 2) Offer
shorter length modules with more entry points and provide more flexibility in
the sequence of module completion; and 3) Implement student support strategies
that increase student persistence and completion of a credential and successful
transition to the workforce, particularly for nontraditional-aged students,
individuals underrepresented in vacuum technologies, veterans, and dislocated
workers. The project will advance knowledge and understanding of the cross-
disciplinary STEM competencies required for vacuum technicians in the era of
Industry 4.0. Offering the new modularized courses is a strategy to address some
of the barriers to entering vacuum technology by opening up access to courses at
times and durations better suited for nontraditional-aged learners. Individuals
will be able to access courses through a combination of asynchronous and
synchronous courses that can be offered virtually or face-to-face. The project
will contribute to our understanding of how to provide technicians with just-
enough instruction in cross-disciplinary STEM skills to allow them to transition
into today’s workforce. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the Nation’s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.