* 2202916
* Reconciling US Southwest Hydroclimate Model Projections and Geologic Data: Constraints from the Miocene Climate Optimum
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jeremy Rugenstein, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 07/31/2025
* USD 567,963.00

As atmospheric CO2 rises and the world warms, water availability in the US
Southwest remains a pressing concern. Ongoing population growth combined with
one of the worst droughts in more than a millennia has placed tremendous
pressure on water resources in the region. Models that simulate global climate
generally find that the US Southwest will become more arid as atmospheric CO2
rises, because higher temperatures will increase evaporation of water from the
surface. In contrast to model projections, the Southwest US appears to be wetter
during periods in the geologic past when atmospheric CO2 was higher. This
disagreement between model projections and geologic data challenges our ability
to understand how water availability in the US Southwest will change as
atmospheric CO2 rises. This research focuses on understanding this disagreement
by investigating how different climate model simulations project changes in the
water cycle and comparing these simulations with new data from a globally warmer
period 15 million years ago during the middle Miocene. This work will improve
society’s ability to understand how the water cycle in the US Southwest will
change in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will collect new
sedimentary carbonate stable isotope data from Santa Fe Group of northern New
Mexico that span the Miocene Climate Optimum (MCO). The sedimentary stable
isotope values are sensitive to moisture source, precipitation seasonality,
temperature, and primary productivity. In turns, numerous ash deposits in the
targeted basin provide the potential for a high-resolution, absolute chronology
to link to the oceanic record of the MCO. The researchers will analyze existing
millennial-long coupled (ocean-atmosphere-land-sea ice) climate model
simulations and large initial condition ensembles to differentiate between
internal variability, the transient, and the equilibrium hydroclimate response
to CO2 forcing and various SST patterns. Further simulations will apply a newly
developed method of simulating a hydroclimate Green’s function to rapidly
compute local P responses to a large range of SST pattern changes, which are
hypothesized to force US Southwest rainfall. The combination of these tasks will
permit the researchers to identify drivers of US Southwest hydroclimate change
and reconcile model simulations and paleo archives to warming or pinpoint the
discrepancies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.