* 2202777
* Collaborative Proposal: Tectonic degassing as a possible solution to the Miocene climate enigma
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jiang Zhu, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2025
* USD 425,904.00

About 20 million years ago, the Earth was much warmer than today and the
Antarctic was nearly ice-free. However, a mysterious climatic transition
happened around 14 million years ago and the Earth went through a series of
cooling events since then. The persistent cooling over millions of years
ultimately led to the emergence of the bi-polar icehouse climate of today.
Scientists have long been puzzled about what processes could have caused the
cooling. One idea is that the rise of the Himalayas mountains may have sped up
erosion and increased the rate of chemical weathering, a process that draws down
atmospheric carbon dioxide. Other scientists suggest that the cooling may have
been caused by a slowdown in the supply of carbon dioxide from deep inside the
earth. The idea is that the formation rate of oceanic crustal rocks decelerated
about 14 million years ago. That would have caused a decrease in the release of
carbon dioxide from the Earth's interior into the atmosphere. The decrease in
the supply of that greenhouse gas then led to the decrease in global
temperatures. This study will help address this cooling mystery by providing
improved estimates of past global temperatures. Those estimates will come from
analyses of organic molecules preserved in deep-sea sediments and from climate
model simulations. The new global temperature reconstruction will help determine
the relative contributions of mountain building and carbon dioxide release from
the Earth's interior to changes in the carbon cycle. The study will provide a
better picture of how tectonic processes on Earth, both on land and at the sea
floor, influence long-term global climate. The project broader impacts include
support for a postdoctoral researcher at both institutions, support for a
graduate student and undergraduate researchers at Brown University, and support
for K-12 focused outreach activity through an existing program at Brown
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beginning in the Middle Miocene (~14 Ma), the
Earth experienced sustained cooling of 10-12 degrees C that ended the generally
warm climate that had prevailed since the Mesozoic. A major enigma about this
Miocene climate transition is whether it is driven by reduced carbon dioxide
degassing (source) or enhanced weathering removal (sink). Assuming a relatively
constant seafloor spreading rate over time, previous studies suggest that the
carbon dioxide drawdown (and the global cooling) was caused by enhanced chemical
weathering. That could have been due to either the uplift of the Himalayas or
the emergence of the tropical maritime continent, which exposed easily weathered
volcanic material in one of the warmest, wettest areas of the world. Recent sea
surface temperature reconstructions, however, reveal that the Middle Miocene was
much warmer than previously thought, raising the puzzle of whether reduced
weathering alone is sufficient to sustain the large warming; an enhanced carbon
dioxide flux is probably required to balance the expected weathering sink of
carbon dioxide under warm Middle Miocene conditions. This study is motivated by
a challenge to the weathering hypothesis based on recent evidence of a ~30%
reduction in global crustal production rate since 15 Ma. This project will
generate new biomarker sea surface temperature estimates with global coverage
for the Miocene, filling temporal and spatial gaps of current datasets. Along
with proxy analysis, the study will also develop new Miocene climate simulations
sampling a wide range of model physics and boundary conditions to reproduce the
Miocene large-scale temperature and hydrological cycle. The model simulations
will be used to probe source/sink configurations compatible with Miocene
temperatures and mass balance in the carbon cycle. By synthesizing the model-
data information, the project will develop an improved reconstruction of the
Miocene climate which will ultimately allow for estimation of the relative
contribution of different source-sink terms (i.e., the Himalayas, the maritime
continent, and the carbon dioxide degassing associated with seafloor spreading)
in driving the Miocene temperature and atmospheric carbon dioxide
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.