* 2202428
* Conference: Energy Access Educators Workshop
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2022,10/31/2022
* Henry Louie, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 10/31/2022
* USD 36,291.00

Attracting and retaining undergraduate engineering students is a difficult
problem, and one of national interest. One effective way to increase engineering
student recruitment and retention, particularly among underrepresented groups,
is by incorporating humanitarian engineering themes and projects into
curricular, co-curricular, and extra-curricular activities. Students are more
likely to show interest in and persist in engineering if they are exposed to the
application of engineering to improve the lives and livelihoods of people in
marginalized, under-resourced, or at-risk communities. However, student
participation in humanitarian engineering activities varies unevenly by
discipline. While civil and mechanical engineering students may easily see their
disciplines reflected in the more common humanitarian engineering activities
such as clean water and shelter projects, electrical engineering students are
less likely to see the connection of their discipline and serving humanity. An
underutilized entry point for electrical engineering students to engage with
humanitarian engineering is in the field of electricity access. Electricity
access is concerned with providing electricity to the 800 million people
presently without it. Unfortunately, the number of faculty active in this area
is relatively small, and there is no venue, professional association or
infrastructure dedicated to serving these educators. This limits the quality and
quantity of humanitarian engineering experiences available to electrical
engineering students, and stifles community building, academic exchange and
opportunities for collaboration among the faculty. This project will create a
first-of-its-kind workshop dedicated solely to enhancing and expanding
undergraduate engineering education in electricity
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will convene approximately 25 energy
access educators and stakeholders from industry, government, and non-profit
organizations for a two-day workshop. The workshop agenda includes targeted
discussion, panel and networking sessions. In these sessions, participants will
share best practices, lessons learned, and innovative ideas for curricular, co-
curricular, and extra-curricular activities as well as identify gaps and
challenges such as identifying educational materials, establishing local
partnerships, and acquiring funding. Pre- and post-workshop surveys will be
given to create a preliminary snapshot of the state of electricity access
education, shape the workshop agenda, and assess the success of the workshop in
meeting its aims. The key findings of the workshop will be synthesized and
disseminated through publications and presentations. The workshop will lead to
the development a roadmap of future activities and infrastructure, such as
additional workshops, email lists, sharing of course materials and resources,
and collaborative pedagogical or applied research. The workshop participants
will be recruited from a variety of higher education institutions, with
particular emphasis on Primarily Undergraduate Institutions, Tribal Colleges and
Universities, and Historically Black Colleges and
Universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.