* 2202820
* RAPID: An Indigenous-Centered Approach to COVID-19 Vaccine Hesitancy and Acceptance
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Micah Hahn, Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 11/30/2023
* USD 199,991.00

Investigators on this project will collaborate with tribal health organizations
to better understand vaccine decision-making in rural and remote communities in
Northwest Alaska, which are currently experiencing some of the highest COVID-19
infection rates in the country. The research has three objectives: identify
barriers to vaccine uptake; characterize decision-making dynamics related to
vaccine acceptance and hesitancy; and evaluate the impact of public health
interventions. The work advances understanding of vaccine acceptance and
hesitancy among Alaskans and field tests an innovative public health
intervention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This community-based study uses mixed
methods to collect and analyze data. The PI team will conduct interviews with
healthcare providers and community leaders about barriers and opportunities to
vaccine uptake. A second set of semi-structured interviews engages participants
and household members in storytelling about vaccine decision-making. Topics
include values and memories that influenced decision-making and individual
experiences of vaccination, infection, and loss of a family member. With
participant permission, these stories will form the basis for culturally
appropriate outreach materials for use by tribal health organizations. The
impact of these materials will be evaluated using focus groups and analysis of
social media and community vaccination rates. Project findings will be
disseminated to local policymakers in the Northwest Arctic Borough, and through
public health conference presentations and peer-reviewed journal
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.