* 2202955
* 2022 Cytoskeletal Motors Molecular Machines: From Biophysics To Physiology To Disease
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Steven Rosenfeld, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 04/30/2023
* USD 25,000.00

The Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on
Cytoskeletal Motors will be held in Dover, VT on July 9-10, and July 10-15,
respectively. The GRS is primarily attended by graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows, and is designed to provide a supportive environment for
trainees to present their scientific findings and network. This will be followed
by the GRC which in addition to trainees, will also bring together senior and
junior scientists from broad ranging disciplines to discuss and advance our
understanding of the molecular motorsâ€”cellular machines that drive many
essential biological functions, including movement of chromosomes during cell
division, movement of subcellular organelles, such as mitochondria, and movement
of cells, such as occurs during development as well as in diseases. The
diversity and range of molecular motors is enormous, and understanding of how
these different cellular machines operate and are regulated is essential to
understanding of how cells travel, grow and change shape, and divide. The
application of novel microscope and biophysical techniques, together with
advances in computer simulations, has greatly increased our understanding of the
function of these cell motors, and a conference to share these results will
disseminate this knowledge rapidly to increase basic knowledge of cell motor
function to allow its use in cellular manufacturing as well as medicine. The
training and engagement of junior scientists (graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, and beginning assistant professors) is a priority of the conference.
Mentoring activities and professional development sessions are also planned as
part of both the GRC and GRS. NSF support will be used to defray registration
fee and/or travel costs to allow attendance of participants from these early
stages of their careers, especially for women and other members of groups that
have been historically under-represented in this field.&lt;br/&gt;The science
presented at the 2022 Molecular Motors GRC and GRS will cover all areas of the
biophysics, biochemistry, and cell biology of the wide variety of these critical
machines, including myosins, kinesins, and dyneins. Leading researchers will
present and discuss recent findings on the structure of these proteins,
computational modeling of changes to motor structure during function, the forces
these motors apply in the cells, the effects of these motors on cell components,
from movement of chromosomes in mitosis to plasma membrane cortical tension to
cell morphology, and the effects these motors have both in normal cells as well
as in cells where motor function is deranged. GRS presentations will be divided
into two scientific sessions: in which the most fundamental issues in motor
function will be discussed: i) molecular motor interaction with their tracks
(actin and microtubules); and ii) the effects of motor dysfunction. GRC
presentations will be divided into eight scientific sessions ranging in topics
from single molecule biophysics of motors and their tracks to motor structure,
regulation, and involvement of cell physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.