* 2202206
* Technical Workforce Immersive Teaching and Learning Resources
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* David Anderson, St. Cloud Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 07/31/2025
* USD 350,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving technician
education at two-year colleges through expanding immersive technology use in the
classroom. Immersive technologies include 360° photography and videography,
augmented reality (AR), mixed reality (MR), and virtual reality (VR). By
bridging the gap between industrial and societal use and academic integration of
immersive technologies, the Technical Workforce Immersive Teaching and Learning
Resource project will flatten the immersive technology implementation learning
curve. This project will provide two-year college faculty opportunities to bring
innovative, evidence-based adult-learning practices into technician education
through professional development opportunities where they can develop immersive
curricula for their classrooms. Technician students engaged with immersive
technologies in the classroom will be better prepared to adapt to a rapidly
changing workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this three-year project is
to provide professional development opportunities related to immersive
technology curricula to two-year college faculty. These technologies provide
students with active learning environments where they can be immersed in the
content and construct new knowledge. This project will develop and deploy
faculty resources including two-week immersive technology summer bootcamps,
immersive learning community networks, and content development support. This
bold approach represents a necessary first effort to extend evidence-based
immersive learning tools. Faculty at two-year colleges will explore immersive
technologies specific to their disciplines and construct experiences to use in
their classrooms and laboratories. Content developed through this project will
contribute to a repository of open educational resources for instruction using
immersive technologies. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the Nation’s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.