* 2202092
* A Collaborative Cybersecurity Analysis Certification Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Adam Beatty, University of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2025
* USD 216,189.00

To meet workforce demands crucial to the Nation’s security and sustained
economic development, this project will develop an educational and career
pipeline for the regional and national cybersecurity workforce. Three West
Virginia educational institutions: BridgeValley Community and Technical College,
the Southern West Virginia Community and Technical College, and the University
of Charleston, will work together to develop and launch a four-course, two-
semester Security Analysis (SA) Certificate program. The program will be offered
virtually and in-person and will target veterans, military-connected adult
learners, and high school students from West Virginia’s rural and economically
depressed southern counties. The goals of the project include: (1) building a
sustainable educational and career pipeline for critically needed cyber
specialists, and (2) growing a capable and trained workforce of cyber
specialists with security abilities and skills vital to national security within
West Virginia and across the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three
institutions share relationships with regional hiring organizations and have
been independently attentive to industry workforce needs. Combining efforts and
streamlining recruiting and co-curricular activities will improve each
institution’s cybersecurity and information technology academic offerings, and
will create a pipeline across state, regional, and national sectors. In addition
to the ATE community, the project team will share best practices and outcomes
across technical, industrial, and military networks. The project team will work
with the state’s First2 Network, an NSF INCLUDES program focused on increasing
STEM academic offerings to first-generation students, and TechConnect West
Virginia, a statewide organization promoting innovative research and workforce
growth by partnering with businesses and regional stakeholders. Evaluation of
the project consists of a constructive and collaborative adaptation of the
“Input, Outputs, and Outcome” model. The evaluation will provide an outside,
independent perspective on the effectiveness of the project and SA Certificate
program. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program
that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields
that drive the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.