* 2202183
* Preparing the Agricultural Workforce in Southwest Ohio
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* James Beaty, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 06/30/2025
* USD 318,011.00

Agriculture is the number one industry in the state of Ohio, contributing $107
billion a year to the state economy. As the population of farmers ages and a
larger proportion of farmers switch to farming part-time, agriculture has
emerged as the one of the top industries aiming to increase the skilled
workforce in the Miami Valley region. Over its 3-year duration, the Preparing
the Agricultural Workforce in Southwest Ohio project will expand and enhance
Sinclair Community College’s Agricultural Sciences (AGR) degree program to build
capacity and provide agricultural training that meets the workforce needs of
both urban and rural communities. To accomplish this, Sinclair Community College
will offer five additional program tracks within the agricultural sciences
program and create learning environments that are conducive to hands-on and
experiential learning. Extensive outreach efforts to K-12 students, teachers,
formally incarcerated individuals and incumbent workers will expand pathways
aimed at training the next generation of the agricultural workforce in the
region. In alignment with the mission of the Advanced Technological Education
(ATE) program, these new resources will supplement existing high-quality
training offered at Sinclair to enrich student interest and skills in
agriculture technology and enhance career pathways for incumbent workers. This
work seeks to diversify the agricultural workforce and address larger societal
challenges such as urban food deserts and helping formerly incarcerated
individuals obtain stable and well-paying employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall project goal will be to increase capacity of educational providers to
meet agricultural workforce demands in Southwest Ohio. Five new short-term
agriculture certificate tracks embedded within the associate degree program will
be developed and implemented to support this goal. The five new certificate
tracks (Greenhouse Management, Urban Agriculture, Agronomy, Large Animal Care
&amp; Husbandry, and Food Science) create a stackable credential model that will
provide incremental preparation steps for students and adults with entry-level
backgrounds in these areas. This model will also provide connections to entry-
level jobs, pathways to further education, short-term solutions for those
needing to earn a credential to enter the job market quickly, and ultimately
lead to economic stability and mobility. To grow and diversify the future
agricultural workforce in the region, the project team will create pathways and
conduct outreach activities that target K-12 students and teachers, formerly
incarcerated individuals, and incumbent workers. It is expected that project
outcomes will lead to increased access to high quality educational programming
and hands-on training to prepare students for in-demand occupations across the
state. Ultimately, this project will improve student learning and increase
Sinclair’s capacity to meet regional workforce needs. The community of educators
in agriculture education, along with the broader technician education community,
will receive implementation information on the curriculum created. The broad
reach of the dissemination plan will allow for replication and adaptation at
other colleges and K-12 dual-enrollment institutions across the country seeking
to enhance agricultural science pathways. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.