* 2202268
* CDS&amp;E: Elucidating and Controlling the Spectral, Spatial and Temporal Responses of Plasmonic Nanostructures based on a Data-Driven Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Yongmin Liu, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 05/31/2025
* USD 306,572.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasmonic nanostructures are tiny
particles made of noble metals, such as gold and silver. They can concentrate
light into extremely small dimensions and significantly enhance the light
intensity. The unique properties of plasmonic nanostructures have produced many
applications, including solar energy harvesting, biomedical sensing, diagnostics
and therapy. The objective of this project is to establish a framework based on
deep learning, a subset of artificial intelligence, to elucidate and control the
physical properties of plasmonic nanostructures by fusing theory, computation,
deep learning algorithms, and experiments. Recent work has demonstrated that
deep learning can discover the highly complicated and non-intuitive
relationships between photonic structures and their properties through extensive
data, overcoming the limitations of conventional analytical and numerical
methods. To further advance this emergent field, the PI will enhance the
capability of deep learning models by considering more degrees of freedom, such
as electric and magnetic field distributions, time-dependent responses, and
multi-physics processes in plasmonic nanostructures. The predictions of the deep
learning models will be directly validated by experiments, which will provide
important feedback and additional data to improve the model
capability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports a comprehensive
education plan that will include innovative activities at the Grade 7-12,
undergraduate, and graduate levels. Special efforts will be made to attract and
educate students from underrepresented ethnic/racial and gender groups, and
broaden their knowledge in photonics, materials science, applied physics, and
artificial intelligence. Part of the research findings will be used to develop
new course materials to introduce the latest development in the fields to the
students at Northeastern University. The PI will also create a new outreach
activity, in which local high-school students will learn about optical
properties of plasmonic nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and experimental
research aimed at effectively harnessing light-matter interactions in the
spectral, spatial, and temporal domains by leveraging advanced deep learning
techniques and using plasmonic nanostructures as the platform. The project
consists of three research thrusts: (1) developing a general approach to model
the spatial distribution of the electric and magnetic fields of complex
plasmonic nanostructures with high efficiency, accuracy and fidelity, which is
critical to engineer nonlinear optical effects at user-defined wavelengths; (2)
investigating the hot-electron-induced temporal responses and the resulting
transient multi-physics processes of plasmonic nanostructures by integrating
deep learning, Fourier transform and governing equations; and (3) fabricating
plasmonic nanostructures with canonical and freeform shapes, and experimentally
characterizing them using advanced microscopy and spectroscopy techniques. The
data-centric framework enabled by deep learning will help to uncover the physics
behind plasmonic nanostructures and other photonic designs. It will provide deep
insights into a series of fundamental problems, such as topology, symmetry, and
non-equilibrium dynamics, with fine spatial and temporal
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports a comprehensive
education plan that will include innovative activities at the Grade 7-12,
undergraduate, and graduate levels. Special efforts will be made to attract and
educate students from underrepresented ethnic/racial and gender groups, and
broaden their knowledge in photonics, materials science, applied physics, and
artificial intelligence. Part of the research findings will be used to develop
new course materials to introduce the latest development in the fields to the
students at Northeastern University. The PI will also create a new outreach
activity, in which local high-school students will learn about optical
properties of plasmonic nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.