* 2202644
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Continental Temperature Variability during Greenland Stadials and Interstadials from Subaqueous Speleothems
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Yemane Asmerom, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2025
* USD 393,452.00

The lack of temperature information for past episodes of climate change remains
a major hinderance to narrowing uncertainties of future climate projections.
This project aims to measure absolute paleo-surface temperatures for important
past climate periods in both the southwestern and northern regions of the United
States based on novel temperature indicators measured in cave records
(speleothems). The newly generated temperature data for the late Pleistocene and
Holocene can potentially provide useful constraints for climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the researchers aim to provide
temperature information for a large region of the North American continent using
dual clumped isotope and strontium isotopes. The new temperature records will be
used to address the following questions: 1) what was the extent of Holocene
temperature variability in and across the continental interior of North America?
To what extent does the covariation between Greenland and continental proxy-
records (e.g., southwestern United States), reflect temperature changes and not
water isotope variability. The researchers have already the samples in hand
collected from several caves (Carlsbad Cavern-NM, Lechuguilla Cave-NM, Wind
Cave-SD, Mammoth Cave-KY, Mystery Cave-MN, Hollyhock Hollow caves-NY, and
lesser-known caves in these areas) extending from the Laurentide ice sheet to
the Desert southwest.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Accurate uranium-series dating of
multiple subsample powders (~200 mg) from selected samples will provide suitable
subsample powders for clumped and Sr isotope analyses of the more important time
periods (e.g., Middle Holocene, Younger Dryas, Extrapolar Climate Reversal
(Mystery Interval), Last Glacial Maximum, the Last Interglacial). This work will
also characterize temperature gradients between the southwestern United States
and the more northern sites for these periods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
potential Broader Impacts include new paleotemperature records that can be used
to benchmark climate models and to evaluate the impact of temperature on
hydroclimate and water resources. Additionally, the research with the
application of dual clumped isotopes and strontium data can yield novel
methodological approaches for quantitative paleoclimate
reconstructions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide research training
for two graduate students at the universities of New Mexico and Michigan. The
results of this work will be disseminated to the broader public via outreach and
media coverage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.