* 2202259
* I-Corps:  Biosymbiotic wearable biosensing devices
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Philipp Gutruf, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a new class of wearable devices for investigation into long-term
physiological processes. For many athletes, recovery, and training management
are continuous processes that takes place daily and encompasses multiple
processes such as training, sleep, and nutrition. Lack of proper load management
and recovery may cause increased levels of stress hormones in the body and
affect the athleteâ€™s ability to perform at a high level. To provide holistic
insight into recovery and health, continuous aggregation of multimodal
information paired with a powerful analytics backend is an essential aspect of
wearable devices. Many competitors in the market focus on limited sensing
modalities and application locations. Additionally, these devices do not provide
users with continuous measurement capabilities and need to be recharged
periodically, leaving gaps in data, and reducing the accuracy of insights
provided by data analytics. The proposed system addresses these problems by
bridging the gaps between high-fidelity and long-term sensing capabilities. The
proposed device enables sensing modalities such as sub-millikelvin resolution
temperature, muscular strain, bioimpedance, PPG, ECG, movement, and sweat rate
in to provide holistic insight into health parameters relevant to sports
performance and recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of a new class of wearable devices called biosymbiotic devices
that do not require recharging utilizing power casting technology and pre-
existing commercial scalable fabrication techniques. The devices feature the
first demonstration of a wireless and battery-free wearable device that may
operate at long distances, is completely customized to the user, and is able to
collect clinical-grade fidelity biosignals indefinitely. The devices utilize
advances in electronics, materials, electromagnetics, and electromechanics to
create an ultra-lightweight, conformal system that features multimodal sensors
and wearability that is virtually imperceptible to the user, enabling long-term
and continuous collection capabilities. Through this project, the goal is to
establish product adoption criteria and validate commercialization plans through
customer discovery. Specifically, the team will investigate a device
configuration geared towards the target market of prosumer and professional
sports athletes that want to optimize training and recovery through unique
insight into their physiology. Additionally, the plan is to integrate sensing
capabilities into the system while developing user-friendly performance
analytics algorithms and interfaces to deliver these
analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.