* 2202747
* Controlled Interphases by ATRP: Polymeric Brushes and Functional Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2027
* Krzysztof Matyjaszewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2027
* USD 800,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research
supports Professor Krzysztof Matyjaszewski at Carnegie Mellon University to
prepare and study controlled interphases between the surface of liquid or solid
substrates and well-defined polymers synthesized by atom transfer radical
polymerization (ATRP). The substrates include liquid metals such as eutectic
gallium-indium alloy (EGaIn), artificial solid electrolyte interphases and solid
polymer electrolytes in lithium metal batteries, as well as surfaces of swollen
nanogels, macrogels, and vesicles. Two main ATRP techniques will be used,
grafting-from and grafting-onto. Precise control of interphases is challenging
due to a very small amount of available materials. However, the interphases
define many critically important properties related to stability of the sub-
micrometer layer, interactions with both neighboring phases, dispersability of
nanoparticles, transport phenomena, (bio)compatibility, friction and other
properties affecting macroscopic performance. Materials prepared in this project
should have several interesting applications depending on the substrates. Liquid
metal functionalized systems could find potential uses to enhance properties of
materials used for soft robotics and as solid electrolytes for lithium metal
batteries. Highly functional resin particles will be used as novel recyclable
supports for solid phase polymer synthesis and also in synthesis of
bioconjugates. In addition to these scientific activities, this work has broader
impacts through education and outreach. In this project, Professor Matyjaszewski
will train postdoctoral fellows, graduate, and undergraduate students in polymer
synthesis and polymer interphases with potential applications in energy storage,
soft robotics, and bioconjugations. He will also provide public education about
preparation and importance of controlled interphases via instructional webpages
and videos. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Division of Materials
Research, Professor Matyjaszewski and his team will explore preparation of
controlled interphases between the surface of liquid or solid substrates and
well-defined polymers synthesized by ATRP. He will investigate the effect of
precise anchoring on the substrate surface of either functionalized polymer
chains or ATRP (macro)initiators followed by polymer growth, as well as their
influence on the properties of interphases. He will use polyacrylates with ether
linkers between oligo(ethylene oxide) chain and polymer backbone, which are much
more hydrolytically stable than well-known isomeric polymethacrylate with
oligo(ethylene oxide) chains linked by ester moiety. This will provide enhanced
stability of polymers and related networks and an additional possibility of
introducing to the polymer backbones other functional groups, such as acids,
amides, hydrazides, alcohols and several other moieties for specific
applications. Professor Matyjaszewski will also introduce branching to polymeric
grafts and crosslinking to artificial solid electrolyte interphases to suppress
growth of lithium dendrites and enhance performance of lithium metal batteries.
The grafting-from and grafting-onto by ATRP will be applied to swellable gels
and liquid metals. Thus, he will use ATRP to graft polymer chains of different
architecture (linear, branched and crosslinked) from liquid droplets of eutectic
gallium-indium alloys, swollen nano- and macroparticles, and vesicles. Highly
functional resin particles will be used as novel recyclable supports for solid
phase polymer synthesis and as easily removable sacrificial initiators in
synthesis of specialized bioconjugates. Therefore, the precise control of
polymers at interphases at solid and liquid substrates will provide attractive
materials for soft robotics and for energy- or bio-related applications.
&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.