* 2202071
* I-Corps:  CO2 hydrate production for large-scale CO2 sequestration
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Vaibhav Bahadur, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology to sequester carbon dioxide (CO2) as CO2 hydrates. CO2
hydrates are ice-like solids, consisting of CO2 and water. Stable CO2 hydrates
form at ~0 ̊C, and at moderate pressures (~450 psi) from a mixture of CO2 and
water. CO2 hydrates can be safely sequestered long-term via multiple options
(under seabed, under permafrost, depleted gas fields). This I-Corps project
targets eventual commercialization of CO2 hydrates-based carbon capture and
sequestration (CCS). Many commercialization partners exist among process
industries, oil-gas industry, and utilities. A likely post-project scenario
involves establishing a startup company as the commercialization vehicle (which
develops sector-specific CCS solutions). Successful commercialization may lead
to significant employment opportunities, and contribute to positioning the US as
a leader in this field. Most importantly, it will augment the portfolio of
technological and geoengineering solutions to tackle climate change. This
project also will stimulate other applications of gas hydrates including
desalination, gas separation and hydrogen storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of technology to rapidly form CO2
hydrates from a mixture of CO2 and water. Key technological challenges
underlying artificial synthesis of hydrates have been very slow growth rates,
and low conversion rates of gas to hydrates. State of the art technology to
speed up hydrate formation includes the use of chemical promoters, which are
expensive and environmentally friendly. The team at UT Austin has made several
scientific discoveries and developed multiple novel approaches to speed up
growth of hydrates, which may cumulatively speed up hydrate formation by an
order of magnitude faster than state-of-the-art. Specific novel advancements
integrated in the proposed technology include recently discovered hydrate
nucleation promoters, a technique to enhance gas-liquid interfacial area and
convection, and the use of high thermal conductivity materials to speed up heat
transfer. Cumulatively, these advancements may enable rapid, on-demand CO2
hydrate production without the use of chemical promoters. The intellectual merit
of this project lies in the integration of multiple fundamental advancements to
realize rapid hydrate formation in reactor configurations commonly used by the
chemicals processing industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.