* 2202011
* Increasing Student Retention and Recruitment through Alumni Programs, Speed Networking, and Industry Engagement
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Golnar Afshar, Austin Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 541,118.00

This project will drive community college student retention and recruitment in
biotechnology fields by fostering mutually beneficial relationships between
students, alumni, industry, and the community. The need for biotechnicians is
increasing nationwide, requiring an ever-expanding pool of skilled
biotechnicians. This project will focus on activities to develop and test
methodologies to directly engage graduates of community college biotechnology
programs in alumni networks and activities. These activities will expand
awareness of biotechnology career pathways and build direct industry connections
with community college biotechnology programs. These connections will be used to
recruit and retain the next generation of skilled technicians. Methodologies
will be tested and evaluated across three colleges from different regions of the
United States: Austin Community College (TX), City College of San Francisco (CA)
and Johnston Community College (NC). Over the 3 years of this project, the
activities will include building connections between over 90 students and 45
industry professionals through alumni success stories and speed networking, to
increase students’ sense of belonging, science identity, and career awareness.
The project will document the career paths of the alumni to create career
pathways for current students. These direct connections with industry will
foster recruitment, retention, and placement of community college students in
the biotechnology field. The methodologies and tools developed will be
disseminated nationally to community college biotechnology programs and will
likely be applicable to other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to produce results-oriented methodologies and tools for recruitment
and retention that focus on alumni engagement. This will be done through
piloting speed networking events, creating “Scientist Spotlights'' and
publishing “Alumni Success Stories” across the three colleges with different
demographic, socio-economic and industry landscapes. To accomplish this, the
project will 1) establish an alumni network to document alumni career pathways
for the purpose of educating current and future students, and 2) develop
employee and alumni outreach tools to increase alumni and industry engagement
creating direct industry interactions between existing and potential community
college students. Feedback from faculty and staff from all three colleges will
be used to develop and embed these methodologies and tools into curricula.
Community college biotechnology, biology, and chemistry students, as well as
high school students, will be recruited to participate in the speed networking
events to directly interact with alumni industry professionals. These events
will provide current and future students relevant and relatable information that
will encourage them to join and/or complete biotechnology programs. This will
simultaneously provide alumni opportunities to re-engage with their program and
give back to their community, creating a sustainable feedback loop for industry
engagement with community college biotechnology programs. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.