* 2202902
* P2C2: Temperature and Hydroclimate Variability in Mid-Latitude arid Central Asia During the Past 13,600 years: a Multi-Proxy Investigation of Issyk-Kul (Kyrgyzstan)
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Isla Castaneda, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 12/31/2024
* USD 322,038.00

Arid Central Asia (ACA) will be strongly affected by future changes in water
supply. Impending temperature increases along with changes in precipitation
amount and type (snow or rain), as well as high population growth, are expected
to bring environmental and economic stress to the region. ACA is a region
characterized by varying geography and includes the Tian Shan Mountains (highest
peak 7,439 m). The rate of warming on Earth is not uniform and varies with
latitude and altitude; the poles and high elevation regions are warming the
fastest. Large populations typically reside in lower elevation regions but often
depend on runoff from the mountains as a water source. This is the case for ACA,
which receives a small amount of annual precipitation, and where mountains and
lakes are critical natural resources. For these reasons, is important to
understand how future climate change will affect ACA. This research will
generate temperature, precipitation and vegetation records spanning the past
13,600 years from Issuk-Kul, a large mountain lake in Kyrgyzstan. These new
records will reveal the past climate history of ACA and will advance
understanding of regional and global climate processes. Improved knowledge of
past mid-latitude climate dynamics in ACA is needed to predict future conditions
more accurately. This research will support efforts to broaden participation
from underrepresented groups in STEM by providing hands-on summer workshops for
middle and high school girls in partnership with the Eureka! Science Camp, run
by Girls Inc. of the Valley (Holyoke, MA) and the College of Natural Sciences at
UMass Amherst. High school interns also will be hosted during summers to gain
laboratory experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Issyk-Kul, one of the world's
largest and deepest lakes, represents a presently understudied paleoclimate
archive. This research will provide a multi-proxy organic geochemical study of
Issyk-Kul using existing sediment cores to test hypotheses including that the
lake experienced greater warming compared to the Northern Hemisphere average
during both the mid-Holocene thermal maximum and since 1850 AD, that ACA
received moisture from the East Asian Summer Monsoon during the mid-Holocene,
and that shifts in the algal and microbial communities of Issyk-Kul occurred in
response to climate variability. Multi-decadal to centennial-scale paleoclimate
records will be produced. Proxies based on glycerol dialkyl glycerol tetraethers
(GDGTs) will be used to generate a quantitative temperature reconstruction from
ACA over the deglaciation and the Holocene, in conjunction with plant wax
(n-alkane) deuterium and carbon isotopes as proxies for shifts in the dominant
moisture sources (the Westerlies, the Siberian High, and the East Asian Summer
Monsoon) and vegetation type (C3 versus C4 plants), respectively. Better
understanding the paleoclimate history Issyk-Kul will constitute a major advance
in the paleoclimatology of ACA where there are few existing records and where
spatial and temporal variability is poorly understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.