* 2202918
* Rainfall, Ecosystems, and Fire in Warm Late Neogene Climates of the Lake Baikal Region
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Pratigya Polissar, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2025
* USD 380,132.00

Climate change makes acute droughts and prolonged heat waves that stimulate
wildfires more common. These fires have devasted local communities in Siberia
and Canada while blanketing large municipalities in Siberia, Canada, Western
Europe, and the United States with smoke. Furthermore, boreal regions store huge
amounts of carbon in soils that, if released to the atmosphere, would accelerate
global warming. Frequent wildfires in boreal forests lead to carbon release by
shifting forest to grasslands and by accelerating permafrost melt. Climate
models predict dramatic ecosystem changes, with boreal forests replaced by
extensive grasslands and a new temperate deciduous forest ecosystem occupying
much of Siberia by the end of the 21st century. However, regional differences in
wildfires and the short time span of satellite observations make it difficult to
verify these model predictions. This project uses warm periods in Earth’s past
to test climate model predictions of hydroclimate, fire and, vegetation cover in
Siberia in warm climates, such as expected by the end of the 21st century.
Models will be tested by comparison to a record of past climate, vegetation, and
wildfire over the past 8.4 million years that is preserved in organic and
mineral fossils in a drillcore from Lake Baikal, Russia. The primary purpose of
this project is the generation of this new paleoclimate record. The broader
impacts of this study are that validation of models will make possible more
accurate forecasts of future carbon emission as well as the human habitability
and economic potential of Siberia in coming decades, with potential
ramifications for regional security. The project will also support undergraduate
research experiences at a federally designated Hispanic-serving
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test two hypotheses, based
upon climate model predictions and studies of recent climate and wildfire
trends. The first, that growing season lengthens and precipitation is more
equable in Siberia under warm climate conditions, will be tested by paired
analyses of plant-wax hydrogen isotopes (precipitation isotope proxy) and
branched glycerol dialkyl glycerol tetraethers (temperature proxy). The second,
that fire regime in the Lake Baikal region is a function of temperature,
hydroclimate, and biome, will be tested by paired analyses of polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons and charcoal (fire proxies) in the same samples as the
plant-wax hydrogen isotope and branched glycerol dialkyl glycerol tetraether
measurements. Timeseries of these data will reveal the regional response of
climate, vegetation, and wildfires in Siberia to global climate trends over the
past 8.4 million years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.