* 2202124
* CDS&amp;E: Inferring Lattice Dynamics from Temporal X-ray Diffraction Data
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Niaz Abdolrahim, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 07/31/2025
* USD 249,998.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging X-ray scattering experimental
techniques provide the capability to probe correlations between atomic structure
and physical properties of materials with atomic-scale (around one-billionth of
a meter) sensitivity and with one trillionth of a second time resolution. The
images obtained in these scattering experiments contain visual features, such as
rings, spots, and halos, which encode detailed information about the atomic
structure and its time evolution. However, the corresponding data sets are
enormously large, and therefore, manually analyzing them with many uncertainties
cannot be solely performed by human experts. This award supports research and
educational activities to develop artificial intelligence techniques to mine
data from X-ray scattering experiments to detect atomic-scale mechanisms of
phase transformations and plastic deformation in materials when they are
subjected to extreme conditions like high pressure, temperature or strain.
Achieving a fundamental understanding of the mechanisms that govern the
arrangement and motion of atoms is crucial for identifying new pathways of
forming new matter with desired properties and behavior at extreme conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also provide multidisciplinary training
for undergraduate and graduate students in computational materials science,
advanced atomic-level structural/chemical characterization, molecular dynamics
simulations, and artificial intelligence techniques. The project will inform the
design of new course material and modules on artificial intelligence applied to
materials science. The PIs will also be involved in outreach to K-12 students
aimed at broadening participation of underrepresented groups in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics and raise awareness of nanotechnology
and materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and educational
activities aimed at developing automated deep-learning computer vision
techniques to mine x-ray diffraction (XRD) data to identify crystal structures
and detect lattice-level mechanisms responsible for phase transformation and
plastic deformation under extreme conditions. At very high pressures,
temperatures, or strain rates when lattice variations or occurrence of new
phases are not known a priori, analyzing vast datasets of snapshots from
billions of XRD measurements become inaccurate, or fail completely. To overcome
this challenge, the research team will leverage a series of novel and advanced
techniques, including multimodal fusion, reconstruction, space-time modeling,
weak supervision, domain adaptation, and visualization to achieve the following
objectives: 1) Generation of static and temporal synthetic one-dimensional XRD
patterns and two-dimensional XRD images, 2) Development of deep learning models
for static and temporal classification of crystal structures, 3) Development of
interpretation techniques for explanation and justification of deep learning
models and predictions, and 4) Domain adaptation to large experimental data. The
successful development of such deep learning techniques will lead to deeper
understanding of unknown phenomena in materials under extreme conditions when no
prior knowledge is available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also
provide multidisciplinary training for undergraduate and graduate students in
computational materials science, advanced atomic-level structural/chemical
characterization, molecular dynamics simulations, and deep learning techniques.
The project will inform the design of new course material and modules on applied
deep learning for materials science. The PIs will also be involved in outreach
to K-12 students aimed at broadening participation of underrepresented groups in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics and raise awareness of
nanotechnology and materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.