* 2202928
* Ligand Dynamics and Chemistry on Locally Curved Metallic Nanoparticle Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Hui Wang, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2025
* USD 487,098.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Hui Wang of University of South Carolina aims
at developing quantitative understanding of the dynamic interactions between
molecular ligands and nanoparticle surfaces as well as surface curvature-
dependent ligand chemistry and photochemistry. The inorganic cores and the
organic ligand shells are two structurally distinct but strongly interplaying
components that synergistically determine the collective optical, electronic,
and catalytic properties of the nanoparticles. The insights to be gained from
this research project will serve as a central knowledge framework that guides
the rational optimization of the surface functionalities of colloidal
nanoparticles toward targeted applications in catalysis, photocatalysis,
photonics, sensing, and biomedicine. This project will create valuable research
training opportunities for students at various levels and will be further
integrated with outreach activity development. Specifically, Dr. Wang will
develop a highly interdisciplinary research and education program on
nanoparticle surface chemistry involving broad participation of graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students. In addition, Dr. Wang and his students
will collaborate with Benedict College, a Historically Black College and
University (HBCU) in South Carolina, to develop a long-term partnership on both
research and education. Furthermore, the Wang group will work closely with the
Electron Microscopy Center at the University of South Carolina on developing
educational outreach activities that specifically target the students from local
public schools and the participants of the South Carolina State Science Fair.

Virtually all chemically synthesized inorganic colloidal nanoparticles,
regardless of their dimensions, crystalline structures, and chemical
compositions, are coated with a thin layer of organic molecular ligands. This
research project involves systematic comparative studies of several deliberately
selected nanoparticle-ligand systems to investigate the interfacial dynamics and
chemical/photochemical transformations of molecular adsorbates on locally curved
metallic nanoparticle surfaces through integrated experimental and computational
research efforts. Dr. Wang and his research team will utilize surface-enhanced
Raman spectroscopy (SERS) as an ultrasensitive plasmon-enhanced spectroscopic
tool to quantitatively correlate the interfacial ligand dynamics with detailed
molecular structures under a diverse set of ligand adsorption, desorption, and
exchange conditions. SERS will also be used as an in situ spectroscopic tool to
fine-revolve detailed structural evolution of the transforming molecular
adsorbates on structurally tailored metallic nanoparticle surfaces in real time
during chemical and photochemical reactions. The thermodynamic and kinetic
results obtained through deliberately designed SERS measurements will be further
corroborated by density functional theory calculations to fully unravel how the
chemical nature of nanoparticle-adsorbate interactions and the local curvature
of nanoparticle surfaces profoundly influence the dynamic interfacial behaviors
and the chemical/photochemical reactivities of various types of surface-bound
ligand molecules, such as organothiols, isocyanide compounds, terminal alkynes,
and diazonium-derived aryl ligands.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.