* 2202066
* Preparing Career Ready Information Technology Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Lanka Elson, Chesapeake College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2025
* USD 317,035.00

The lack of diversity and the shortage of qualified workers in the technical
sector is a well-known and well-documented problem that is making it difficult
for companies to hire workers across the entire technology sector. This project
will address local industry needs while at the same time supplying broader
insights into effective strategies for diversifying the Information Technology
workforce in a rural region, and formalizing career readiness skill development
within a highly technical curriculum. Career readiness skills will be embedded
throughout the core Computer Science Technology program, providing students with
the opportunity to take industry certification exams and to learn and practice
job skills. The result of this project will be a more diverse, career-ready
technical workforce that can support the continued growth of Chesapeake
College’s Computer Science Technology program and the growing population on the
Delmarva Peninsula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four career readiness skills
(teamwork, customer service, communication, and professionalism) and 12 soft
skill competencies will be embedded into the program’s six core courses.
Students will be provided with vouchers enabling them to take two industry
certification exams, providing the opportunity to further develop their
Information Technology skills. Responding to local workforce needs for students
with help desk experience, a help desk simulation lab will be established to
provide students with hands on experience providing customer service using help
desk software while at the same time allow them to improve their soft skills. To
assess the extent to which the project achieves its objectives, the evaluation
will consist of formative questions and summative questions that will be
analyzed to determine the extent to which the objectives of the project are
being achieved. Project results will be disseminated through presentations at
state and national conferences as well as through ATE
Central.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.