* 2202410
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Investigating microbial predation as a driver of endosymbiosis and phagocyte evasion
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Jessie Uehling, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 03/31/2025
* USD 591,459.00

Soil microbes compete. As a result they evolved tools to resist their enemies.
However, there is also evidence of collaboration between microbes
(endosymbiosis), where bacteria live inside fungal cells. We have shown that,
together, a bacterial endosymbiont and its fungal host create a holobiont that
can make a powerful toxin that blocks soil-dwelling amoebae from engulfing the
fungus. This endosymbiotic bacterium also changes how the fungus controls its
own gene expression to fight different kinds of stress. This project examines
how frequently fungi and endosymbionts evade amoebae; the implications for
fungal housing of endosymbionts; and whether these symbioses lead to co-
evolution. To answer these questions, we will look at bacterial-fungal
partnerships across a wide range of species, looking for differences and
commonalities in their shared genomes. We will also record reactions of wild-
type and mutant fungal-bacterial endosymbionts with amoebae in the lab to
identify the different strategies they can take to evade amoebae engulfment.
Finally, we will examine one endosymbiont pair in depth to understand the
mechanisms that allow these partnerships to exist. Amoebae are very similar to
the cells in the human immune system that are the first line of defense against
infection. Thus, this study can help our understanding of immunity. Additional
broader impacts of this proposal include developing fungal biological education
modules and teaching resources in the K-6 classrooms, develop mushroom grow kits
for children, and participation in science podcasts. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Identifying how environmental fungi developed traits to evade immune
cells is critical to understanding the causes of opportunistic fungal infections
in nature and in humans. Mucoromycota are primarily soil-associated fungi, some
of which are also opportunistic mammalian pathogens. We recently identified an
endosymbiosis between Betaproteobacteria Ralstonia (bacterium) and Mucoromycota
Rhizopus (fungus), a symbiosis that blocks engulfment and killing of the fungus
by the soil-dwelling amoeba Dictyostelium and also confers virulence in animals.
Endosymbioses between Betaproteobacteria and Mucoromycota are environmentally
ubiquitous. Endosymbionts are also observed in approximately half of clinical
Rhizopus isolates, where phagocyte-related deficiencies are a major predictor of
susceptibility. We hypothesize that interactions between bacterium-fungus
holobionts and soil amoeba drive their evolutionary trajectories and
opportunistic virulence in mammals. We will use phenotypic, genomic, and
molecular tools to dissect the holobiont-phagocyte interaction and investigate
host-pathogen interactions at two levels: 1) interactions between bacteria and
their fungal hosts, and 2) the effect of endosymbionts on phagocyte evasion and
opportunistic virulence. We will take both an unbiased approach to survey
bacterial-fungal-amoebal interactions across the genus and a directed approach
to investigate the molecular mechanisms for specific bacterial-fungal isolates
alone and with amoeba. These mechanistic studies will be coupled to comparative
genomics analyses to reveal how evolutionary pressures exerted by amoebae drive
endosymbiosis and immune evasion. This collaborative US/UK project is supported
by the US National Science Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and Biological
Sciences Research Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.