* 2202484
* EAGER: Mining a Useable Past: Perspectives, Paradoxes, and Possibilities with Security and Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Gerardo Con Diaz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,978.00

Rapid evolution of digital and mobile technologies is simultaneously eroding
personal privacy and creating a permanent need for increasingly secure systems,
with major underlying shifts in the social, economic, and technical
relationships between security and privacy that have been unfolding for four
decades. Time is running out to record and preserve the histories of the
pioneers who transformed privacy and security into interconnected, essential,
and highly profitable ventures. This project aims to record and permanently
preserve these pioneers’ histories by conducting and publishing thirty research-
grade oral histories that will be permanently archived at the Charles Babbage
Institute for Computing, Information, &amp; Culture (CBI).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oral histories that will be recorded identify the
intersectional forces that have shaped privacy and security today, by examining
the technical, policy, and societal factors that have shaped the academic and
industrial fields. The research creates a long-term infrastructure for future
research in the history of privacy and security, which the project will achieve
by publishing and permanently archiving the interviews at the online databases
and physical holdings of CBI, world’s leading archive in the history of
computing. Additionally, a book will synthesize the research, with a goal of
being highly accessible and structured for widespread use as a course text in
many fields—including history, sociology, computer science, STS, social
informatics, communication, and legal studies—as well as to appeal to the
general educated reader.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.