* 2202663
* P2C2: Tropical Pacific Influences on Atmospheric Blocking across Climates
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Christina Karamperidou, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 654,880.00

Atmospheric blocking events are persistent weather patterns, most often high-
pressure systems, that divert the mid-latitude jet stream and storms for days to
weeks and can be associated with extreme weather such as heat waves, cold
spells, droughts, and flooding. There is significant uncertainty surrounding the
response of atmospheric blocking and its related extreme events to anthropogenic
climate change, including their frequency, intensity, and duration, as well as
their modulation by climate variability. The mean climate state and anomalies of
the tropical Pacific during El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events influence
atmospheric blocking; however, these impacts vary depending on the ENSO “flavor”
(Eastern or Central Pacific). Thus, part of the uncertainty in blocking
projections is due to uncertainties in the projected changes in both the
tropical Pacific mean state and ENSO diversity and their potential interactions.
This project aims to investigate the relationship between ENSO diversity,
atmospheric blocking and extreme events in observations and existing and new
targeted model experiments. Via a paleoclimate model-proxy synthesis, the
project will potentially enable the assessment of biases and the development of
constraints for future projections of atmospheric blocking and associated
weather extremes as they are influenced by the tropics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work focuses on a systematic and hierarchical investigation of the relationship
between atmospheric blocking and associated weather extremes that will
specifically consider the impact of different states of tropical Pacific mean
climate and of ENSO diversity. To this end, the researchers will relate
atmospheric blocking characteristics and extreme event frequency to the state of
the tropical Pacific at multiple time scales (multidecadal, interannual) and,
diagnose the underlying mechanisms via a synthesis of diagnostic analysis of GCM
present-day and past climate experiments, new high-resolution (~15km) model
experiments designed to isolate the role of the tropical Pacific, statistical
modeling of weather extremes, and paleoclimate proxy records. This investigation
will offer new insights into the impact of the tropics on midlatitude extreme
events and allow for a quantitative synthesis of paleoclimate proxies and models
to assess model skill in representing these relationships. The ultimate goal is
to devise metrics that reduce model uncertainty in simulations of externally-
forced changes in blocking, in other words calculate constraints for blocking
projections based on simulation skill of tropical Pacific mean state and
diversity. The potential broader impacts include a comprehensive framework for
integration, validation and interpretation of past climate and modern
observations to evaluate future climate projections at regional and global
scales. This project has the potential to improve the prediction of extreme
weather and assessment of risk associated with the intersection of climate
change and variability, atmospheric blocking, and extreme events, and develops
knowledge and resources that are increasingly being used by academic
institutions, government agencies, and private-sector R&amp;D companies,
including insurance companies, banks, and consulting
firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide scientific training for
graduate and undergraduate students on new technologies on weather and climate
risk analysis in Title III - Asian American and Native American Pacific
Islander-Serving Institutions (AANAPI). Additionally, a new online outreach
module will be developed to be incorporated in the biennial SOEST Open House
Activities for K-12 visitors and the general public (~10-minute activities),
designed to raise awareness and understanding of the distinct impacts of ENSO
flavors. This new module will be designed as an ENSO impacts game, where the
players will place a Sea Surface Temperature anomaly corresponding to different
ENSO flavors, which will change the position of the jet stream on the board.
They will then be asked to guess the ENSO impacts in multiple locations,
including Hawaii (wet/dry, warm/cold) as they relate to changes in the jet
stream, and will be assigned scores based on hits and misses. The module will be
shared publicly to be used by educators across the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.