* 2202712
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Constraints on Last Interglacial and Late Holocene Global Mean Sea Level and Fingerprinting Polar Ice Mass Flux from Broadly Distributed Coastal Caves
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Yemane Asmerom, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2025
* USD 348,463.00

This project aims to advance the knowledge of global mean sea level (GMSL) and
characterize the relative contribution of ice sheets and glaciers to GMSL
variations. The researchers will use geological records preserved in cave
deposits to reconstruct the GMSL history over the last 130.000 years from
multiple locations (Mediterranean Sea, Yucatan Peninsula, Philippine Sea), and
to study sea-level high stands during past warm climates. With over one third of
the world’s population living within coastline regions, assessing the regional
vulnerability to future-sea level rise is of societal relevance and requires an
understanding of the magnitude, rate, and drivers of past sea level fluctuations
to put current trends in context. This will be achieved by direct sea level
estimates provided by coastline mineralogical records, namely phreatic
overgrowth on speleothems which form at sea level on partly submerged
caves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phreatic overgrowths on speleothems (POS) are
precise and accurate indicators of local sea level changes during critical
periods of the ice age, including the Mid-Pliocene Warm period, the Last
Interglacial (LIG) and the Late Holocene. This project aims to analyze existing
POS archives and to expand this archive to include several promising cave sites.
The scientific goals are encapsulated in several core research questions: 1)
What is the temporal variability of GMSL from the LIG to the Late Holocene and
what is the phasing between peak GMSL and the initiation of global scale
warming; 2) What are the relative contributions of the major polar ice sheets to
this variability and is there evidence of hemispheric teleconnections?; and 3)
to what extent is the GMSL rise and acceleration anomalous relative to the
record of GMSL across the Late Holocene? The researchers will develop a near
continuous GMSL curve for climate warm intervals derived from high temporally
and vertically well resolved POS observations linked to state of the art
statistical and geophysical modelling. The observations include U-series
chronologies, high-resolution stable isotope analyses of C and O, and
mineralogical and petrographical analyses to constrain timing and duration of
peak sea-level high stands. Additionally, numerical simulations of Glacial
Isostatic Adjustment (GIA) will be used to correct GMSL record from the impact
of GIA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts (include a greater
knowledge and a better understanding of the magnitude and drivers of sea level
rise. This has direct implication for different scientific communities
investigating key relationships between sea level, ice sheets, Earth’s climate,
and properties of the solid earth. Further, the newly developed knowledge will
be of a broad societal relevance as it will potentially benefit coastal
communities, stakeholders, and policy makers. This project will provide
education and research training for graduate and undergraduate students at the
universities of South Florida, New Mexico and Harvard who will be involved in
many aspects of the interdisciplinary research. Additionally, the results of
this research will be communicated through teaching at the various project
institutions. The researchers will disseminate the project findings with the
relevant scientific communities via peer-reviewed publication and presentation
at national and international conferences. The research finding will be also
disseminated to the broader public through public presentations, popular science
articles and media coverage. Educational material will be developed for outreach
activities at the studied caves, including underwater images and videos. The
data collected during this project will be made publicly
accessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.