* 2202221
* Creating Pathways for Technicians in Advanced Design and Manufacturing Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Michael Appio, Foothill-De Anza Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2025
* USD 525,793.00

The manufacturing sector is undergoing rapid changes as additive manufacturing
(also known as 3D printing) and robotic automation transform the way products
are designed and produced. These changes have created an industry demand for
machinists and manufacturing technicians who are capable of applying these
technologies in manufacturing facilities. However, the number of graduates from
technician programs that are focused on these technologies has not kept pace
with the demand. Technical education programs are needed that help students
acquire the knowledge, skills, and abilities to successfully apply these
emerging technologies. There is also an opportunity to increase the number of
college instructors who are capable of providing technical education programs in
advanced manufacturing. This project will develop new courses and certificate
programs related to additive manufacturing and automation, provide industry
mentors and student support services to broaden participation in the technical
workforce, and provide professional development opportunities for instructors at
other institutions. This project will create pathways for students to pursue
high paying jobs with career advancement potential in the Silicon Valley
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to (1) increase the
number of qualified technicians who can apply advanced design and manufacturing
technologies, (2) improve the retention and success of students from
historically underrepresented groups, and (3) increase the number of
institutions that are capable of offering technical education in this field. A
survey of industry partners in the region will be conducted to determine the
knowledge, skills, and abilities that are necessary for advanced design and
manufacturing technicians. Based on the survey results, new courses will be
developed and existing courses will be revised to incorporate the new content.
These courses will be used to create new certificates in multi-axis computer
controlled machining and robotic automation that are aligned with industry
certifications. In collaboration with industry partners, the project team will
develop a professional mentoring program in which professionals from industry
mentor a group of students in the program who are from historically
underrepresented groups. An instructor professional development curriculum will
be developed that focuses on computer-aided design, additive manufacturing,
multi-axis machining, and robotic automation. The professional development
program will be offered twice a year for college manufacturing faculty from the
San Francisco Bay region. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-
technology fields that drive the Nationâ€™s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.