* 2202236
* Providing Opportunities for Women in Next Generation Electric Vehicle Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* John Frala, Rio Hondo College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 504,839.00

This project serves the national interest by developing a new Women’s Academy
called Providing Opportunities for Women in Next Generation Electric Vehicle
Technologies (WINGS-EV). WINGS-EV, as a learning community model, is industry-
driven, standards-centered, and STEM-based, and will result in the development
of new educational materials, curricula, coursework, lab exercises, internship
opportunities, and comprehensive student support services. Even as the
automotive industry moves forward with electric mobility and self-driving cars,
it is held back by a deepening talent crisis. Today, women account for only 27
percent of the US auto manufacturing workforce as compared to roughly 47 percent
of the overall labor force. Rio Hondo College’s WINGS-EV Women’s Academy will
extend current research on barriers faced by women desiring to enter the
electric vehicle technician workforce and barriers that arise in transitioning
from high school to a community college (especially those that serve underserved
communities) to baccalaureate-granting institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a
learning community model, WINGS-EV intentionally links together courses or
coursework to provide greater curricular coherence, more opportunities for
active teaming, and interaction between students, faculty, and industry
partners. There are two overarching goals of WINGS-EV: 1) to meet the workforce
needs of employers who require trained, qualified, and experienced technicians;
and 2) to increase the number of female students in the hydrogen and electric
battery technicians’ program. The broad impacts of WINGS-EV include integrating
the high-performance electronics, computer management skills, customer
management, and advanced technology diagnostic skills that ready participating
students for employment. At the same time WINGS-EV will assist diverse high
school populations by encouraging female students to enroll in dual enrollment,
thereby attaining two- and/or four-year technology degrees more quickly. By
focusing on recruitment, retention, and support strategies required to increase
female enrollment for one specific automotive subject (EV technicians), future
growth can be accommodated by adopting the same strategies for other
interdisciplinary STEM fields within technology education programs. This project
is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
Nation’s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.