* 2202180
* Building Efficiency for a sustainable Tomorrow (BEST) Center
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Mary Ann Piette, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,650,000.00

Commercial buildings are a predominant feature of U.S. cities. Such buildings
form the physical infra-structure for people working in many economic sectors.
The technicians who operate these buildings are largely invisible to building
occupants, occasionally seen responding to a complaint about room temperature or
repairing equipment. Climate change, the COVID-19 pandemic, and new digital
technologies are creating a new dynamic for the work of building technicians,
increasing the importance of their role, expanding the knowledge and skills
required of them, and raising expectations about the quality of their work.
Today’s building technicians must be prepared to manage the complex building
automation, data analytics, and energy management systems of the high-
performance “sustainable” buildings of the future. This project will support the
BEST Center transitioning to a Resource Center to continue to serve the
community for the collection, dissemination, and adoption of programs, courses,
lab applications, and innovative instructional methods for the advanced
technological education of building systems technicians.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BEST Resource Center will support the development of
building technician education programs at community and technical colleges
nationwide, engage industry to support this effort, and strengthen the national
STEM pipeline. The Center will have 3 goals: 1) Transform the instructional
capacity of community colleges in the field of building technician education,
with an emphasis on High Performance Building Operations Technical-Professional
(HPBOT-P) and Building Automation Specialist (BAS) curriculum alignment and
certification; 2) Engage industry stakeholders and research partners in a
national collaboration with community colleges to support high-quality building
science instructional programs; and 3) Strengthen the national STEM pipeline for
building technicians through outreach to high school students, women, and
populations traditionally underrepresented in building science. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.