* 2202939
* ENSO flavors during the Last Glacial Maximum: Assessing spatial variability under varying climate background conditions
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Gerald Rustic, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 332,944.00

ENSO flavors during the Last Glacial Maximum: Assessing spatial variability
under varying climate background conditions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The largest
source of interannual climate variability on Earth is the El Niño Southern
Oscillation (ENSO), characterized by distinct spatial patterns of tropical
Pacific sea surface temperatures. These patterns (or ‘flavors’) are linked to
climatic changes through powerful coupled ocean-atmosphere interactions that
reverberate globally and can adversely affect human societies. Recent
observations suggest these patterns may be changing, limiting societies’ ability
to forecast and mitigate ENSO impacts. However, it remains unclear whether
changes to ENSO’s spatial expression and climatic effects are related to
background climate conditions such as mean global temperature or tropical ocean
surface and subsurface temperatures. This project will use ocean sediments
deposited approximately 20,000 years ago to study how ENSO ‘flavors’ – the
spatial pattern of temperatures – change during a colder background climate
state. The results will advance our theoretical understanding of the ENSO system
and enable better predictions of global ENSO impacts under future climate
conditions. This project will offer climate research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students and will facilitate creation of online
content to highlight the importance of ENSO-related climate variability at the
regional and national level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature of the
relationship between background climate conditions and the patterns of ocean
temperature anomalies, or ‘flavors’ that characterize the El Niño Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) remains unclear. This project will test hypotheses that
background climate state, such as mean temperature and tropical Pacific surface
and subsurface ocean conditions, influence the spatial pattern of ENSO
variability, and that the thermocline plays a key role in modulating ENSO. The
spatial variability of the tropical Pacific under differing climate background
conditions will be assessed by developing records of variability spanning the
last glacial maximum (20,000 years ago) from key locations in the central and
eastern tropical Pacific. The geochemistry of planktic foraminifera shells will
be analyzed to reconstruct oceanic conditions at these sites. Population
distributions of trace elemental and stable isotopic ratios from individual
shells will provide estimates of surface and subsurface ocean variability. These
data will reconstruct ENSO’s spatial expression during the last glacial maximum
and test whether background climate and/or thermocline conditions influence ENSO
‘flavors’. This research will advance our knowledge of climate system processes,
mechanisms, and dynamical ocean-atmosphere interactions during different climate
states with implications for predicting future ENSO behavior. This project
incorporates undergraduate and graduate student research and will produce online
content for public education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.