* 2202501
* EPM: Engineering Transparent Conducting Superlattices from Liquid Metal Printed 2D Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* William Scheideler, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2025
* USD 487,727.00

Nontechnical Description: &lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional (2D), atomically thin
materials have unique optical and electronic properties that could enable
emerging technologies, from chemical sensors to low power microelectronics.
However, fabricating atomically thin layers at a large-scale
while&lt;br/&gt;controlling their electrical properties remains challenging.
This project seeks to harness a new class of ultrathin oxide layers formed on
the surface of the molten metals gallium and indium to efficiently fabricate
highly conductive and ultra-transparent nanosheets. The primary goal of this
work is to thoroughly understand and precisely control the nanoscale atomic
composition, crystallinity, and electron transport properties of these 2D oxide
materials by stacking multiple layers and by engineering the oxidation of liquid
metal alloys formed from tin, zinc, and gallium. These methods enhance the
electron mobility and light transmittance, as well as tuning of the electron
concentration in these materials for enabling applications to photodetectors,
solar cells, and displays. Integrated with the research efforts, this plan
builds on practices that have successfully engaged undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups in research to train a diverse and inclusive engineering
workforce. The education plan involves development of remote deployable liquid
metal science demonstrations for experiential learning by undergraduates and
K-12 students. This project also includes efforts to broaden graduate level STEM
participation via the principal investigator’s organization and hosting of a
panel discussion series in collaboration with diverse engineering student
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of this project is to develop a new paradigm of ultra-transparent, highly
flexible, and optoelectronically tunable 2D metal oxides via superlattice
engineering. These high-performance transparent conducting materials leverage a
fundamentally new synthetic strategy for printing 2D oxide nanosheets from the
solid oxide skin of liquid metals. Initial studies of 2D oxides reveal their
unique overlapping grain morphologies, quantum-confined electronic structure,
and ultrahigh electron mobility. This work identifies the nanoscale material
origins of these exceptional optoelectronic properties and controls the
composition, crystallinity, and conductivity of multicomponent 2D oxides by
engineering the physics of liquid metal surface oxidation. These studies
specifically investigate how metal alloy composition impacts the logarithmic
growth kinetics of surface oxidation and then connect this process physics with
2D oxides’ chemical composition through detailed material characterization.
These experiments test the hypothesis that surface-driven defect modulation
doping from type-II heterojunctions with insulating wide bandgap oxides (e.g.
gallium oxide) can directly enhance the conductivity of 2D metal oxides.
Extracting the electronic density of states in combination with optical
absorption spectroscopy can also quantitatively link alloy composition with the
surface oxides’ electronic structure. These studies are of broad significance
because this fundamental knowledge unlocks emerging applications in flexible
electronic devices including low-power emissive displays, electrochromic smart
windows, and high-efficiency solar cells that demand high-performing
semiconductors and transparent electrodes with tunable
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Electronic and Photonic Materials program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.