* 2202077
* Engaging Rural Students in Advancement Opportunities through the  Field of Data Analytics
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Laura Berry, North Arkansas College
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 462,135.00

The geographical region served by this project supports a large number of
students from groups which have been historically underrepresented in STEM
career pathways. This project will emphasize recruitment, retention, and
graduation of students from groups underrepresented in STEM disciplines, thus
providing women and Hispanics in Northark’s service area with increased access
to well-paying careers in data analytics. The project will serve regional and
national interests by developing an Associate of Applied Science (AAS) degree in
Data Analytics. The proposed degree program will prepare graduates to quickly
and effectively enter the workplace. The students will work on case studies
using real-world data. The proposed project plans to integrate communication,
collaboration, professional ethics, critical thinking, and employability skills
into course content. Data sources for projects will include data from Oceans of
Data, DataCamp and anonymized North Arkansas College data generated from
undergraduate research projects. The project team will collaborate with an
active and engaged Business and Industry Leadership Team (BILT). The key
activities of this proposal has the potential to be scaled and adapted by other
two-year colleges and applied to other STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team intends to (1) immerse students in case
studies and real-world data, (2) integrate communication, collaboration,
critical thinking, and employability skills into data analytics content, (3)
collaborate with local industry using a BILT, and (4) focus on development of a
more diverse STEM community. Coupled with a concurrent credit pathway for high
school students, this project team will lead to an increase in the number and
diversity of highly prepared data analytics technicians. Best practices from the
National Center for Women in Technology will be adapted to recruit and retain
women and other students from underrepresented groups into the data analytics
fields. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program
that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields
that drive the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.