* 2202699
* Collaborative Research: RI: AF: Small: Long-Term Impact of Fair Machine Learning under Strategic Individual Behavior
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Xueru Zhang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 09/30/2025
* USD 346,500.00

The development of Machine learning (ML) techniques have revolutionized society
and enabled breakthroughs in various scientific fields. Despite the enormous
social benefits, ML techniques have also caused ethical concerns when used to
make decisions about humans. It has been evident that in many high-stakes
applications, such as hiring, lending, criminal justice, and college admission,
ML techniques may exhibit bias against disadvantaged or marginalized social
groups or be vulnerable to individual strategic behavior. Recent studies have
largely examined these as two separate issues in a static framework. However,
the long-term impacts of ML techniques on the well-being of the population
remain unclear. Since ML algorithms are deployed in a dynamic environment (i.e.,
individuals adapt their behaviors strategically and repeatedly as they interact
with ML algorithms), ML developed in a static framework without considering
human feedback effects may behave in an unanticipated and potentially harmful
way. This project moves beyond static settings and aims to understand the long-
term impacts of fair ML under dynamic human-ML interactions. Such an
understanding is critical to ensure the trustworthiness of ML techniques and can
be leveraged for designing effective interventions that promote long-term social
welfare and equity; it may further help guide policymakers to design policies
that better serve society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies fairness
problems in a sequential framework with humans repeatedly interacting with ML
systems. Three key research questions will be addressed when investigating the
long-term impacts of fair ML: (1) how to rigorously model individual strategic
behavior and its impact on ML development; (2) how to validate and analyze the
human behavioral model; and (3) what approaches can be taken to improve long-
term human well-being? Integrating the knowledge from machine learning,
stochastic control, game theory, and social sciences, this project will first
establish an analytical framework that characterizes the complex sequential
interactions between strategic individuals and ML. This framework could enable
the rigorous analysis of the evolution of population dynamics and be further
leveraged for developing effective interventions that improve social welfare and
long-term equity. Finally, this project will conduct different analyses and
experiments to examine the robustness and accuracy of the proposed framework and
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.