* 2202205
* Flying High for New Careers in Aviation Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* William Burke, JOHNSON, O.S. TECHNICAL INSTITUTE
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2025
* USD 307,706.00

The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics predicts overall employment of aircraft and
avionics equipment mechanics and technicians to grow 11 percent from 2020 to
2030, faster than the average for all occupations. About 14,400 openings for
aircraft and avionics equipment mechanics and technicians are projected each
year, on average, over the decade. The Institute for Public Policy and Economic
Development found that Northeastern Pennsylvania’s demographic challenges slow
down economic growth in the region while estimating there to be a regional need
for aviation mechanics. Johnson College will develop and implement a Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) approved Aviation Technology associate degree
program that successfully recruits and trains students to fill a growing,
essential regional and national high technology workforce development needs in
the aviation industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project objectives include the
establishment of a working airport-based training laboratory; relationships to
engage military veterans who desire training as part of their transition to
civilian life; and faculty development activities to remain current with FAA
practices. Additional objectives include expansion of College-Industry
partnerships to provide training and career guidance; expansion of the College’s
dual enrollment program with regional school districts and Career Technology
Centers; and development of or participation in middle/high school career
awareness activities. The Aviation Technology two-year associate degree program
will prepare students to fill a growing number of essential positions in the
aviation industry. The curriculum will align with the latest FAA technology and
education requirements so that graduates are prepared at the highest level to
pass FAA licensure and meet the growing demand for aviation technology
mechanics. Students will be recruited from a variety of diverse backgrounds,
including prior military service, age, gender, race, cultural, economic, and
educational experience. It is expected that the program developed will create a
replicable format for institutions looking to create a similar program and meet
their own regional workforce development needs. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.