* 2202015
* Improving Advanced Manufacturing Technician Education Using Industry Partnerships
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Marcella Gale, Central Virginia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 05/31/2025
* USD 464,846.00

There is growing demand from industry for technicians with advanced
manufacturing skills in the central Virginia region. Building partnerships
between academia, industry, non-profits, and economic agencies is an effective
approach to improving educational pathways and leveraging local resources to
help train students to meet this demand. The project team will work with
industry partners to identify the skills that are needed so that students will
be successful in the technician workforce. Community colleges rely heavily on
adjunct instructors from industry to train students. Courses in advanced
manufacturing technician degree programs require adjunct faculty with current
and applied knowledge and skills which are continually changing in the rapidly
automating manufacturing environment. This project will help industry employees
engage in technician education programs as adjunct instructors, providing
qualified educators for these programs. Better industry partnerships will help
support recruitment and retention of students to produce more advanced
manufacturing technicians. Industry employees will serve as adjuncts in the
classroom to improve student competencies and outside the classroom to engage
secondary and underrepresented students in advanced manufacturing. This project
will advance understanding of the effectiveness of industry-academic
partnerships in leveraging local resources and growing the advanced
manufacturing workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
improve advanced manufacturing technician training by: (1) growing industry
partnerships to improve instruction and curriculum content, (2) training
industry professionals to serve as faculty in technical education degree
programs, and (3) strengthening career pathways for students through
partnerships between industry, local economic agencies, and non-profits. This
project will organize multiple Collaborative Working Groups for different
industry sectors that have representatives from regional advanced manufacturing
companies that currently have or will need technicians. These groups will review
technical degree programs and make recommendations, participate in student
outreach activities, and develop internship opportunities for students. A new
online training course will be developed to provide training for industry
adjunct faculty on effective teaching practices, the use of instructional
technology, and communicating with students. This project will provide
opportunities for secondary students to learn about technician careers in
advanced manufacturing by bringing students to campus to participate in hands-on
learning activities in the lab facilities. The project team will work with an
ATE center and an ATE Coordination Network to disseminate project results
including presentations and open educational resources. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.