* 2202182
* Developing New Academic Pathways for the Advanced Manufacturing Technician Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Daniel So, State Fair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 05/31/2025
* USD 571,769.00

Advanced manufacturing technician programs provide pathways for students to
pursue technical careers in manufacturing companies that are adopting new
automation and robotics technologies. The demand for manufacturing technicians
in the central Missouri region continues to grow. However, the supply of
qualified technicians with skills in advanced manufacturing technologies has not
kept pace with this demand. This project addresses the need to increase the
number of students entering and successfully completing technician degree and
certificate programs in advanced manufacturing. In collaboration with regional
industry, the project team will develop a foundational course in advanced
manufacturing and revise existing courses in multiple technology degree
programs. Students will have the opportunity to obtain nationally recognized
certifications. The project will provide rural high school students in the
region with new technical education opportunities including new advanced
manufacturing courses that can be taken at high schools and hands-on training
with new advanced manufacturing equipment. Workshops and mentoring for secondary
school teachers will be provided so that teachers can integrate advanced
manufacturing concepts in their high school courses. Students from rural areas
in central Missouri will have a new pathway to help them pursue a technical
career in manufacturing that improves their economic
situation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to increase the
number of students in advanced manufacturing technician pathways to meet the
demand for skilled technicians in regional industry. This project will: (1)
enhance educational certificates and technician degrees that lead to advanced
manufacturing technician careers, (2) engage secondary students in activities to
raise awareness of technician career opportunities, (3) build capacity for
offering dual enrollment courses by training high school teachers, and (4)
encourage persistence and completion of educational certificates in advanced
manufacturing. Regional industry advisors will provide guidance on which
industry certifications are needed by students and which Industry 4.0 concepts
and skills should be integrated in the technician degree programs. The project
will provide creative hands-on learning opportunities such as summer camps for
secondary students to engage them in technical careers. High school teachers
will receive training and certifications through workshops that include hands-on
training with advanced manufacturing technologies. Dual enrollment courses will
be offered by high school teachers to help secondary students enter advanced
manufacturing technician pathways. Using institutional data and student surveys,
the project team will assess the impact of the project activities on student
completion of certifications and the number of students who enter the technician
workforce. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.