* 2202090
* Distance-Enabled Industry-Led Data Analytics Technician Pathway (ILDAP)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Mason Lefler, Bridgerland Applied Technology College
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 577,503.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by creating a Distance-Enabled
Industry-Led Data Analytics Technician Pathway (ILDAP) to fill the critical
shortage of skilled data technicians in information technology and manufacturing
sectors in the rural Intermountain West. Data is transforming the economy and
society across all sectors. Businesses of all types need technicians who can
collect, clean, analyze, understand, and visualize data. Due to dramatic
economic growth and the recency of the data analytics field, the Intermountain
West is struggling to meet the extreme demand for middle-skilled data
technicians. This project will create an avenue for incumbent workers to gain
data analytics skills and transform how women at home will gain high demand
analytical skills in order to reenter the workforce. The project has the
potential to generate knowledge of how technical colleges can partner with local
industry to produce efficient, engaging, and effective data analytics
instruction at a distance to simultaneously prepare participants for job
advancement and/or a pathway towards college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Driven by
robust industry input, the ILDAP project intends to resolve the need for middle-
skilled data analytics technicians in the Intermountain West by: (1) developing
a Data Analytics Business Industry Leadership Team, (2) increasing instructor
expertise through professional development (3) developing distance-enabled data
analytics courses to reach incumbent workers and women at home, and (4)
recruiting and retaining women into data analytics. Through robust industry
collaborations, this project will develop a refined curriculum and programmatic
resources that can be shared locally and nationally. The project team plans to
share the proposed curriculum and practices in recruiting students from
underrepresented groups. The project results will be shared locally to industry
and three local school districts. The project team plans to disseminate results
with seven in-state technical colleges regionally through the yearly community
of practice meeting. In order to reach the wide breadth of interested parties,
the project team will present their work nationally at various conferences and
share project products at atecentral.net. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.