* 2202743
* Synthesis, assembly, and properties of dehydroalanine containing block copolypeptides
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Timothy Deming, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2025
* USD 487,779.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Timothy J. Deming of the University of
California-Los Angeles is preparing and studying the aqueous self-assembly of
synthetic copolypeptide amphiphiles containing dehydroamino acids. Polypeptides
are among the most important biopolymers and are basically long chain
macromolecules consisting of amino acids linked together by a particular kind of
a chemical bond called a peptide bond or link. All living organisms contain
numerous polypeptides and cannot exist without them. Amphiphilic copolymers, on
the other hand, are polymers that possess both water-loving and oil-loving
properties. They are typically found in soaps and detergents and are also the
main component of cell membranes. In this research, copolypeptides containing
dehydroalanine segments will first be synthesized using a suite of chemical
reaction sequences. The assemblies of these polymers will then be investigated
in water in order to understand how the extended conformation of hydrophobic
(oil-loving) dehydroalanine segments influences assembly structure. The
synthesized polymers will also be subjected to chemical modifications in order
to further understand structural changes in these assemblies when they are
exposed to biological conditions that mimic those found in the human body. These
studies have the potential to advance the knowledge on self-assembly of complex
biopolymers and are also of relevance to the development of stimuli responsive
biomaterials for therapeutic delivery applications. The research will provide
interdisciplinary teaching and training of graduate and undergraduate students
and unique opportunities for inclusion of underrepresented groups. The team will
continue interactions and outreach with local universities with majority
Hispanic student populations. Participations in “Meet the ACS Editors” events at
national conferences will afford advice on preparation and review of manuscripts
to young scientists and encourage URM and female junior faculty to participate
in journal activities and organize ACS National Meeting symposia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on the design, synthesis and
systematic study of self-assembly of novel diblock copolypeptide amphiphiles
containing poly(dehydroalanine) (ADH) segments in order to learn how the
extended conformations of ADH chains of varying lengths influence self-assembled
structures. Following the identification of compositions useful for the
formation of ordered assemblies, ionic hydrophilic segments will be replaced
with non-ionic and biocompatible poly(L-methionine sulfoxide). This modification
will enable evaluation of simultaneous switching of conformation and solubility
in copolypeptides. The use of non-ionic segments is also expected to impart
improved downstream cell and animal compatibility. All copolypeptides will be
purified by dialysis and characterized using a suite of chromatographic and
spectroscopic techniques. Lastly, a biomimetic chemical modification of ADH and
other segments in block copolypeptides will be investigated in order to further
understand how assembled structures respond to changes in both segment
conformations and solubilities. Outcomes of these studies will provide new
insights on how chain conformation switching under biologically relevant
conditions can enhance the development and advancement of stimuli responsive
biomaterials, in particular those amenable for intracellular therapeutic
delivery. The methodology developed in this research significantly lowers the
barriers for synthetic access to ADH-containing copolymers. Coupled with in-
depth examination of the relationships between copolypeptide composition and
self-assembled structures, the knowledge gained has the potential to advance the
field of biomimetic polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.