* 2202003
* Integrating Electric Vehicle Technology in Legacy Automotive Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Nathanial Weber, Northeast State Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 349,340.00

Tennessee ranks first in the Southeastern United States for electric vehicle
(EV) manufacturing, with more than 162,000 electric vehicles manufactured in the
state since 2013. General Motors and Ford have both announced major new
investments in EV production in Tennessee since 2020. As EV technology continues
to advance at a rapid pace and the number of electric vehicles on the road
continues to increase, it will be necessary to establish multiple training
programs throughout the state, including stand-alone programs and those that are
integrated into legacy automotive programs. This will address the growing need
for EV maintenance and repair technicians statewide and beyond. Northeast State
Community College has trained automotive technicians for more than fifty years,
enrolling an average of sixty students each year in its Automotive Service
Technology program. This project will study the effectiveness of and document
the unique challenges associated with integrating EV technology into a legacy
automotive training program. Outcomes of this effort will include faculty
professional development, a job skills analysis, and curricular revisions, all
of which will improve outcomes for students in this high need
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northeast State will leverage existing relationships
with industry partners and a recent partnership with the National Electric
Vehicle Consortium (NEVC) to secure faculty professional development, conduct a
job tasks analysis to identify critical EV maintenance and repair skills and
competencies, review existing EV maintenance and repair curriculum, develop
curriculum to address gaps, pilot the curriculum, and conduct targeted
recruitment to increase representation of women in the program. This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.