* 2202991
* Understanding How Latent Heat Release and Cloud Radiative Effects Shape Jet Variability and Jet Shifts Under Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Nicholas Lutsko, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2025
* USD 792,469.00

Jets flying over the middle latitudes of either the Northern or Southern
Hemisphere commonly encounter eastward winds with speeds over 100 miles per
hour, substantially reducing flight times going east. The presence of such
strong flow in the upper troposphere exerts a controlling influence on middle
latitude weather systems and even subtle changes in the jet streams can be
consequential for surface weather. Simulations of climate change due to
greenhouse warming typically show shift of the jet streams toward higher
latitudes in both hemispheres, and observations show indications that poleward
shifting has already occurred. The poleward shift is similar to the unforced
natural variability of the longitudinally averaged jet streams, in which north-
south shifting is the most prominent mode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under this
award considers the role of moisture in the natural north-south shifting of the
jet streams and their poleward movement in response to greenhouse gas increases.
Moisture can affect the mean jet position through the heating that occurs when
it condenses to form cloud droplets, and the clouds cause additional heating and
cooling through cloud radiative effects (CREs), in particular cooling by
reflecting sunlight back to space and warming by the trapping of outgoing
longwave radiation. Recent work suggests that CREs play a strong role in the
poleward drift of jets found in climate change simulations, but the exact
mechanism has not yet been determined and little work has been done on the role
of CREs in natural variability. The role of latent heating in the poleward drift
is also relatively unexamined, and two recent studies disagree as to whether
latent heating reduces or increases the persistence of naturally occurring jet
displacements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research uses a suite of simplified
models, in which moist effects can be added in a controlled manner, to study the
influence of latent heating and CREs on north-south jet fluctuations and forced
poleward drift. A further resource for the work is the archive of model
simulations produced for the Clouds On-Off Klimate Intercomparison Experiment
(COOKIE), in which comprehensive climate models are integrated with and without
CREs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal relevance given the effects of
jet shifts on surface weather, including their role in determining the frequency
and severity of extreme events associated with frontal storms and blocking
events. The project provides support and training to a graduate student and
postdoctoral research associate, thereby developing the scientific workforce in
this research area. The project also recruits an undergraduate student each
summer through the Scripps Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURF) program. In
addition, the award supports high school science education through the purchase
and use of rotating tanks from the DIYnamics Project, which are used for
classroom demonstrations of jet streams, cyclones, and other features of the
atmospheric circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.