* 2202860
* Collaborative Research:  Correcting sea surface temperature proxies for seasonal biases: combined data and model investigation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Zhengyu Liu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 116,017.00

Warmer than present periods in Earth history can provide insight into how the
climate system will respond to rising global temperatures. Knowledge of ocean
conditions during past warm periods comes, in large part, from geochemical
records (proxies) of past sea surface temperature. These proxies are generally
interpreted to reflect the average yearly temperature. Many SST proxies suggest
that prior to the industrial revolution, global temperatures had been cooling
for 6000 years. This result is at odds with climate model simulations which show
warming over that period in response to rising atmospheric greenhouse gas
levels. This mismatch has cast doubts on model predictions of future climate
change and the warming impact of greenhouse gases. However, a recent study
suggested the mismatch arises from the interpretation of the proxies, not from
problems with the climate models. That study suggested that proxies often record
temperature during a particular season, rather than the yearly average. When the
seasonality of the proxy was considered the models and proxies were consistent.
This study will test and refine approaches for extracting the seasonal and mean
annual temperature from proxies of past sea surface temperatures. In addition,
new geochemical records of past temperature will be produced across three recent
warm periods in Earth history. These new data will aid in ground-truthing model
predictions of future climate change. The project will also provide training
opportunities for early career scientists, including students from
underrepresented groups in the sciences. Results from the project will be
communicated via public lectures and a K-12 science outreach
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accounting for seasonal biases in sea surface
temperature (SST) proxies is critical for understanding the drivers of SST in
response to internal and external forcings. The proposed work aims to provide a
way forward to identify seasonal biases and remove them from proxy SST records
to improve paleoceanographic reconstructions. The study will include a series of
test of the seasonal to annual mean transformation method in fully coupled and
idealized climate models to explore the impact of ice sheet forcing, greenhouse
gases, nonlinearities in the climate system, and sampling errors on the efficacy
of the method in different regions of the global ocean and during multiple
interglacial periods. The study will produce new paired foraminifer-
magnesium/calcium and alkenone derived SST records from seven locations. At each
of these sites, data from the Holocene, last interglacial, and Marine isotope
stage 9 will be used to explore the stability of biases and the drivers of
seasonal and mean annual climate change during multiple examples of a warm
interglacial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.