* 2202718
* The Geometry of Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* AUTUMN KENT, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2025
* USD 203,970.00

Surfaces are fundamental objects in geometry and typically come in three
flavors: flat, round, or saddle shaped, geometries more technically referred to
as Euclidean, spherical, or hyperbolic. Three-dimensional objects, too,
typically come in one of a few flavors, including Euclidean, spherical, and
hyperbolic, plus a few others. In both two and three dimensions, the hyperbolic
geometries are the most common and currently the most studied. This project is
concerned with the geometry of 3-dimensional hyperbolic spaces. Its broad aim is
to build complete models of the geometry from fundamental building blocks,
completing a long line of inquiry in the subject. In addition to its core
research objectives, the project serves the profession and the advancement of
science through plans for continued mentoring of students, advocacy for
underrepresented groups, and several outreach and service activities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project is concerned with the geometry of hyperbolic 3-manifolds
and their deformations. The project is centered on a study of Thurston's
skinning map, which is a holomorphic function on the Teichm√ºller space
associated to a hyperbolic 3-manifold of infinite volume. The size and shape of
the image of this map has implications for the underlying geometry of the
hyperbolic manifold, and the project aims to bound the size of the image in
terms of the topology of the underlying manifold's boundary, without any
dependence on the topology of the underlying manifold. Using this, the project
aims to construct uniform models of hyperbolic 3-manifolds. The techniques
involved in the approach are of wider interest, and the project aims to use
these techniques to establish new theorems on the geometric inflexibility of
hyperbolic manifolds. The project also aims to establish new universal
hyperbolic Dehn filling theorems. The project's new techniques will also be
aimed at establishing the existence of hyperbolic integral homology spheres of
large injectivity radius.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.