* 2202396
* Student and Postdoc Travel Support for DNA28
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Darko Stefanovic, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/28/2023
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides student travel support for the 28th International Conference
on DNA Computing and Molecular Programming (DNA28), held at the University of
New Mexico, Albuquerque, August 8-12, 2022. This support will enable a new
generation of student researchers to attend the conference, present their work,
learn from leading experts in the field, and interact with students at other
institutions, fostering a sense of worldwide community of scientific enquiry.
This conference emphasizes topics that bridge computation, biology, and
nanotechnology and attracts top researchers in the fields of computer science,
mathematics, chemistry, molecular biology, and nanotechnology. The scope of
topics includes control of molecular folding and self-assembly to construct
nanostructures; demonstration of switches, gates, devices, and circuits with
biomolecules; molecular motors and molecular robotics; computational processes
in vitro and in vivo; studies of fault-tolerance and error correction; synthetic
biology and in vitro evolution; DNA data storage; software tools for analysis,
simulation, and design of molecular systems; a range of applications in
engineering, physics, chemistry, biology, and especially medicine (including
approaches to smart therapeutics with cell-specific, programmable, drug
delivery).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference organizers plan to support up to 20
successful student applicants, who are either US citizens or students at US
institutions. Emphasis will be placed on students whose institutions are under-
resourced and would otherwise not be able to send them to the conference, and
students presenting their research results at the conference. Conference
organizers will invite applications in regular conference announcements. A
diverse committee of conference organizers and external referees will then make
the selection from the received applications. The awards will provide support
toward registration, travel, and accommodation. The availability of this support
will encourage the participation of members of groups underrepresented in
molecular computing research, especially those who are delivering oral or poster
presentations at the conference, and graduate and undergraduate students who are
otherwise unable to afford attending this conference. As this is the first in-
person DNA conference planned for several years, this support will be vital to
enable a vibrant and diverse conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.