* 2202377
* Workshop on Quantum Computing, Information, Science, and Engineering
* O/D,OIA
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Mark Novotny, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 05/31/2024
* USD 99,680.00

Quantum computing and quantum information science and engineering is one of the
most critical and emerging worldwide technological fields. The importance of
both the quantum research endeavors and the equally important training of a
quantum-ready workforce were stressed in the National Quantum Initiative Act of
2019. This workshop brings together researchers and administrators from the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) states and
territories to identify how their institutions can better contribute to field of
quantum computing and quantum information science and engineering. The workshop
involves attendees learning about the current state of select quantum computing
and quantum information science and engineering topics. The workshop has two
main Intellectual Merit goals. First, it seeks to provide a platform for
collaborative research. Also, the workshop aims to act as a litmus test to
determine the state of affairs related to quantum computing and quantum
information science and engineering within the EPSCoR states and jurisdictions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this workshop is to facilitate
academic institutions to better understand why they should and examples of how
they might contribute to the education of their undergraduate and graduate
students for entry into the quantum ready workforce. This workshop will directly
impact over 50 attendees. By learning about other quantum researchers and
institutions, it is expected that organically new and stronger collaborations
will emerge to realize the vision of the National Quantum Initiative Act and the
vision of the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research. The
tangible outcome of the workshop in the form of a publicly available report will
on its own have potential to have an enormous impact not only on the current
quantum computing and quantum information science and engineering researchers
but also on the next generation of researchers that look for guidance and
reassurances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.