* 2202062
* A Comprehensive Approach for Preparing Community College Career Programs to Support the Vehicle to Grid Transition
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Christopher McNally, Hudson Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 350,000.00

Market analyses show that battery electric vehicles (BEV) will make up over 25%
of the automotive and light vehicle fleet in the United States by 2030. The
global BEV market share is expected to exceed 30% of all vehicles on the road.
The increased power demand generated by this growth will require greater
efficiency in the generation and delivery of electricity to the US market.
Central to this efficiency will be the vehicle-to-grid interface (V2G) commonly
referred to as the “electric vehicle charging station”. Energy producers,
government entities, and industry will all require employees with an
understanding of the impact of BEVs on the electrical supply grid and the impact
of the supply grid on the operation of BEVs. This project at Hudson Valley
Community College (HVCC) seeks to address the critical need for electricians and
technicians with applicable knowledge of the V2G interface. The project will
meet this need by (1) developing educational modules to train electricians in
the theory and operation of BEV charging systems, and (2) training
automotive/light truck technicians in the theory and operation of electrical
generation and supply grids. HVCC will develop BEV charging system educational
modules that can be easily and efficiently integrated into existing degree
programs, and make these training modules widely available for implementation by
other educational institutions throughout the country. The project team expects
that addressing the knowledge gaps in V2G theory and operation will greatly
increase the population of technicians prepared to perform the critical services
necessary to support the country’s transition to electric
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable HVCC to develop training
modules that will address significant knowledge gaps in trades critical to the
country’s transition to a BEV fleet. An estimated 200 students will complete
degree programs in areas directly impacted by V2G, including automotive repair,
electrical construction and maintenance, and green technology management.
Additionally, 14 high school, community college, and trade educators serving
students in traditionally underserved communities will be trained in V2G theory
and operation. The educational modules developed through this project will be
shared with educational programs throughout the country through existing NSF/ATE
supported conferences and data bases, the State University of New York system,
and professional trade and industry conferences. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technology Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation’s
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.