* 2202543
* Collaborative Research: Constraining Pliocene North Pacific marine heatwave variability from individual foraminifera Mg/Ca
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Casey Saenger, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 06/30/2025
* USD 213,571.00

Marine heatwaves are extended periods of above average ocean temperature. They
can have large social and economic impacts. The frequency and duration of marine
heatwaves is thought to be increasing, but little data exists to evaluate such
trends. This project will place marine heatwaves in a broader context by
reconstructing heatwave variability during the late Pliocene. That warm time
period roughly 2.6 to 3.6 million years ago is a geologic analog for near future
climate. Results from this project will provide data to evaluate climate model
simulations. That will help improve model forecasts of future climate, including
marine heatwaves. The project will support a graduate student at Western
Washington University and a postdoc at the University of Washington. The project
will also support development of college-level teaching modules focused on
climate, and outreach efforts to inform the public about the causes and
consequences of marine heatwaves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore
marine heatwave behavior in the north Pacific, where a heatwave event from
2014-2016 was likely the most ecologically and economically impactful ever.
Using element/calcium ratios of individual Globigerina bulloides foraminifera,
the project will generate distributions of sea surface temperature from which
the fingerprint of marine heatwaves can be extracted using quantile-quantile
analysis. By comparing reconstructions from the Holocene to those during the
mid-Piacenzian warm period at multiple core sites, the project will characterize
the behavior of north Pacific marine heatwaves during the preindustrial and a
geologic analog for future climate, thereby providing a valuable target for
improving climate models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.