* 2202472
* Chemically Tunable Acoustic Phonons in 2D Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kristie Koski, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2025
* USD 325,441.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acoustic phonons are sound waves that
move in materials and control important properties like stiffness, heat
conduction, and how materials work in electronic devices. With this project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research, Professor Kristie Koski at the University of California,
Davis, will study acoustic phonons in new two-dimensional (2D) materials that
are only a few atoms thick, where the behavior of phonons is very unusual and
not well understood. 2D materials are exciting for a wide range of applications
from electronics to energy to sensors. To fully realize these applications
requires understanding and controlling material properties. This project uses
precise laser-light spectroscopy measurements to map out the phonon behavior in
detail, and it also explores how to modify and customize the phonon behavior
using chemistry to produce 2D materials that have never before existed. This is
the kind of knowledge needed to design 2D materials optimized for future
devices, energy systems, and industries serving the national interest.
Educational and broader outreach goals include an online Brillouin spectroscopy
database for the scientific and broader public communities. US Military Veterans
are recruited for participation in this research effort. Undergraduate students,
with targeted recruitment of women and minorities, are trained for careers in
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As 2D materials become integrated into new
technologies, and material dimensions reach quantum limits, acoustic phonon
effects alter material mechanical properties, affect heat transport, and impact
electronic transport. In this project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, aims to
understand acoustic phonons in 2D materials, filling a major gap in fundamental
knowledge while addressing the outstanding question: Where is the cross-over
from bulk to quantum acoustic phonon behavior in a 2D material? This effort
develops a transformative set of solid-state chemistry techniques to synthesize
and chemically control the fundamental acoustic phonon behavior of 2D oxide and
chalcogenide (S, Se, Te-based) materials. These materials are generated using
new synthetic routes to heterostructures and new zero-valent intercalation
chemistries. Brillouin laser light scattering spectroscopy is used to measure
and understand acoustic phonons in 2D layered materials. Measurements give
complete acoustic phonon dispersion relations, sound velocities, refractive
indices, mechanical properties, and stiffness coefficients of 2D materials from
the bulk to a monolayer. This effort lays critical foundation for the
fundamental understanding and chemical control of phonons in 2D materials for
future application. This work develops, enhances, and expands upon an online
Brillouin spectroscopy database complementing similarly available databases in
Raman and X-ray Diffraction. This work trains undergraduates in research with
emphasis on recruitment of women and minorities. Military Veterans are recruited
for participation in research through the UC Davis Veteran Success
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.