* 2202281
* Computational Studies on the Modulation of Peptide-lipid Interactions by Glycosaminoglycans
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Silvina Matysiak, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2025
* USD 256,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program in the
Chemistry Division, Silvina Matysiak from the University of Maryland will
investigate the molecular conditions that promote or impede amyloid formation in
an environment mimicking the extracellular matrix. The extracellular matrix is a
complex mesh of proteins and carbohydrates, and it is connected to the cells it
surrounds, holding them together to form a tissue. Amyloids are proteinaceous
deposits/aggregates. Amyloid formation is a critical factor in many normal
biological processes and in neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's
disease. The importance of carbohydrates and the surface of cell membranes in
modulating amyloid formation have been recognized by the scientific community.
However, it has been challenging to isolate and quantify how specific
intermolecular interactions influence or nucleate the formation of particular
amyloid aggregation states. The proposed research will exploit and extend
computational models, developed over the last few years in Dr. Matysiak’s lab,
that now enable the Matysiak group to pursue this type of research. This
research will also allow graduate and undergraduate students to acquire
specialized training in multiscale computational modeling. The new computational
models will be used in the redesigning of a computational modeling course using
a course-based undergraduate research experience (CURE)
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to characterize the
effects of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) in peptide-membrane interactions and
peptide aggregation by the usage of coarse-grained and atomistic models. The
aggregation of several amyloidogenic peptides (functional or toxic) will be
studied under various conditions. Stepping through mixed bilayers of different
compositions and in the presence of different specific polysaccharide structures
will help the Maryland team to ascertain what interactions can enhance or
suppress peptide folding/misfolding and aggregation. Information from this study
is expected to provide new insight into how peptide-lipid, peptide-
oligosaccharide, and oligosaccharide-lipid interactions tune the emergence of
specific amyloid peptide aggregation morphologies and into the kinetics of these
aggregation processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.