* 2202291
* Using Augmented Reality to Enhance Attention in STEM Learning for Students with Executive Function Disabilities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jodi Asbell-Clarke, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 08/31/2025
* USD 849,947.00

Using Augmented Reality to Enhance Attention in Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics Learning for Students with Executive Function
Disabilities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Executive functioning represents a broad skill
set that is central to STEM learning and academic success, including skills
related to attention, persistence, emotion regulation, and inhibition control.
For students with executive function difficulties, focusing during homework and
other independent learning tasks is a challenge. Many existing assistive
technologies supplementing a student’s organizational capabilities are expensive
and exclusionary and rely on students’ ability to organize or initiate their own
task monitoring. This project provides an innovative, scalable intervention that
enables individuals who struggle with executive functioning to persist and
thrive in academic and workplace settings by using Augmented Reality technology
to support an individual’s ability to self-monitor their attention and re-engage
with the content when they are off task. In the long term, the system has the
potential to become a widely used learning technology that improves outcomes for
students with and without executive functioning difficulties. The project will
serve the public interest by increasing the participation of a population that
is currently underrepresented in STEM education and the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make a novel contribution to
both the computer sciences and the learning sciences, achieved through two
overarching project goals. First, using a temporal analysis of head position,
head orientation, and gaze orientation, the project team will develop an open-
source tool based on deep learning algorithms that can detect off-task behavior
as undergraduate students work on math homework problems. Second, the team will
use augmented reality to provide appropriate feedback to students in the form of
redirection or breaks related to their own level of focus and distractibility.
Development of this system will involve an iterative prototyping and testing
process, and will conclude with an early efficacy study. To explore the most
effective prompts, students with executive functioning issues will participate
as co-designers of the system. The deep learning algorithm for the detection of
off-task behavior is a novel contribution to the computer science field that has
potential applications for other subject areas and other types of learning
difficulties. Furthermore, the resultant self-monitoring and redirection prompts
are a contribution to the learning sciences that can benefit most learners.
Thus, this research will be a significant development in the application of
augmented reality to learning as it explores the most productive means of
student interaction with educational technology in a complex problem
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.