* 2202313
* RAPID: Quantifying Wetland Root Structure, Strength, and Uprooting due to Hurricane Ida
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Navid Jafari, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 11/30/2023
* USD 49,770.00

Coastal wetlands are valuable ecosystems. They improve water quality, provide
wildlife habitat and biodiversity, store organic carbon, and protect coastal
communities from storms by dampening waves and reducing storm surge heights.
Yet, severe storms are one of the most common natural drivers of coastal wetland
loss. For coastal Louisiana, the combined impacts of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita
(2005) and then Hurricanes Gustav and Ike (2008) converted nearly the area of
New York City into open water. As a result, predicting wetland loss due to
hurricanes is an important goal because of the significant consequences with
respect to coastal populations. This RAPID award will allow timely field testing
and core sampling to quantify wetland root strength and structure in the
Barataria basin of coastal Louisiana, which experienced extreme land loss from
Hurricane Ida. This information will help inform the scientific community and
public on how the wetlands are eroded, what controls erosional resistance, why
some hurricanes are more damaging than others, and what potential is for long-
term recovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hurricane Ida made landfall on
the southeastern Louisiana coast, bringing storm surge and waves of
approximately 4.5 m above the normal water level that caused immense damage to
the natural and built environment, specifically undermining the wetland root
systems and removing much of the marsh platform. Current knowledge of the
ability of the wetland platform to withstand hurricane-induced uprooting is
limited, and the roles of wetland root structure, biomass volume, and strength
need further research. The objective of this RAPID research is to collect
perishable data of wetland uprooting, including (i) quantifying the micro-scale
live biomass, necromass, root structure, pore structure, and sediment density
using X-ray Computed Tomography (XCT) scans; (ii) measuring the macro-scale
field strength of root systems using cone penetrometer tests (CPTs); and (iii)
assessing the resilience of wetland vegetation and root systems to recover from
a disturbance. This award will develop new knowledge concerning how the wetland
platform withstands storm surge and waves, how these systems could evolve over
space and time (particularly in the face of sea level rise, restoration
activities, and recovery after an extreme event), and how these changes could
alter their ability to protect the coastline from further
damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.