* 2202135
* Galactic Archaeology: Constraining the Origin of the Elements with Empirical and Theoretical Supernova Yields
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Emily Griffith, Griffith, Emily J
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2025
* USD 210,000.00

Emily Griffith is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Fellowship to carry
out a program of research and education at the University of Colorado. Griffith
will combine new observational results from large spectroscopic surveys with
theoretical yields of elements produced in supernovae and evolved stars. Results
from this project will allow astronomers to understand the origin of the
elements and the chemical enrichment history of the Milky Way galaxy and the
Magellanic Clouds. For the education component of this project, Griffith will
develop a mentor training program to improve the retention of underrepresented
students in science, and she will develop a planetarium show incorporating the
latest research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will exploit high quality
spectroscopic data for millions of stars to determine the relative contribution
of core collapse supernovae (CCSN), Type Ia supernovae (SNIa), and Asymptotic
Giant Branch (AGB) stars to the chemical enrichment of the Galactic disk and
bulge, and the Magellanic Clouds. Through a detailed comparison of observational
and theoretical data, Griffith will explore the impact of binary interactions on
CCSN yields and identify elemental yield ratios that are diagnostic of SNIa
enrichment channels. She will also construct a simulated stellar population with
known enrichment to test her theoretical model and identify the abundance
signatures that delayed enrichment sources such as SNIa and AGB stars imprint on
observed stellar populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.