* 2202144
* RAPID: The Impact of Bans on Peremptory Challenges On Voir Dire, Jury Composition, and Case Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Valena Beety, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 11/30/2023
* USD 199,750.00

Despite decades of effort aimed at reducing disparities in the American legal
system, they persist. Certain demographic groups are overrepresented in prisons
and among those falsely convicted, due, in part, to their continually being
underrepresented on juries. Increased diversity on juries improves the quality
of deliberation and reduces bias in jury decisions—but prosecutors’ use of
peremptory challenges is a primary mechanism for creating disparities on juries.
Prosecutors strike jurors from some groups at higher rates and successfully
provide neutral reasons when challenged. Arizona is about to take a truly
transformative step by banning peremptory challenges, a ground-breaking reform
taking effect on January 1st, 2022. The stated goal of the ban is to combat bias
in jury selection; the assumption being that this will increase jury diversity
and reduce bias in verdicts. This project advances basic science on diversity,
group decision-making, and combating bias in a real-world setting. It tests
whether a structural change to the jury selection process alters how jury
selection decisions are made and the downstream consequences for diversity and
bias on juries. It tests whether racial discrimination in jury selection
persists because attorneys shift their tendency to offer compelling neutral
justifications for excluding jurors of some groups from peremptory challenges to
challenges for cause. This project furthers NSF values of combating bias and
promoting equity, diversity, and inclusion by testing the impact of a large-
scale ground-breaking intervention designed to do just that in the legal system.
This project also creates important databases for future research and involve
many members of underrepresented groups as research assistants in every stage of
the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This rule change presents an important and
ephemeral opportunity to collect data on voir dire practices, composition of
juries, and case outcomes before and after this change. This transdisciplinary,
multi-method project is designed to achieve the following research aims: (1)
test whether Superior Court juries are significantly more diverse and
representative after the peremptory challenge ban, (2) test whether conviction
or liability rates in cases with defendants of some groups will significantly
decrease after the peremptory challenge ban, (3) test whether the percentage of
persons of some groups excused for hardship/cause will significantly increase
after the peremptory challenge ban is enacted, thereby mitigating the overall
impact of the ban, (4) test whether the way challenges for cause are argued and
decided in court changes after the peremptory challenge ban is enacted in ways
that mitigate the overall impact of the ban, and (5) conduct interviews with
judges and attorneys regarding how they might alter their jury selection
strategies in ways that limit the impact of the ban on overall jury
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.