* 2202889
* P2C2: Collaborative Research: Defining the paleoclimate-fire relationship in CA across temporal scales through integrated monitoring, stalagmite studies, and proxy system modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Isabel Montanez, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 07/31/2025
* USD 627,539.00

Despite observable increases in the frequency and intensity of wildfires, the
relationship between fire, warming, and rainfall variability in California (CA)
remains poorly understood. This project will define the relationship between
past climate change and wildfire behavior in CA over the last 70,000 years. This
will be accomplished by monitoring caves in CA and by assessing evidence of
climate change and of wildfires preserved in cave mineral deposits. These
deposits, called stalagmites, are capable of documenting past environmental
changes continuously over 1000s to 10s of thousands of years. An environmental
model that links climate, cave, and wildfire processes will be developed that
will advance the understanding of how the climate and fire signals are archived
in stalagmites. The model will also be used to build robust reconstructions of
the climate-fire relationship at individual cave sites and for transects of
caves across CA. Collectively, this research will contribute to building a
cohesive picture of how climate in this region responds to global climate
change, including warming, and how these changes influence wildfire behavior.
Additional deliverables include an open-access, standardized database of all
stalagmite records and community accessible software. A cohort of diverse early
career scientists and undergraduate and graduate students will be trained
through the project using a vertically and laterally integrated training and
mentoring program, ‘C3 —Climate Change in California’.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will test three hypotheses linked by the primary goal of investigating
the relationship between regional hydroclimate conditions and wildfire in the
fire-prone region of CA, over a variety of timescales and background climate
states including periods with no or minimal anthropogenic influence. This will
be accomplished by addressing four research objectives. First, a process-based,
‘surface-to-stalagmite’ understanding of the evolution of a suite of
hydroclimate and fire tracers will be developed through monitoring of three
karst systems representative of different climate conditions in CA. This
component will further calibrate promising new proxies (delta-44Ca, 87Sr/86Sr,
and a suite of biomarkers) that to date have been applied to few karst systems.
Second, a next-generation, multi-proxy karst system model will be built that
leverages existing proxy system models and links hydroclimate and fire proxies
mechanistically to their suite of environmental and ecologic drivers. Third, a
comparable set of calcite, inclusion-fluid, and biomarker proxy records,
including novel hydrologic and fire proxies, will be developed for ten
stalagmites that define latitudinal and coastal-to-Sierra Nevada transects in
CA. Fourth, site-specific and regional proxy-model comparisons will be carried
out using Bayesian inversion to produce data-driven quantitative reconstructions
of the hydroclimate and fire activity in CA over the past 70 ka. Collectively,
this research will provide the basis for future climate modeling efforts focused
on constraining the drivers of hydroclimate change and fire activity in the
western U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.