* 2202766
* Collaborative Research: On the Intensity and Size Relationship of Tropical Cyclones
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Da-Lin Zhang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Yu Gu
* 04/30/2025
* USD 372,445.00

Tropical cyclones (TCs) are the most destructive natural phenomena, causing many
casualties and enormous economic loss every year. Their intensity and size are
the two most important matrics for assessing TC severity and potential hazards
but their relation is not well understood and challenging to be predicted. The
improved understanding of TC intensity-size relation will shed insights into how
operational forecasts for TC intensity and size could be further improved. These
improvements will in turn help coastal communities to prepare for the maximum
potential damage and lead to saving lives and minimizing the losses of
properties. This project will train two Ph.D. students and a postdoc in fields
of atmospheric dynamics, modeling, and data science, and support STEM education
by working with an undergraduate student to launch experimental forecasts for TC
intensity and size based on the knowledge gained from the project. The research
findings and experimental forecasts will be communicated to the science
community via peer-reviewed publications, to college students via classroom
teaching and curriculum development, and to general public via website and
twitter accounts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is built on the knowledge
and insights gained from a previously NSF-funded EAGER project, which put
forward a radial invariant model of “effective absolute angular momentum” (eAAM)
for radial profiles of TC surface winds by combining the absolute angular
momentum (AAM) and the loss of AAM due to surface drags. The main goal of this
project is to explore the dependencies of radial loss of AAM and eAAM values on
environment factors so that the eAAM model would better explain the observed
complexity and rich diversity of TC intensity-size relation. This research is
guided by the central hypothesis substantiated by three process-based working
hypotheses. Under this framework, different eAAM values result from differences
in the inward radial loss of AAM that depends environment conditions. The
central question of how the inward radial loss rate of AAM and eAAM are related
to environment conditions is investigated through 6 sets of A-B series numerical
experiments using the Cloud Model Version 1 (CM1) model for the A-series and
cloud-permitting version of the Weather Research and Forecast (WRF) model for
the B-series. The resultant environment-dependent eAAM model will be validated
by requiring that both the eAAM-predicted TC winds using observed size
information and the eAAM-predicted TC sizes using observed wind information are
highly in agreement (within observation uncertainties) with their observational
counterparts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.