* 2202496
* Collaborative Research: STEM Learning Embedded in a Machine-in-the-LoopCollaborative Story Writing Game
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Danielle McNamara, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2025
* USD 199,955.00

Developing “21st century skills” such as collaboration, communication, critical
thinking, and creativity (the 4Cs) has become increasingly important for
students to keep up with the ever-evolving labor market of the future. Teaching
the 4Cs effectively and efficiently requires deeply intertwining them with core
content knowledge areas, since the acquisition of domain knowledge can bolster
students’ development of these soft skills. In this project, the investigators
take a step towards combining 4C skill development with STEM education by
developing a collaborative writing game in which multiple students work together
to craft a narrative around embedded STEM education elements. As a key
innovation, the investigators will embed this collaborative writing game with
natural language processing and artificial intelligence (AI)-based tools to
automate fact-checking, feedback, knowledge tracing, and narrative story arc
suggestions, which will facilitate students’ progress toward mastery while
reducing teacher workload. Overall, this project has the potential to increase
student engagement in STEM learning activities and improve learning outcomes.
The project will be grounded in StoriumEdu, a collaborative story writing
platform, therefore directly benefiting its user base of 2,000 K-12 classrooms
with over 27,000 students and potentially an even larger number of students
through the dissemination of the team’s research findings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This major technical goals of this project are intended to
augment scientific writing instruction with AI-based tools. To achieve these
goals, the project will develop novel technologies that automatically provide
writing assistance and feedback, and these tools will be deployed into K-12
classrooms via the StoriumEdu platform in order to evaluate their effectiveness.
A core technical challenge is to assess the factuality of student writing by
building machine learning models for fact-checking. The team proposes to design
retrieval-augmented neural networks that can localize spans within student-
written text that exhibit scientific misunderstandings. These spans will then be
connected with relevant passages from textbooks or online articles to enable
students to easily correct their errors. After developing fact-checking methods,
the team will also focus on knowledge tracing, which allows measuring student
progress over time in terms of which concepts they have mastered or are still
struggling with. The knowledge tracing models will be developed with feedback
from scientific literacy experts. The output of these models informs the final
aspect of this project, which aims to generate narrative progressions associated
with conceptual misunderstandings. This will allow students to engage more
strongly with concepts that they have yet to master, which maximizes the writing
platform’s pedagogical potential. Taken as a whole, this project’s research
contributions synthesize novel NLP methods with educational progress tracking
and feedback systems in an effort to improve STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.