* 2202983
* Tropical Atlantic Hydrologic Change during the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Donald Penman, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 172,778.00

Climate models predict how global patterns of evaporation and precipitation (the
hydrologic cycle) may behave differently in a warmer world. Predicted changes to
the global hydrologic cycle have regional implications for the frequency and
severity of drought, fire, extreme weather events, and flooding. This project
seeks to use the sedimentary record to study how the hydrologic cycle changed
during a past warm interval in Earth’s history. The project targets a well-
studied ancient global warming event: the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum, 56
million years ago. By analyzing the chemistry of microfossils preserved in deep-
sea sediments from this time period, the researchers can constrain how the
balance of evaporation and precipitation changed in regions thought to be
particularly sensitive to hydrologic change. The results will be compared to
simulations of climatic warming carried out by the latest generation of global
climate models. This data-model comparison will improve predictions for future
hydrologic variations under ongoing climate change. This project will also
provide training and experience for graduate students, and summer internship
programs for undergraduate students from under-served
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future changes to global patterns
of evaporation and precipitation are one of the most pressing areas of concern
highlighted by numerical simulations of anthropogenic climate change. Studying
past warm events in Earth’s geological past provides an opportunity to test
climate model skill in predicting regional hydrologic change. Specifically,
recent climate model simulations of the anomalously warm conditions during the
Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM, ~56 million years ago) suggest that the
tropical Atlantic Ocean was particularly susceptible to a pronounced shift
towards a more arid (more evaporation, less precipitation) state under warmer
conditions. This project will test that model prediction by geochemically
constraining regional hydrologic change across the PETM using deep-sea sediment
cores from the Tropical Atlantic. Regional hydrologic change across the PETM
will be constrained by analyzing oxygen isotopes in surface-dwelling planktonic
foraminifera at Ocean Drilling Project Site 1258 (Demerara Rise, Tropical North
Atlantic Ocean). Since oxygen isotopes in foraminifera reflect a combination of
temperature and seawater composition, the magnesium to calcium ratio (Mg/Ca) of
the same foraminifers will also be measured to correct for temperature effects,
producing a record of changing oxygen isotopic composition of surface seawater
across the PETM. The sense and magnitude of this change will be compared to
recent simulations of Eocene warming using NCAR’s isotope-enabled Community
Earth System Model (iCESM). The methods developed in the proposed work will also
be applied to several other sites with published foraminiferal oxygen isotope
and Mg/Ca records, producing a global data-model synthesis for hydrologic change
across the PETM. This comparison will either bolster confidence in model
predictions for regional hydrologic change under warmer conditions, or else
identify areas for improvement. The project will support a PhD student and
provide training and experience in analytical geochemistry and climate model
interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.