* 2202451
* Project mTEAM: Advancing Emergency Medicine Trainee Skills using Multimodal Debriefing System in Simulation-based Training
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Vitaliy Popov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 06/30/2025
* USD 849,170.00

With the United States population living longer and having more chronic health
conditions, the incidence of sudden medical emergencies is continually growing.
These acute events create a complex, high-stress environment that requires teams
of healthcare professionals to act precisely and quickly to give patients the
best chance of survival. The need for knowledge about how to better prepare
teams for work in fast-paced, acute care settings is more important than ever.
Healthcare professionals need frequent, realistic training opportunities that
offer meaningful feedback on the skills that are essential for quality team-
based clinical care. The research team has developed a multi-user Virtual
Reality (VR) platform for Cardiac Arrest Resuscitation. This platform is
designed to create realistic time pressure and rapid workload changes for the
training of healthcare professionals. However, existing healthcare simulation
training, including VR and manikin–based learning, requires constant and real-
time human observation. This limitation results in learners receiving feedback
that is of variable quality - often generalized, inconsistent, and highly
dependent on simulation instructors. With feedback being essential for learning
and development, this limits the effectiveness and scalability of simulation
training. To fill this gap, the research team will develop and evaluate a novel
debriefing system that aims to capture and visualize multimodal data streams
that evaluate learners’ cognitive (e.g., clinical decision-making) and
behavioral (e.g., situational awareness, communication) processes to provide
data-informed feedback focused on improving team-based care of patients who
suffer sudden medical emergencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this new
multimodal debriefing system, instructors will be able to provide new insights
and personalized feedback to clinicians during post-simulation debriefing
sessions to allow for more meaningful reflection, targeted intervention, and
rapid development of these complex skills. The project objectives are to: 1)
conduct a human-centered design study with trainees and faculty to refine the
concept of a multimodal debriefing system 2) engineer and evolve an unobtrusive
multi-modal sensor-based data collection system; and 3) conduct a quasi-
experimental study to evaluate the potential of this study’s debriefing system
to improve clinical knowledge and teamwork skills. The proposed research not
only provides a strong path forward to impact the way cardiac arrest training is
carried out across institutions, but it will also create knowledge and systems
that can be translated to develop data-informed, team-based training programs
for other medical domains and other high-risk industries that rely on expert
teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.