* 2202184
* Product Design Incubator: Fostering an Entrepreneurial Mindset Through Interdisciplinary Product Design
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Paula Ford, Northern Virginia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2025
* USD 649,791.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the communication,
collaboration and critical thinking skills of technicians in training through
entrepreneurial product design training. Employers in the information and
engineering technology (IET) sector report that the employee talent pool lacks
these skills that are demanded by the modern workplace. Traditional IET programs
do not foster these skills, instead focusing on the acquisition of technical
knowledge. A promising method to teach these skills is product design – a
holistic set of methodologies that applies engineering, entrepreneurship, and
creative skills to the development of new products or services. As an
interdisciplinary collaborative process, product design functions as a microcosm
of the workplace, aiding in the development of skills required by regional
employers. Northern Virginia Community College (NOVA)’s Product Design Incubator
(PDI) is an interdisciplinary project designed to train groups of community
college students through a product design challenge. The PDI curriculum will
integrate introductory entrepreneurship education and training (EET) and design
thinking to guide students from initial ideation through the prototyping and
pitch processes. PDI will be situated at NOVA’s Fab Lab and will incorporate
NOVA faculty, regional entrepreneurs and IET professionals to support student
products. PDI will increase contact between students and industry professionals,
foster interdisciplinary collaboration between NOVA students and staff, and
increase the supply of IET workers with industry-required collaboration,
communication, and critical thinking skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PDI’s primary
goal is to improve skill development through product design instruction. PDI has
4 components: 1) a series of entrepreneurship workshops focused on learning
entrepreneurship skills through a series of product design exercises; 2) a four-
week summer product design internship during which student groups will work with
an interdisciplinary group of faculty, regional entrepreneurs and the Fab Lab
staff to prototype, test, and refine their idea; 3) an industry-centered pitch
event for student groups to present their ideas to regional entrepreneurs and
professionals who will provide feedback on student product prototypes; and 4) a
follow-up academic year mentoring plan to help students develop their summer
work into a portfolio, focus their career interests, or continue to develop
their idea into an actionable business. Throughout the product duration, PDI
will provide product design instruction to 60 students. During year 1, PDI will
use an advisory cohort structure of 12 students, who will provide formative
feedback on the program. During years 2 and 3, cohorts will expand to 24
students. PDI will advance the understanding of the efficacy of product design
centered EET in improving communication and collaboration skills, fostering an
entrepreneurial mindset and improving interdisciplinary knowledge. Results from
NOVA PDI will provide insights into the integration of EET into technician
education to strengthen critical skills. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.