* 2202179
* Improving and Modernizing Machinist Training and Education for Machining Workforce Preparation in the Finger Lakes Region of New York
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* John Troy, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 649,257.00

Machining is an essential component of the manufacturing process that has played
a significant role in every industrial revolution. Machinists, as machine tool
operators, are important members of the skilled technical workforce, and require
long-term and professional training or education. As many new concepts and
technologies are being introduced in the machining industry to satisfy the
requirements of Industry 4.0, the corresponding revision of machinist training
must also take place. This project will improve and modernize existing machinist
training and education in response to the new requirements of the machining
industry in the era of Industry 4.0. It is expected that the local machining
industry, an important economic pillar of the Finger Lakes region in New York
State, will benefit significantly from increasing the pool of available skilled
workers and meeting the new demands of machining knowledge and
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals of this project are to 1) improve
existing machining training and education programs in response to the skill and
knowledge requirements of 21st century interdisciplinary themes, 2) modernize
existing machinist training and education using innovative methods and advanced
technologies to improve trainee engagement and learning efficiency, 3) expand
the machining workforce by increasing the accessibility and flexibility of
machinist training and education to various stakeholders, and 4) facilitate
machinist training/education interworking and resource sharing among training
providers. All project results will be disseminated throughout New York State as
well as the entire United States through collaborations with New York
Manufacturing Extension Partnership (NY MEP) and Boards of Cooperative
Educational Services (BOCES) of New York State to maximize their impact. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.