* 2202862
* FW-HTF-T/Collaborative Research: Occupational Exoskeletons and the Human-Technology Partnership: Achieving Scale and Integration into the Future of Work
* TIP,ITE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Divya Srinivasan, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 12/31/2026
* USD 3,590,513.00

In multiple industrial sectors including manufacturing and construction,
industrial exoskeleton technologies have substantial potential to improve
productivity, and worker safety and well-being; and to equalize job opportunity
by allowing diverse populations to enter and stay employed in physically
demanding jobs that are otherwise inaccessible. Despite this potential, and
extensive evidence from lab-based studies, exoskeleton technologies are still
far from mainstream adoption in industry. Three key barriers inhibiting large-
scale exoskeleton deployments are (1) deciding and rationalizing when
exoskeletons should be implemented as part of a workflow; (2) understanding the
social and organizational climate that is needed for successful implementation
in industry; and (3) enabling a faster design-to-device cycle time for new
technological solutions in the exoskeleton space. This research project aims to
utilize an “at-scale” approach to address these gaps through the development of
a modeling approach to predict the biomechanical consequences of exoskeleton
use; design of a best-practices implementation approach for exoskeletons while
considering socio-technical-organizational factors; and by “closing the loop” by
creating a physical robotics platform to serve as an exoskeleton emulator to
accelerate exoskeleton design. With the principle of convergence in mind, our
proposed work will allow overcoming the noted barriers and will bring theory and
practice together by to facilitate the transition of an innovative technology to
a new normal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together several
disciplines, including robotics, human factors, biomechanics, occupational
health and safety, organizational science, psychology, and statistics. The
investigator team is structured to achieve multiple convergent goals. First, the
proposed research will substantially advance knowledge in modeling of human-
exoskeleton interactions to obtain realistic predictions of human joint torques
and reaction forces; second, theoretical and methodological innovations will be
made in studying a complex socio-technical system at scale; and finally, a
wearable robotics emulator will be designed and built to facilitate design
modifications and assessment of exoskeleton users’ preferences of support
profiles. We will pioneer theoretical advancements in organizational science and
psychology, by developing and validating a multilevel model framework that
converges two different technology acceptance models (respectively from the
individual and organizational perspectives), to understand how individuals and
organizations perceive and adopt exoskeletons. In turn, this work will also
generate actionable strategies for re-thinking technology design, with our
exoskeleton emulator “closing the loop” on the design side. Our work variously
includes virtual modeling, physical prototyping, and experimental investigations
with a tiered approach that gradually increases in breadth, scale, and
complexity. This project has been funded by the Future of Work at the Human-
Technology Frontier cross-directorate program to promote deeper basic
understanding of the interdependent human-technology partnership in work
contexts by advancing design of intelligent work technologies that operate in
harmony with human workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.