* 2202061
* CAS-Climate: Workshop on Resilience Research and Practice in the Gulf Region
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,07/31/2022
* Eren Ozguven, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

This grant is in support of a three-day workshop to bring together scholars and
stakeholders for the purpose of building a community of practice focused on
climate resilience research and practice in the Gulf Region. Climate change is
affecting the lives and livelihoods of millions of people in the Gulf Region,
from the tip of Florida to the Texas coast. Across this vast swath, urban
centers such as Houston, the fourth largest and one of the most diverse cities
of the US, and small coastal towns, are all nested within one of the planet’s
most biodiverse and productive ecosystems. The Gulf Region also contains a
disproportionate number of people who are considered socially vulnerable to
disasters. These chronic stressors are worsened by climate change, evolving
population dynamics, aging infrastructure capacity and condition, and rapid
industrial and technological change. The Gulf Coast region will be bellwether of
change, providing either successful or failed adaptation examples for the entire
nation as climate impacts increase. The workshop provides an opportunity for
researchers, policymakers, and communities to work together towards: 1) shaping
research to undertake co-design and research translation so that needs of
community stakeholders are prioritized, and 2) moving research findings into
actionable knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop cross-disciplinary
interactions will help identify needs in the research community and at the
intersection of research and practice. There are many researchers in the STEM
and humanities disciplines that are focused on questions relating to climate
resilience in the Gulf Coast region. They are not, however, linked in region-
specific interdisciplinary or research-to-action networks. This means that there
is lack of awareness among researchers about work other researchers might be
doing that is relevant to their own, and there is lack of coordination among
research thrusts such that stakeholders might be able to more efficiently
interact and use the knowledge outputs of resilience research. Moreover, the
Gulf Coast region is uniquely diverse in its interfaces between urban centers
and rural areas, and resilience research must address these challenges, among
other major gaps that exist in the understanding of the interactions of human
and natural systems in this region. Workshop sessions target engendering
meaningful communication and allowing for focused discussion of ideas presented
by leaders in a range of relevant disciplines, to result in a convergent
prospectus of resilience research initiatives at the interface of environmental
and urban systems. This workshop will initiate transdisciplinary research
relationships through: 1) Professional development of early career faculty and
city/state level and policy professionals in introductory socio- environmental
modeling, 2) Meeting the increasing demand for workers with interdisciplinary
training in navigating the complex interplay between rapid climate change and
resulting stresses in ecosystem and engineered services, 3) Developing of a
network of scholars, government representatives, and community organizations
focused on building resilience across the Gulf Region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.