* 2202858
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Extending Tree-Ring Based Reconstructions of Atlantic Gulf Basin Hydroclimate over the Common Era Using Old-Growth Sinker Wood
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Matthew Therrell, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2025
* USD 116,659.00

The general goal of the research is to collect old-growth bald cypress and
longleaf pine samples from trees that were cut in the late 19th and early 20th
century to extend existing bald cypress tree-ring chronologies over the full
Common Era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Baldcypress is one of the key tree species for
tree-ring based climate reconstruction in the southeastern United States (U.S.),
because of its longevity and its distinct sensitivity to spring and summer
precipitation variability. Even though it has widespread applications in
regional and continental-scale high-resolution paleoclimate research, the full
spatiotemporal extent of its dendroclimatic potential is yet to be explored. The
lack of remnant old-growth bald cypress stands with long-lived trees, in
particular, contributes to the dearth of millennium-length chronologies in the
Atlantic Gulf Basin (AGB). In the 19th and 20th century, old-growth forests,
including bald cypress and longleaf pine stands, throughout the AGB were
excessively exploited for the booming construction industry and few forests
survived. During this commercial exploitation period, many logs were lost, stuck
in river bends, in transport from the swamp harvest location to the mill sites.
A century later, caches of such long-lived ‘sinker wood’ can be found on the
bottoms of many AGB rivers and slips, forming the only reliable source of old-
growth timber and a unique source for expanding the spatiotemporal reach of AGB
dendrochronology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers aim to use the extended
chronologies to develop regional and seasonal AGB hydroclimate reconstructions
that span the entire Common Era (1CE-present). On the interannual to decadal
time scales best captured by bald cypress-based reconstructions, summer AGB
hydroclimate variability is primarily influenced by Atlantic Multidecadal
Variability (AMV). The resulting AGB hydroclimate reconstruction will build upon
existing reconstructions of past AMV in three important ways: (a) temporal
extension, (b) spatial extension, and (c) sub-seasonal resolution. Common Era-
length reconstructions could improve the understanding of the regional
expression of past periods of global-scale climate variability, specifically the
Late Antique Little Ice Age (ca. 536-660 CE) and the Roman Climate Optimum (ca.
300 BCE -400 CE). Moreover, AGB reconstructions would provide important anchor
points in the subtropics, a region typically underrepresented in terrestrial
proxy networks. Furthermore, by developing independent earlywood and latewood
width chronologies, the research team plans to reconstruct AGB hydroclimate
variability at sub-seasonal resolution, which can help improve the understanding
of the dynamical nature of large-scale ocean-atmosphere forcing of
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include greater
understanding of water resources in the southeastern United States, support for
a post-doctoral researcher, a project-based undergraduate research experience
course at the University of Arizona aimed at attracting under-represented
students to scientific research, and outreach and field trips to the for local
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.