* 2202267
* Stable Homotopy Groups: Theory and Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Daniel Isaksen, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2025
* USD 158,714.00

Spheres are the basic building blocks of topology. More complicated topological
objects can be constructed by fitting these spheres together. Spheres of
different dimensions can fit together in only a few different ways. Enumerating
these combinations of spheres is one of the fundamental questions of a branch of
mathematics called homotopy theory. This project focuses on the computation of
the stable homotopy groups of spheres, using three general categories of
techniques: theory, manual computation, and machine computation. These
categories are mutually reinforcing. Theory establishes new techniques of
computation; manual computation reveals new structure that points toward
theoretical advances; machine computation provides independent verification of
manual computation and carries it even further. Broader impacts of the project
include development and growth of the electronic Computational Homotopy Theory
(eCHT) virtual research community. With a long-term goal of self-sustainability,
the eCHT community will experiment with different types of online engagement,
such as foundational courses for early-career graduate students, seminar series
on focused topics, career development events, online conferences, and building
connections to online networks in neighboring subjects. These new modes of
interaction aim to overcome traditional barriers to entry, especially for people
in remote geographical locations and for those with non-traditional backgrounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's main research goal is to compute stable
homotopy groups of spheres in the classical, C-motivic, R-motivic, and
C2-equivariant contexts. It breaks into three main topics: the Adams spectral
sequence, the effective slice spectral sequence, and deformations of stable
homotopy theory. The effective spectral sequence is a replacement for the Adams-
Novikov spectral sequence in the R-motivic and C2-equivariant situations. The
first two topics are essentially computational, although they point towards a
number of more theoretical questions. Two of the many possible outcomes of these
computations are: new information about Mahowald (root) invariants; and settling
the last unknown case of the Kervaire invariant one problem. The third topic is
a theoretical perspective that was recently uncovered by computational
exploration. Deformations will play a growing role in computational stable
homotopy theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.