* 2202151
* Advancing Precision Agriculture in the Urban Environment
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Brandon Keller, Northeast Community College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 06/30/2025
* USD 545,016.00

The agriculture industry has seen rapid advances through the development and
application of precision agriculture techniques. Horticulture-based jobs are now
utilizing these advances such as drones, water-sensing technology, and automated
weeding systems. Combining precision agriculture with horticulture in the
emerging field of urban agriculture is therefore an expanding filed that needs a
skilled workforce. This is particularly true in Nebraska, where one in four jobs
is connected to agriculture and many are found in an urban and/or horticulture
setting. This project unites the fields of precision agriculture and
horticulture to create a technical education program at a two-year college that
provides a pathway to urban agriculture careers. Over its 3-year duration,
current programming will be expanded to provide micro-credentialed courses
related to urban agriculture technology, summer workshops for high school
agriculture educators, and continuing education workshops for incumbent workers.
These new resources will improve existing high-quality training to enrich
student interest and skills in horticulture technology and enhance career
pathways for incumbent workers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following objectives
will guide the project: 1) partner with local high schools to introduce students
to career options and to provide active learning opportunities using
horticulture concepts and precision technologies, 2) design and implement a
series of six workshops for agriculture educators to enhance their ability to
teach relevant courses in horticulture, precision technology, and urban
agriculture, and 3) provide a series of five continuing education workshops for
incumbent workers. This program will strengthen partnerships with area high
schools and build new relationships within the horticulture and urban
agriculture industries. In secondary schools, teachers will be invited to be
true colleagues, by co-creating educational pathways that excite, encourage, and
prepare students to consider careers in urban agriculture. A three-course
modularized curriculum will be developed that can be used to supplement
agriculture education courses in local high schools, and in some cases, will
result in dual credit for high school students. Overall, the new curriculum will
impact students and teachers at five pilot high schools and incumbent workers
from around the state. Results of the project and the curriculum will be made
available to other community colleges, the community of educators in agriculture
education and the broader technician education community. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nationâ€™s
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.