* 2202034
* Creating Technician Pathways in Mechatronics for the Industry 4.0 Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Amanda Sizemore, St. Charles Community College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 03/31/2025
* USD 464,038.00

Industry 4.0 technologies are transforming manufacturing facilities into smart
factories that use digital technologies, advanced sensors and controls, and
robotics to increase automation and improve manufacturing processes. Technicians
who understand how to implement and maintain these technologies are needed to
support this transformation. Students in technician degree programs need to
learn new multidisciplinary skills at the intersection of electrical,
mechanical, logistics, and data systems. This project will address this need by
working with industry to identify the knowledge, skills, and abilities that
students will need to be successful in the Industry 4.0 technician workforce.
Using these results, the project team will create a set of courses for a new
mechatronics Associate of Applied Science degree program and a set of
certificate programs that students can earn as they complete courses. Technician
education will include classroom instruction, hands-on training in the labs,
industry internships, and apprenticeships. High school students will have the
opportunity to earn certificates through dual enrollment agreements with rural
secondary schools. This project will help increase the supply of technicians
with Industry 4.0 skills to meet the growing demand of rural manufacturers in
the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to create academic
pathways to train students on Industry 4.0 technologies that are used in the
automotive, industrial maintenance, contract manufacturing, and logistics
sectors. The project will establish a Business Industry Leadership Team to
prioritize industry programmatic content, identify program implementation
strategies, implement work-based learning activities, and identify and recruit
faculty with industry expertise. A mechatronics Associate in Applied Science
Degree, stackable certificates, and industry credentials will be developed by
revising existing courses and creating new courses. New lab equipment will
provide students with hands-on training on different types of electronic
sensors, electrical motors, pneumatic actuators, and mechanical power
transmission components. This training will help students earn an industry
credential in mechatronics. The project team will offer career awareness
activities for rural high school students and establish dual enrollment programs
with local high schools. The impact of the project on student recruitment,
retention, and program completion will be assessed based on institutional data.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the Nation’s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.