* 2202109
* Advanced Manufacturing: Girls Can, Too
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Sara Palmer, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2025
* USD 347,382.00

Kentucky faces a skilled technical worker shortage that must be addressed if the
state is to advance its manufacturing base. Analysis of graduation data in
Advanced Manufacturing credentials by Bluegrass Community &amp; Technical
College (BCTC) faculty indicates few women graduate in these fields. BCTC’s
three-year Girls Can Too Project will address this problem by educating,
recruiting and mentoring 80 middle and high school girls into careers relating
to Industrial Maintenance Technology (IMT), a key technical field that supplies
highly skilled technicians who install, maintain and repair industrial systems
equipment. Project activities will develop awareness and learning activities
coupled with mentoring interventions for these middle and high school girls and
then recruit 10 to 12 high school girls to enroll in dual credit courses that
will prepare them for transfer into the IMT program to earn certificates,
diplomas or AAS degrees. Mentoring and support by professional women employed in
IMT will provide women enrolled in the IMT program with leadership opportunities
as near-peer mentors for the middle and high school students participating in
the Girls Can Too Project. The broader impacts of this project include support
for girls’ engagement and transition into technical fields by strengthening and
expanding high school dual credit programs to include IMT preparation courses.
The project also supports systemic change in the college’s systems of support,
mentoring and industry connections through a female-led mentoring program and a
Business and Industry Leadership Team (BILT). The intellectual merit of the
project rest on its contribution to a growing field of study that assesses the
value of mentoring and support interventions to address gender disparities in
STEM fields. College administrators will review project successes and adapt or
expand activities to grow enrollment in other technical programs with similar
gender disparities so the college can build a diverse skilled technical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to recruit
and retain more women in Industrial Maintenance Technology by increasing
awareness and providing learning opportunities and mentoring beginning in middle
school. Girls and young women will gain access to relevant dual credit courses
in high school and have high levels of contact with faculty and industry
professionals who are women. Each year, project directors expect 80 students
from middle and high schools to participate in program activities supported by
two faculty who will lead the program of interventions and support that
encompass Saturday engagements at the college’s Advanced Manufacturing campus in
Georgetown Kentucky and summer learning experiences that engages them with
hands-on activities related to industrial maintenance. High school students who
participate in the program will have the opportunity to take four technology-
related dual credit courses to prepare for enrollment in the college’s IMT
program. IMT faculty will add to their pedagogical skills those strategies
needed to engage a more diverse classroom by participating in BCTC’s Cultural
Competency course, a semester-long course developed and offered by the college
to advance the goals of equity and diversity in teaching and learning. This
cultural competency knowledge will be integrated into the IMT classroom to
update the curriculum and better meet the needs of a more diverse student body.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.