* 2202253
* How Are Dynamos Born And How Do They Die? Characterizing Stellar Magnetism During Spin-Down
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Loren Matilsky, Matilsky, Loren
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 09/30/2025
* USD 210,000.00

Loren Matilsky is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Fellowship to carry
out a program of research and education at the University of California, Santa
Cruz. Matilsky will perform supercomputer simulations of magnetized, rotating
shells to characterize global dynamos in stars. Results from this project will
allow astronomers to better understand stellar dynamos, a critical step in
modeling “space weather” – violent magnetic eruptions such as stellar flares and
coronal mass ejections – that influences planetary habitability. Matilsky will
also establish a peer mentoring program that will help students and postdoctoral
researchers gain the skills to navigate research and
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamos in stars other than the Sun are poorly
understood and have yet to be adequately explored. Matilsky will address this
knowledge gap by implementing a suite of simulations for two main stellar
geometries – a Sun-like star with a tachocline and a fully convective M-dwarf
with no tachocline – spanning the full range of rotation rates achieved during
spin-down. This work will advance our understanding of the observed activity-
rotation relation in low mass stars and determine whether the nature of the
dynamo changes fundamentally during a star’s life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.