* 2202287
* Collaborative proposal: Glacial-interglacial variability in tropospheric reactive halogens
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Becky Alexander, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2025
* USD 486,913.00

The general goal of the research is to investigate the sensitivity of reactive
halogen abundance to glacial-interglacial climate change in a global model and
examine its implications for ice core proxies. The research specifically focuses
on three research questions: 1) Can blowing snow on sea ice explain the increase
in Sodium ions observed in Greenland and Antarctic ice cores on the glacial-
interglacial timescale; 2) What are the biggest drivers for changes in the
abundance of reactive halogens over the glacial-interglacial timescale; and 3)
What are the potential implications for the oxidizing capacity of the atmosphere
and short-lived climate forcing agents Methane, Tropospheric Ozone, and
Aerosols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will help improve the understanding
of reactive halogens over a major climate transition and examine the
implications of their role in climate feedbacks via their influence on the
oxidation capacity of the atmosphere. The atmospheric abundance of Methane,
Ozone, and Aerosols may have significant impacts on the Earthâ€™s climate system
over a variety of timescales through their direct and indirect radiative
forcing, as well as impacts on biogeochemical cycling due to their influence on
the biosphere. The project also provides support for graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.