* 2202710
* Collaborative Research: Enhanced electricity generation through liquid flow over durable slippery Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Stefano Leonardi, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2025
* USD 218,562.00

Efficient hydropower technologies support national prosperity and energy
security by providing a renewable energy source and reducing greenhouse gas
emissions. Traditional hydropower technologies convert the kinetic energy of
falling water to electricity using dams and bulky electromagnetic generators.
Although hydropower is a renewable energy source, traditional approaches often
come with adverse environmental impacts and poor power efficiency. Notably,
electricity can also be generated when liquid flows over a surface, and the
resulting electricity can be harvested without using dams or electromagnetic
generators. Generating hydropower via liquid flow over a surface is a versatile
approach that would enable the harvesting of energy stored in various forms
across the global water cycle (e.g., water flow, natural evaporation, raindrops,
and ocean waves). However, such energy generation approaches do not yet yield
the desired voltage output. To increase the generated electricity when liquid
flows over a surface, this project will examine the impact of the liquid-surface
interfacial properties on performance; favorable properties include significant
interface charges, small liquid moving friction, and being durable under flow.
The generated knowledge related to liquid flow over novel engineered interfaces
will transform key technologies in the sustainable generation of energy, clean
water, and the design of biomedical devices. The investigators will conduct
educational activities that focus on the professional development and
participation of women in STEM, especially K-12 and undergraduate students, to
train a diverse future engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching objective of this proposal is to discover new fundamentals of
electrokinetics over engineered interfaces; this knowledge will be used to
design a novel, durable slippery surface for improved electricity generation.
Superhydrophobic surfaces are traditionally used to enhance energy conversion in
electrokinetic flow by reducing interface friction. However, there are two
significant challenges associated with using superhydrophobic surfaces for this
purpose: the reduced interface charges due to non-charged liquid-air interfaces
and the inferior durability of liquid-air interfaces under fluid flow. To
address these challenges and achieve the overarching objective, an integrated
experimental and computational approach will be employed to generate the
necessary knowledge. Task 1 entails the experimental characterization of the
streaming potential of electrokinetic flow over oil-filled slippery rough
surfaces. This effort will lead to an understanding of the effects of liquid-oil
interfaces and surface roughness on enhancing interface charges. Task 2 entails
experimental characterization and direct numerical simulation of the liquid-oil
interface stability and durability in flow under different oil properties and
geometrical parameters of the surface texture. The influences of these control
parameters on surface durability will be revealed. The insights gained through
Tasks 1 and 2 will then be applied to design a durable slippery surface that
will increase voltage generation by two orders of magnitude over that of using a
solid or superhydrophobic surface. The novel durable slippery surface will
transform the development of electrokinetic energy devices for myriad
applications, ranging from small-scale in situ power sources for smart
electronics to scaled-up energy systems for blue energy
harvesting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.