* 2202255
* Plant chemistry and microbes as drivers of microbiome-mediated resistance to parasitism in a butterfly herbivore
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jacobus de Roode, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2025
* USD 735,474.00

Most animals on our planet are herbivores, using plants as their food. Plants
have evolved a wide variety of toxic chemicals to protect themselves from being
eaten. In return, many herbivores have evolved resistance to toxins, and some
are even able to use plant toxins to protect themselves against their own
enemies, including predators and parasites. One such herbivore is the monarch
butterfly, whose caterpillars feed on milkweeds, which contain toxins called
cardenolides. Previous work has shown that monarchs do not only use toxic
milkweed as food, but also as medicine against a debilitating parasite. However,
it remains unknown whether cardenolides directly kill parasites, or whether they
change the monarch gut microbiome (all the micro-organisms that form the
insect’s gut flora) so that specific bacteria or fungi kill the parasite. In
this project, the researchers will carry out a series of experiments to find out
how toxic milkweeds provide medicine to monarch butterflies. Do their toxins act
like drugs? Do they make the gut flora inhospitable to parasites? Or do the
milkweeds themselves provide probiotic bacteria to the monarch so they can
withstand infection? As part of the research, the researchers will train a
postdoc and undergraduate students, and work with the Fernbank Science Center in
Atlanta to develop lesson plans for fifth grade public school students. Lesson
plans will focus on the question how diet can change the gut flora of animals
and thereby change susceptibility to disease.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimentally validating the indirect link between diet
quality, gut community composition, and infectious disease has proven
challenging given the complex nature of many animal gut microbial communities
and disease pathologies. In this project, the researchers will use monarch
butterflies and their protozoan parasites as a focal host-parasite interaction
to investigate the interplay between host plant chemicals and microbes,
herbivore gut microbiomes and parasite resistance. This project provides an
ideal opportunity to fully connect these interrelated pieces of host ecology to
disease outcomes. In testing these predictions, the proposal will also expand
our understanding of how medicinal metabolites interact with “probiotic” gut
microbial communities to influence infection. The researchers will address the
following specific aims: (1) Determine the role of phytochemistry and plant
microbes in shaping the assembly of gut microbial communities towards an anti-
parasitic state; (2) identify key traits of the microbial communities that are
critical to gut microbial protection against parasitic infection; (3) determine
the extent to which spatial and chemical attributes of gut microbial communities
increase resistance to parasitism. Building upon preliminary results, the
researchers predict that: (i) ingesting a high diversity of toxic secondary
metabolites and plant microbes selects for a more diverse gut microbial
community; and (ii) a more diverse microbial community provides hosts protection
from infection through both physical and chemical interference of
parasites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.