* 2202273
* Collaborative Research: The role of multifunctionality in the evolution of cranial morphological diversity in bats
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Thomas Eiting, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 25,045.00

From insect wings to bird beaks, most anatomical structures carry out more than
one function. How anatomical structures have evolved to accomplish more than one
function is a long-standing, important question in the field of organismal
biology. This project addresses this question by examining the skull and how its
different functions – such as sensing, breathing, and feeding– interact and in
so doing may have shaped the diversity of skull morphology over evolutionary
time. To study this topic, this project focuses on bats, the second most
species-rich Order of mammals, because this group offers extraordinary diversity
in number of species, a wide range of skull shapes and sizes, and novel skull
functions such as echolocation. To understand how the interaction among skull
functions helped generate bat skull diversity, the researchers will first
measure and map the diversity of internal and external skull morphology across
bats. The researchers will then use computational models and physiological data
to predict and compare how well differently shaped skulls perform during
feeding, respiration, and olfaction, identifying what parts of the skull affect
these functions and how. Finally, the researchers will reconstruct how
functionally relevant skull features have evolved in the context of competing
functions. The project will generate massive datasets of skull internal and
external morphology (3D models, histological series), enable training of
undergraduate and graduate students, and support the development of a museum
exhibit projected to reach thousands of visitors across two
cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantitative information revealing the performance
relationships and tradeoffs among cranial functions is scarce, which hinders a
full understanding of the factors shaping cranial morphological diversity in
vertebrates. This proposal outlines a highly integrative research framework that
will explicitly link morphological and performance diversity across the multiple
functions of a key vertebrate structure, the cranium, thereby increasing the
understanding of which and how intrinsic and extrinsic factors contributed to
its morphological evolution. This project’s central hypothesis is that the
morphological diversity of the cranium of bats is the result of structural,
mechanical, and physiological interactions among its functions, including
tradeoffs and facilitation. The project will particularly focus on examining the
rostrum (snout), because its morphological and functional variation underlies
most of the cranial diversity across bat species, and conserved and derived
cranial functions interface within its limited space. The team will use an
integrative and cross-disciplinary approach to complete three aims and test
predictions derived from the main hypothesis. In Aim 1, the team will use micro-
Computed Tomography (micro-CT) to image bat skulls and geometric morphometric
analyses of internal and external cranial features to identify the major traits
that underlie cranial morphological diversity across bats. In Aim 2, the team
will use models of natural and altered morphologies of selected bat species to
conduct measurements, calculations, and computational modeling with validation
to (1) translate variation in cranial morphology into performance outputs for
several functions relevant to bat ecology (feeding, respiration, olfaction,
vision and echolocation), and (2) identify performance relationships and
tradeoffs among functions. In Aim 3, the team will use phylogenetic comparative
analyses to identify patterns of evolution in functionally-relevant cranial
traits, and examine the effect of tradeoffs on morphological diversity. The
project will generate predictive (finite element, computational fluid dynamic)
models that will be experimentally validated, which will greatly advance the
field of biomechanics and serve as the basis for future studies aimed at
measuring in vivo performance. By coupling descriptive and experimental
approaches within a phylogenetic framework, the project will be the first to
explicitly address the role of multifunctionality in the morphological
diversification of the cranium across a whole mammalian
Order.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.