* 2202956
* 2022 Gordon Research Conference on Photosensory Receptors and Signal Transduction
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Brian Crane, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 01/31/2023
* USD 4,000.00

The Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on
Photosensory Receptors and Signal Transduction (PRST) will be held in Ventura CA
on March 26th, and March 27th, 2022, respectively. The GRS, which is primarily
attended by graduate students and postdocs, and the GRC, will bring together
senior and junior researchers from broad ranging disciplines to discuss and
advance our understanding of biological molecules and cellular systems that
sense light. Light provides one of the primary environmental stimuli on our
planet and Nature has evolved a remarkable palette of chromophore-containing
molecules to provide specific responses to the specific wavelengths and
intensities of electromagnetic radiation. The chemistry and biophysics of these
systems is rich, complex and bears on our ability to design new systems to
harvest energy and control biology with light. Indeed, understanding how light
signals are transmitted has the potential to improve crop yields through
optimized photosynthesis and plant growth, allow the development of new
molecular tools to study neuroscience and processes associated with vision loss
and mood disorders. The themes of the GRC and GRS have been chosen to emphasize
the most important, universal questions underlying these problems and to
stimulate the exchange of ideas among diverse researchers to solve them. The
training and engagement of junior scientists, both postdoctoral fellows and
graduate students is a priority of the conference. As such, mentoring activities
and professional development sessions are also planned as part of the meeting.
NSF support will be used to defray registration fee and/or travel costs of
participants from groups historically under-represented in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science presented at the 2022 PRST GRC and GRS
will encompass the study of photosensory molecules from all domains of life.
Mechanistic studies of light reception and signal propagation at the level of
quantum behavior through macromolecular dynamics is a long-standing, central
theme of the meeting. We will discuss the regulation of plant photobiology and
the implications thereof for improving agriculture by increasing crop yields and
developing more efficient biofuels. Optogenetics, the ability to program protein
localization, trigger signaling networks, control neuronal activity and modulate
gene expression with light is another key area to be highlighted. Key scientific
problems will drive technology development of x-ray lasers and modern
synchrotrons, whose use will be underscored in several presentations.
Understanding photosensory receptors in the broadest sense is critical to the
advancement of many fields. Lessons learned are applicable to not just biology
but as precedents for improving energy harvesting and storage and in
photovoltaic and other devices. In health-related areas, studies of
photoreceptors can be applied to the recovery of vision and rescue of retinal
degenerative diseases. Light entrainment of circadian rhythms impacts sleep,
mood and mental health. The talks and discussion groups hope to reveal how these
processes function at the molecular level, thereby providing potential
downstream avenues to address issues related to disruption of circadian rhythms
such as depression, seasonal affected disorder and sleep abnormalities. The GRS
presentations will be divided into two sessions: in which the most fundamental
issues in photosensory signal transduction will be discussed: i) molecular
mechanisms of phototransduction and ii) synthetic
photobiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.