* 2202803
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Small: PATHWiSE - Supporting Teacher Authoring of Robot-Assisted Homework
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Bilge Mutlu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Cindy Bethel
* 08/31/2025
* USD 244,999.00

Researchers in the learning sciences describe learning as a social activity
where social interactions with others are conducive to developing deep and
lasting knowledge. Teachers often help students using social interactions in
science classrooms by providing guidance to students, including giving small
cues to what students might notice about their learning, restating key points in
what others are explaining, or asking students questions to explain their
reasoning. However, during homework, students usually complete lessons by
themselves without the aid of rich social interaction that comes from teacher
guidance. To help students during homework, educational technologies can provide
personalized support for lessons, but most systems lack the ability to provide
the type of socially rich guidance that teachers use in classrooms. One solution
is to use social robots, or learning companion robots, as an educational
technology capable of providing a social learning experience and personalized
supports for students as they complete their homework. A major challenge in
providing homework lessons designed for social robotic support is a lack of
tools for teachers to create and customize these lessons. To address that
challenge, in this project, researchers will partner with middle school science
teachers and students, to design PATHWiSE, Personalized Augmentation Tools for
HomeWork in Science Education, a homework studio for robot augmented learning.
The PATHWiSE homework studio is an online system where teachers can design
lessons and add robot interactions to science homework and students can log on
with a robot in their home to engage in these robot-assisted homework
activities. PATHWiSE empowers teachers to add guidance for students during
homework by including guiding comments, highlighting material, and asking
questions that relate to their classrooms and students lived experiences. With
help from the PATHWiSE tool, teachers can transform homework into a socially
interactive experience that can vastly improve the learning experience for
students of all abilities. This work makes significant societal contributions
through an innovative technology that can transform at-home learning
experiences; new knowledge and guidance that demonstrate how to develop teacher
authoring tools for complex technologies, and new recommendations that inform
real-world practice of integrating social robots into science
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students usually complete homework lessons in
isolation rather than through rich social interaction. Educational technologies
can support student homework via step-by-step feedback or proficiency tracking,
but most systems lack mechanisms to provide guidance that reflects the socio-
cultural experiences students have in and out of the classroom. To address that
challenge, researchers in this project will conduct design-based research in
partnership with middle school science teachers and students to co-design
PATHWiSE, Personalized Augmentation Tools for HomeWork in Science Education, a
homework studio for robot augmented learning. The PATHWiSE homework studio is an
open-source online system that includes a teacher authoring environment for
adding teacher guidance to science homework activities and a student homework
environment where students engage in robot-assisted homework activities.
PATHWiSE uses a modified trigger-action programming environment that visually
overlays trigger-action pairs directly onto multimedia homework activities in
the teacher interface. Teachers indicate trigger points, indicating where to
provide guidance, and associated actions that describe the robot response at
that trigger point. As students work at home with the PATHWiSE interface, the
robot will retrieve trigger-action pairs for an assignment from a database. When
a trigger point is reached, the associated actions will be translated into robot
behaviors (verbal, non-verbal, and movement actions). Finally, researchers will
conduct a pilot study to examine teacher use and student experiences with the
PATHWiSE system, where teachers will create augmented homework assignments,
embedded over four weeks in their actual curriculum, and students will complete
these assignments at home with either the robot or a similar computer-based
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.