* 2202771
* Evolution of Glacial Meltwater in the North Atlantic Current - Subpolar Front System
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Alan Condron, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2025
* USD 449,645.00

The melting of the great ice sheets of the last Ice Age caused sea level to rise
by about 130 m globally. In this project a computer model will be developed to
simulate the pathways of glacial water introduced into the North Atlantic Ocean
from the Laurentide Ice Sheet – the great ice sheet that covered northern North
America during the last Ice Age. The project will include modeling of small-
scale eddies and their influence on glacial water movements which will help in
the understanding of the ocean’s response to ice sheet changes. The results will
be important for understanding the role of glacial waters released today from
other ice sheets such as the Greenland Ice Sheet. The project will support a
graduate student and three undergraduate students, and a how-to manual will be
produced so that scientists can use or adapt the model for other
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A numerical model which represents ocean
circulation and sea ice and which resolves ocean mesoscale eddies will be
developed to produce detailed simulations of the evolution of glacial water in
the North Atlantic Current-Subpolar Front system. Focus will be on glacial
meltwater which emanated from the Laurentide Ice Sheet at different locations
along the Labrador Shelf, where evidence for ice streams delivering material
into the sub-polar gyre exists, and through Fram Strait, which will allow
representation of a source of meltwater from the Arctic Ocean, and in particular
the Mackenzie River. Two questions will be addressed: (1) To which extent are
the temperature and salinity of glacial waters modified as they flow towards
deep-water formation areas in the northern North Atlantic? (2) Which processes
(eddy-induced mixing or air-sea interactions) most effectively modify the
properties of glacial waters en route to these areas? The work plan to address
these questions is threefold. First, a coupled ocean circulation-sea-ice model
will be configured to represent the subpolar North Atlantic. Second, the coupled
model will be tested by using modern observations from oceanographic cruises,
hydrographic climatologies, and satellite missions. Finally, experiments with
the coupled model will be conducted and analyzed to quantify the erosion of
glacial water properties en route to deep-water formation regions and evaluate
the role of different eroding factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.