* 2202108
* Research on the Use of Real-Time Tracking and Eye-Tracking Technology for Integrating Metacognition and Augmented Reality into Undergraduate Engineering Laboratories
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jung Hyup Kim, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2025
* USD 850,000.00

This project aims to innovate Augmented Reality (AR) learning platforms in an
undergraduate engineering laboratory. Recently, due to the COVID-19 pandemic,
in-person engineering laboratories faced significant challenges in providing
hands-on exercise. AR technology might be a solution to the current challenge.
Unlike virtual reality, AR does not cover a physical world but mixes 3D virtual
objects into physical objects to improve students’ laboratory experiences and
spatial awareness. However, students faced difficulties navigating the AR device
and have experienced a mismatch between computer-generated 3D images and
physical objects while learning in an AR environment. To transform AR learning
from a static and isolated experience into a dynamic self-study, this project
includes research on using a real-time tracking sensor with a 3D full-body
motion capture system to improve AR usability and detect student’s premature
termination of learning using metacognitive monitoring feedback and eye-tracking
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to
integrate real-time 3D motion and location tracking systems to meet a series of
objectives to gain insight into scientific development and technological
innovation in a location-based AR environment. The first objective is to create
the next generation of an AR learning platform by integrating state-of-the-art
indoor real-time location technology and a 3D full-body motion capture system.
The second objective is to detect the early termination of learning by using
metacognitive monitoring feedback and eye movement data. The researchers will
apply advanced gaze behavior metrics, such as fractal analysis of pupil dilation
and eye inter-fixation duration, to identify significant eye gaze behavior
representing student’s premature termination of learning. The last objective is
to implement the research findings to promote instructional improvement in an
engineering laboratory on the impact of receiving metacognitive feedback on
learning performance. The current project will address integrated research and
education activities to enhance our knowledge of effective undergraduate
engineering laboratory education using real-time 3D motion and location tracking
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.