* 2202122
* CyberTech: Expanding Opportunities in Cybersecurity
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Luis Pentzke, Broward College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2025
* USD 324,191.00

The US Bureau of Labor Statistics projects an increase of 31% in job openings in
cybersecurity between 2019 and 2029. Even though the state of Florida has the
fourth highest employment level in cybersecurity in the Nation, educational
options for Florida students who wish to prepare for and pursue employment in
the cybersecurity field are limited. The goal of this project is to increase
access for low-income students, and underrepresented students to cybersecurity
technician training while increasing overall graduation rates. This project will
make use of a co-teaching model where faculty and cybersecurity graduate
students work together to ensure the relevancy of the curriculum in the
cybersecurity program. Graduate students will co-teach classes with faculty
bringing the latest knowledge of cybersecurity threats and security breaches to
the classroom. Partnerships with industry, universities, community colleges, and
secondary schools will help ensure project success and alignment with the
rapidly changing needs of the industry. This project will support regional
workforce needs by providing local employers with a larger and better trained
supply of cybersecurity technicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
respond to local industry needs while supplying broader insight into
effectiveness of the co-teaching model on technician enrollment, retention, and
certification acquisition. The program will pair cybersecurity instructors with
cybersecurity graduate students through a co-teaching collaboration that will
offer students near-peer support, access to current cybersecurity research, and
a competency-based framework with recognition for prior learning. Project
objectives include: 1) Increasing enrollment in cybersecurity courses; 2)
Increasing fall-to-fall retention in cybersecurity courses; and 3) Increasing
the number of credentials earned by students participating in the program. The
evaluation plan will study the impact of the program on the target audience and
the programâ€™s potential for benefiting others. The evaluation design includes
clear and specific student performance objectives with measurable qualities; use
of multiple measures; use of project documents, records, and results for
formative evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.