* 2202033
* Biofab Explorer: Designing A Dual Enrollment Pathway to Careers in Biofabrication
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Amanda Bastoni, CAST, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2025
* USD 646,526.00

The project will develop biofabrication career guidance curriculum and
materials, situate these within Career and Technical Education (CTE) classrooms
that offer dual enrolment (i.e., college credit during high school), and provide
professional development to educators on how to create inclusive and industry-
aligned career guidance. Biofabrication refers to the production of human
tissues from organic and synthetic sources. The project meets regional industry
needs for STEM technicians by targeting the early stages of the biomanufacturing
talent pipeline—high school CTE students, for whom internships can be scarce and
who lack awareness of STEM technician roles in biomanufacturing. The project
will provide career awareness for students and educators of the biofabrication
industry, and support skill and knowledge development for a diverse group of
students so they can build industry relevant skills, and increase access to STEM
technician education in New Hampshire, Massachusetts, and North Carolina — all
hubs for biomanufacturing. The project provides a model for aligning emerging
areas of advanced manufacturing with education and career guidance and addresses
critical gaps in career guidance by creating inclusive opportunities for a broad
range of students to build self-efficacy beliefs, understand biomanufacturing,
and demonstrate industry relevant skills and knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project brings together CAST, Manchester Community College, Great Bay Community
College, Johnston Community College, secondary CTE centers—including guidance
counselors, administrators, educators, and the Advanced Regenerative
Manufacturing Institute (ARMI)/BioFab USA to accomplish three goals. First, the
project will identify and validate Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities (KSAs) for
STEM technician roles in biofabrication and create career guidance curriculum
including a career guidance website, work-based learning simulations, and
activities teachers can use to help students explore careers and develop and
demonstrate industry skills. Working together, ARMI experts, the Business and
Industry Leadership Team, and secondary and post-secondary educator will use
Universal Design for Learning (UDL), an approach to designing learning
environments and education technologies with all student needs in mind, for
curriculum development. Second, Biofab Explorer and the eportfolio technologies
developed by CAST will be piloted in two dual enrollment models, one in high
school CTE settings taught by high school CTE teachers with community college
faculty oversight (Manchester Community College and Great Bay Community College,
NH) and one in a CTE secondary program taught by community college faculty and
(Johnston Community College, NC). Third, professional development workshops for
secondary and postsecondary educators will be delivered to 1) introduce the
career guidance curriculum, Biofab Explorer, and the eportfolio, 2) identify
ways these digital environments can increase knowledge of STEM technician
opportunities, 3) provide hands-on skill building with Work Based Learning (WBL)
simulations, and 4) model how UDL strategies can help recruit and support
students underrepresented in STEM education and careers. A regional workshop
will be offered to educators from across New Hampshire and Massachusetts and a
second regional workshop will be offered to educators from across North
Carolina. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program
that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields
that drive the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.