* 2202105
* An Initiative of Closing the Cloud Computing Skills Gap
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* MUBARAK BANISAKHER, Hillsborough Community College
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 491,794.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a cloud computing
program to meet a regional workforce need. The cloud computing industry has
grown exponentially at an unprecedented rate especially during the pandemic.
Community colleges nationwide, however, have not yet widely created curriculum
and supporting materials to effectively train technicians in this rapidly
growing field. There are widespread workforce gaps of cloud computing
technicians. This project will develop new courses that will strengthen
knowledge in cloud technologies, virtualization, storage, operating systems,
networking, and cybersecurity. A collaboration with other institutions and
industry partners has the potential to help program adoptions with curricula and
best practices to jumpstart a workforce training pipeline in cloud computing.
The project team intends to focus on the recruitment of women and students from
underrepresented groups in order to meet the growing demands of cloud computing
technicians in Tampa region. The project has the potential to advance knowledge
of accelerating the development of cloud computing training
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal is to develop a cloud computing
curriculum with stackable courses towards a college-credit certificate and an
associate degree. This goal will be met through four objectives: 1) Development
of a clouding computing curriculum that will foster an environment of learning
and success through hands-on experiences in cloud technology courses; 2)
Acquisition of expertise and technical knowledge through a Business and Industry
Leadership Team and a mentoring collaboration with the Cloud Computing Center at
Miami Dade College; 3) Provision of opportunities to secondary and post-
secondary faculty by taking cloud certifications; and 4) Recruitment activities
including job preparations, and retention services. In addition, the project
will provide an annual summer program of cloud computing for high school and
college students in collaboration with local public schools. The project team
plans to disseminate the proposed curriculum and practices in recruiting
students from underrepresented groups at various national and regional
conferences. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.