* 2202872
* RAPID: Measuring Uptake, Persistence, and Impact of Behavioral Interventions On Respiratory Viruses
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Nita Bharti, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This study investigates the reasons for differences in disease transmission
between populations as a result of behavioral changes chosen by individuals and
separating those effects from top-down, mandated changes. Top-down behavioral
interventions are used to reduce the transmission of pathogens when
pharmaceutical treatments (e.g., drugs and vaccines) are not available. They are
often designed to minimize movement and contacts and include school and
workplace closures or event cancellations. In additionally, individuals may
choose to temporarily change their behavior to reduce their risk of infection.
Such individual changes are difficult to predict or measure, making it
challenging to measure their effectiveness in reducing disease incidence and
spread. The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 prompted widespread county-level
restrictions alongside individual behavioral changes, such as staying at home
and wearing masks. Despite experiencing the same county level restrictions,
university students experienced very high rates of COVID-19 per capita, while
non-students reported very few COVID-19 cases per capita. In contrast, neither
population experienced seasonal influenza during the first winter of COVID-19.
By comparing behaviors and disease incidence in these population, this research
will help plan and design more effective and efficient outbreak management
strategies for re-emerging or novel pathogens. This project supports training of
early-career scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study investigates the 1)
uptake, 2) persistence over time, and 3) impact of top-down behavioral
interventions and individual behavioral changes on COVID-19 and influenza
incidence. By integrating passive and active data collection, researchers will
quantify changes in behaviors in central Pennsylvania. Comparing behavioral
changes during top-down interventions to other times helps disentangle mandated
behavioral changes from individual choices. Longitudinal passive surveillance
data will provide frequent measures of population-level movements before and
after SARS-CoV-2 emerged. Traffic cameras will quantify vehicular and pedestrian
traffic while mobile devices will provide proxy measures of total visits to
points of interest, time spent outside the home, mixing between students and
non-students, and so forth. This project also will longitudinally survey
students (N=684) and non-students (N=1313) to measure individual adherence to
top-down interventions and the voluntary adoption of other behavioral changes.
Surveys will ask about movement, staying home, gatherings, masking, hand
washing, vaccination, and so forth. At each time step, survey participants will
provide blood for serological analyses to detect prior infection. Researchers
will incorporate dynamic measures of behavioral interventions and individual
behaviors into disease models to estimate the dynamics in the force of infection
for COVID-19 and influenza in students and non-students. These models will
measure the impacts of specific behaviors on disease transmission and will
inform future interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was funded in
collaboration with the CDC to support rapid-response research projects to
further advance federal infectious disease modeling
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.