* 2202113
* AGS-FIRP Track 3: Methane Emissions Quantification at Scales from 20m to 200km Using the MethaneAIR Imaging Spectrometer on the NSF Gulfstream-V (MAIR-E)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Steven Wofsy, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,045,206.00

In this field campaign project, a dual imaging spectrometer will be deployed on
the NSF Gulfstream V aircraft to measure methane emissions from oil and gas
production areas. The selected regions for study account for more than 50% of
the onshore methane production in the continental United States. A recent NSF-
supported award, titled MethaneAIR, produced maps of atmospheric methane with
unprecedented granularity showing the amount of methane added to the atmosphere
by emission sources at the ground. This project will provide estimates of
methane emissions from the regions studied providing attribution for the
observed emissions and a baseline to which emissions can be compared in the
future. The accurate quantification of these sources is extremely important for
holding nations and industry accountable to the COP26 Methane Pledge for
addressing climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The airborne imaging
spectrometer that was developed by EDF will be used in this project to address
the following science questions: (1) What are the basin-scale emission rates
from major oil and gas (O&amp;G) provinces in the US? (2) How are basin-scale
emissions partitioned between very large point sources (“the fat tail of the
distribution”) and very large numbers of smaller sources? (3) What factors cause
emission rates to vary among O&amp;G regions? (4) What are the emission rates
from landfills across the US? (5) How effective is control technology in
reducing methane emissions from landfills?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate
students at Harvard and a postdoctoral scholar at the University Utah will be
trained in new advanced methods for scientific assessment of MethaneAIR imagery
and help to solve novel inverse modeling problems presented by this
qualitatively new type of imagery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.