* 2202036
* Robotic Process Automation Career Training
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Faith Alexander, COLLEGE OF THE MAINLAND COMMUNITY COLLEGE DISTRICT
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2025
* USD 307,758.00

Robotic process automation (RPA) is a technology that uses software to complete
common, repetitive tasks, such as open emails, transfer files, and send
invoices. This form of automation uses software to perform business process
activities at a high-volume, allowing workers to direct their attention to more
important tasks that are not candidates for automation. Companies are turning to
RPA technology to improve the efficiency of their operations and to make more
effective use of their human capital. The goal of this project is to develop and
implement a two-year degree program consisting of stackable credentials in RPA
that supports industry-recognized RPA tool certifications and offers cooperative
work-based learning opportunities. Among the community colleges in Texas, the
College of the Mainland will be the first to offer a workforce Occupational
Skills Award and Certificate in RPA technology. There is no certificate, two-
year, or four-year degree programs in Texas dedicated to RPA. Students with
specialized RPA skills who obtain industry-recognized certifications will be
qualified to fill a variety of positions in this rapidly growing
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Robotic Process Automation Career Training
(RPACT) project will develop a two-year curriculum using RPA tools supplied by
leading vendors. Students will learn to configure these tools to create software
robots which perform repetitive tasks, usually tasks performed every day
manually by computer users. The objectives of the project include (1)
identifying the skills, certifications, and supporting systems for the industry
focused workforce program, (2) developing and promoting the RPACT program
pathway and curriculum, (3) recruiting and retaining students focusing on women,
nontraditional aged, and concurrent high school students, and (4) supporting
RPACT students through the program, to obtain industry-recognized certification,
and into RPA technician careers. RPACT will target recruitment and student
supports for women, nontraditional aged (25+) reskilling/upskilling students,
and concurrent high school students. Project faculty will establish a network of
business and industry advisors, develop industry-aligned curriculum with a
hands-on lab learning foundation, support internships and career services, and
evaluate the project to inform post-award
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.