* 2202984
* Partially Wrapped Fukaya Categories and Functoriality in Mirror Symmetry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Denis Auroux, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2025
* USD 354,491.00

In modern geometry it is often useful to think of spaces in non-local terms
rather than relying on classical concepts such as position. This is especially
true of symplectic geometry -- the geometry of phase spaces of classical
mechanics, where points are "too small" to be relevant, and it is more natural
to consider objects called Lagrangian submanifolds. These objects and their
interactions are encoded by an algebraic structure (or "non-commutative space")
called the Fukaya category. A remarkable mathematical conjecture inspired by
ideas from theoretical physics, "homological mirror symmetry", asserts that
Fukaya categories are in fact often equivalent to honest (commutative) spaces of
the sort studied in algebraic geometry. This research project studies versions
of Fukaya categories for symplectic manifolds equipped with one or more
(commuting) functions and/or relative to certain directions at infinity. The
rich structure of these categories, coming from the additional data, yields new
ways of understanding the effect of various geometric constructions on the
Fukaya category of a symplectic manifold; this in turn should greatly extend the
range of settings in which homological mirror symmetry can be verified. The
project will also provide research opportunities for several graduate students
and generally aim to make this research area more accessible to the broader
mathematical community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; From a technical standpoint, the
first goal of this project is to develop a better geometric setup for partially
wrapped Fukaya categories as they arise in mirror symmetry, to arrive at a
formulation where computations are possible and the expected structural features
are manifest. The other main goal is to use these foundations to give a general
proof of homological mirror symmetry for (not necessarily Calabi-Yau) complete
intersections in toric varieties, and to study canonical bases of their
coordinate rings. Finally, this project will also bring conceptual clarity to
the field by unifying different proposed constructions of partially wrapped
Fukaya categories, finding new instances of functoriality in mirror symmetry,
and studying the interplay between geometric constructions and categorical
ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.