* 2202230
* Geospatial Technical Education: Bridging Classroom to GIS Technician Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Jaquelyn Klancher, Central Wyoming College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2025
* USD 349,804.00

Geospatial Information Science (GIS) is a rapidly growing field of employment
for which a significant workforce gap exists in Central Wyoming. There are not
enough workforce-ready geospatial employees trained at the technician level to
satisfy employment needs in the region. The goal of this project is to increase
the recruitment, retention, and graduation rates of students in GIS at Central
Wyoming College (CWC). The project will place specific emphasis on increasing
the participation of students from groups underrepresented in GIS with a focus
on American Indian students. An overall increase in the number of students
participating in the GIS program, combined with innovative scheduling and course
formatting will increase student completion rates and help CWC to graduate more
workforce-ready GIS technicians. The resulting GIS program will include
opportunities for field-based research, internships, and work experience that
will enhance student learning and provide economic support to help with program
retention and completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three key
objectives: the expansion of recruitment and retention efforts to increase the
number of students graduating from GIS programs; the modification of existing
GIS programs to create an innovative industry-appropriate curriculum; and the
development of partnerships to better include hands-on GIS experiences for
students. The project will leverage CWC’s American Indian Services Coordinator
and CWC’s partnership with the Tribal Historic Preservation Offices of the
Eastern Shoshone and Northern Arapaho tribes to increase recruitment, retention,
diversity, and overall program completion. Long-standing professional,
government and academic relationships will be engaged to create more paid
internship opportunities, ensure program quality, and facilitate student
transfer into the workforce and to 4-year institutions. Project evaluation will
use mixed methods, primarily descriptive and qualitative, supplemented by
interrupted-time series (ITS) models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the
education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the
Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.