* 2202772
* High Spatial Resolution Assessment of the Speleothem Magnetization Proxy
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Roger Fu, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2025
* USD 313,105.00

This research aims to quantify the reliability of magnetization in speleothems
as an indicator of past rainfall. Specifically, the researchers aim to
investigate the physical mechanism that link rainfall and the deposition of
magnetic particles. The work will take advantage of recent technological
advances that permit magnetic field imaging at high resolution using the quantum
diamond microscope. Analyses of speleothems can provide well-dated, high-
resolution records of ancient climate conditions. However, the most used proxies
for past rainfall are influenced by multiple and competing effects, resulting in
potentially ambiguous interpretations. Recent studies have shown that speleothem
magnetism, specifically, the intensity of speleothem magnetization holds promise
as an archive of local hydroclimate. However, multiple processes other than
rainfall can lead to the enrichment of magnetic particles. Therefore,
understanding how regional hydroclimate and cave hydrology impact the mechanism
of magnetic particle enrichment in speleothem is a prerequisite for the broad
usage of speleothem magnetism as a tracer of ancient precipitation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research framework consists of three Tasks: 1) Direct
evaluation of the rainfall-magnetization relationship using observational
records; 2) Testing reproducibility of a precipitation signal using duplicate
samples; and 3) Cave monitoring campaign to characterize fluxes of magnetic
particles and their dependence on recorded hydrological
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include
developing a new tracer of past rainfall variability to enhance paleoclimate
reconstructions. The researchers will organize outreach activities that consist
of Climate themed fieldtrips for high school students and their teachers. The
fieldtrips will include the climate exhibit at the Harvard Museum of Natural
History and glacial features at the Great Esker Park in Weymouth, MA and Drumlin
Farms in Lincoln, MA. The students will complete hands-on activities such as
measuring the dimensions of the esker and drumlin. The outreach activities will
also involve the students and their teachers in data analyses through the
Harvard LabXchange initiative. The magnetic images generated by the quantum
diamond microscope in this project will be made accessible for students and
teachers to actively participate in the research activities of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.