* 2202203
* Collaborative Research: Nanoscale structure and dynamics of a cell-cell adhesion complex
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Xiaolin Cheng, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 05/31/2026
* USD 289,687.00

The sensing and transducing of mechanical forces by cells influence fundamental
processes in biology like cell adhesion, embryo development, tissue repair.
Transducing mechanical forces is also essential for senses like touch and
hearing. However, the molecular mechanisms by which the cellular protein
machineries operate to sense and transduce mechanical forces remain to be
elucidated. The cell-cell adhesion adherens junction (AJ) macromolecular
complexes serve as mechanosensing hubs between neighboring cells in
multicellular organisms. Because the AJ complexes are highly flexible,
determining their structure and dynamics poses a challenge to molecular
biophysics. This project aims to elucidate the mechanosensing mechanism of the
AJ core complex by a novel integrative structural biology approach. Given its
interdisciplinary nature, the collaborative research provides multidisciplinary
training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students. Moreover, this
research contributes to the development of next generation world class national
infrastructure for neutron scattering, and to the community outreach programs to
broaden participations in STEM education and research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will employ cutting edge static
and dynamic neutron scattering, theoretical physics and molecular simulation to
determine the structure and dynamics of the mechanosensitive core complex of the
AJ. With the aid of selective deuteration, neutron scattering, particularly
neutron spin echo spectroscopy, can probe the dynamics of macromolecular
complexes on nanometer length scales and on nanosecond to microsecond
timescales, which fills a largely unexplored spatial-temporal niche between cell
biophysics/single molecule spectroscopy and high-resolution structural biology.
The uniquely integrated approach will provide new insight into the mechanism
underlying AJ macromolecular mechanosensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.