* 2202785
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Assessing Climate and Stochastic Forcing of North Atlantic Tropical Cyclone Activity over the Past Millennium
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Kerry Emanuel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 76,532.00

This project aims to improve model predictions of tropical cyclones in coastal
North America by combining past records of Atlantic hurricanes with tropical
cyclone models of the North Atlantic. The U.S. coastal communities are
susceptible to tropical cyclone (TC) damages, with urban infrastructure that is
ill-equipped for TC-induced flooding. Recent active Atlantic hurricane seasons
(i.e., 2020) have cast justified attention on the role of climate change in
altering TCs in the North Atlantic. However, a robust analysis of the influence
of longer-time scale climate variability on the frequency and trajectories of TC
is hindered by the short observation datasets (~ 50 years available from
satellite records). Past records of hurricanes (proxy records) can extend the
record of TC statistics to thousands of years beyond observational data. But
these records tend to capture only close-moving and intense storms which make it
difficult to ascertain whether past records of hurricanes are related to climate
variability or randomness (stochasticity). Therefore, this project proposes to
rigorously assess uncertainties associated with past hurricane records
(paleohurricanes) by analyzing existing proxies of TCs from the North Atlantic
and comparing them to new TC model simulations of the past millennium. These
data-model comparisons will then be used to both investigate the sensitivity of
Atlantic TCs to changing climate drivers and feedbacks in a model world, and to
test the ability of individual and networks of paleohurricane records in
capturing TC climate in the real world. The potential Broader Impacts include a
better understanding of the processes driving changes in tropical cyclones
activity in the Atlantic and a potential improvement of the ability to predict
future tropical cyclones risk for coastal
communities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the researchers will: 1) Generate
North Atlantic TC datasets spanning multiple model simulations of the last
millennium; 2) Investigate relationships between the past response of modeled
TCs and climatic drivers (such as the North Atlantic Subtropical High and El
Niño Southern Oscillation); 3) Integrate new TC simulations with existing
records of past hurricanes spanning the past millennium to quantify the climate
signal captured in individual records compared to local noise; and 4) Develop
methodology for combining reconstructions of past hurricanes to maximize
regional-to-basin-wide climate signal. This project will potentially expand the
dataset of landfalling TCs to better quantify local risks and robustly assess
the role for climate variability in driving TC activity. A storm dataset
spanning the last 1000 years will be developed and available to the broader
scientific community and stakeholders. This project will provide research
experience and support for two early-career scientists, including research
support for one postdoctoral fellow and undergraduate students at Rice
University. The researchers will leverage undergraduate summer research projects
through Rice’s anticipated 2020-2022 REU which recruits historically black
college and community college students. Further, the researchers at Rice
University will work with leaders of Girl Scouts San Jacinto Council to plan
events focused on hurricane science and preparedness, including sessions that
will engage the participants of the Girl Scout Global Leadership Conference,
attended by 250 scouts and 150 troop leaders. The project will also support
summer research experiences for high school students through collaboration with
the Rice Design, Connect, Create (DCC). The 4-week summer program engages 35-60
minority participants in applied physics including climate, but also establishes
networks and mentoring for participants across critical transitions in STEM
career pathways – from high school, to graduate school, and beyond – known to be
critical to retaining scientists in STEM fields. The outcome of this research
project will be disseminated to thousands of students in Houston public schools
through the Rice Research Experience for Teachers (RET) and Applied Math Program
(AMP!).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.