* 2202154
* Technician Training for Advanced Manufacturing and Materials
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Denise Sutton, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2025
* USD 569,635.00

Recent advances in advanced manufacturing technologies have led to new
capabilities in manufacturing. Technicians who have a better understanding of
these new technologies and the advanced engineering materials used in these
processes will be able to implement them in manufacturing facilities.
Traditional technical education for manufacturing technicians needs to keep pace
with these technology trends in industry. To address this need, this project
will introduce new content for existing design, manufacturing, and materials
science courses including virtual and hands-on experiential learning exercises
as well as tutorials on specific topics. A Business and Industry Leadership Team
will provide feedback on course content so that the courses are aligned with the
needs of industry. A summer training program will provide an opportunity for
students to learn professional skills that will help them be successful in the
technician workforce. To complement the training program, students will have the
option to participate in an entrepreneurial student competition in which student
teams address an industry problem or develop a new
product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to address industry’s
workforce needs for skilled technicians who have training in advanced
manufacturing technologies including computer-aided design, additive
manufacturing, and engineering materials. This project will use the Business and
Industry Leadership Team model to collaborate with industry to develop course
content that addresses the knowledge, skills, and abilities that manufacturers
need to implement and maintain these technologies. In addition to classroom
instruction, students will have experiential learning opportunities using a
combination of virtual and hands-on activities. Virtual training software will
help students earn certificates corresponding to a specific set of skills. A new
summer training program will provide training on professional skills including
communication, teamwork, and time management skills. This program will also help
students develop better problem-solving skills and learn how to conduct
experiments and analyze data to obtain meaningful results. The project team will
assess the impact of project activities on student learning and retention using
student surveys, assessments of student work, and student interviews. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.