* 2202101
* CDS&amp;E: Excited-state properties and the impact of random defects in quantum materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Chinedu Ekuma, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 04/30/2025
* USD 318,775.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education on techniques that will enhance and expand
our current scientific knowledge of the properties of realistic two-dimensional
(2D) materials, which consist of a single layer of atoms. Just as the discovery
of semiconductors revolutionized computation and information storage, functional
2D materials and materials formed by vertically stacking 2D materials have the
potential to revolutionize every aspect of our lives. They are actively being
explored for both fundamental research and modern device applications, including
efficient generation, storing, and transporting power across the national grid
with minimal losses, ultrasensitive sensors capable of synchronous monitoring,
and efficient disease detection and diagnosis. Critical to actualizing these
novel and transformative technological applications is a fundamental
understanding of the interplay between the exotic phases that abound in 2D
materials. Due to the complexity of electron-electron interactions coupled with
materials' inhomogeneities, standard computational modeling approaches suitable
for perfect bulk materials often become unreliable for modeling 2D materials.
The PI and his team will develop and employ advanced theoretical and
computational techniques that will account for strong electron-electron
interaction and inhomogeneous nature of 2D materials to explore physical
properties and phenomena that could potentially be harnessed for technological
advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports various education and
outreach activities. The PI will (1) train both undergraduate and graduate
students in computational physics, data science, and materials science research,
(2) deliver corresponding interdisciplinary hands-on materials modeling courses
by integrating research with teaching, and (3) perform educational outreach with
the potential to enhance science education and increased public scientific
awareness and literacy within the Lehigh
Valley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education on techniques that will enhance and expand our current
scientific knowledge of the properties of two-dimensional (2D) materials beyond
idealistic models of perfectly ordered or structurally averaged materials. To
tackle the challenges of studying moderately correlated realistic 2D materials,
the PI will develop and employ advanced numerical and theoretical techniques
accounting for Coulomb interactions, random disorder, complete orbital
structure, and the presence of dielectric screening within the material. Several
open questions that have come into focus due to recent experimental discoveries
in 2D-based quantum materials will be addressed, such as (1) What is the
physical nature of the nanoscale phase coexistence between materialâ€™s
imperfection, spatial correlations, and Coulomb interactions? (2) What is the
fate of Coulomb and exciton interactions, and quantum criticality near broken
symmetry states in the presence of material imperfection? (3) Can the defect-
induced broken symmetry state, e.g., Mott physics and metal-insulator quantum
transition be harnessed through band-engineering? The PI will exploit the
potential to realize defect-induced transitions between the various broken-
symmetry states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports various education
and outreach activities. The PI will (1) train both undergraduate and graduate
students in computational physics, data science, and materials science research,
(2) deliver corresponding interdisciplinary hands-on materials modeling courses
by integrating research with teaching, and (3) perform educational outreach with
the potential to enhance STEM education and increased public scientific
awareness and literacy within the Lehigh Valley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.