* 2202762
* P2C2: Collaborative Research: The Role of Seasonality in Abrupt Climate Change - a Test by Reconstructing Fluctuations of a Late-Glacial Ice Mass in Eastern North America
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Brenda Hall, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 08/31/2025
* USD 601,729.00

This research aims to determine the signature of summer-warming-driven ice
retreat and meltwater production by reconstructing the behavior of an ice cap
that persisted in northwestern Maine during the end of the last ice age. By
mapping and dating glacial landforms documenting the pattern and timing of Maine
ice-cap recession, as well as by reconstructing meltwater fluxes from the
decaying ice cap in the Gulf of Maine on the basis of marine sediment
geochemistry, the researchers will evaluate whether this ice cap system
fluctuated in concert with the abrupt climate changes as registered in
Greenlandic ice cores, or whether it retreated during the North Atlantic stadial
episodes, reflecting summertime warming and hence intense seasonality. Informed
by these geological reconstructions of glacier and meltwater change, the
researchers will employ an Earth System Model to evaluate the effects of
warming-induced meltwater fluxes on seasonality in the North Atlantic region.
Clarifying the role of seasonality in abrupt climate change will have important
implications for deciphering the origins of abrupt climate change and will help
to hone understanding of the global climate dynamics that brought the ice age to
an end. The overall research effort will provide field-based training and
education for the next generation of scientists at the undergraduate and
graduate level, as well as in-depth enhanced public engagement in cooperation
with Maine’s Baxter State Park, home of Katahdin, the highest mountain in the
region and the northern end of the Appalachian Trail. The researchers will work
closely with the Baxter Park Authority on innovative ways to educate the public
about the intertwined glacial and climatic history of the region and its greater
global context. Specific objectives include developing 3D-printed landscape
models, which will be displayed along with educational placards at park venues.
The researchers will also collaborate with a New Media team to develop an
informative smartphone app that can be used throughout the
park.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The termination of the last ice age featured a
spectacular series of abrupt climate oscillations. In the North Atlantic region,
ice cores recorded abrupt switches between ‘stadial’ intervals, such as
‘Heinrich Stadial 1’ (HS1; ~18,000 – 14,700 kyr ago) and the ‘Younger Dryas’
(YD; ~12,800 – 11,600 kyr ago), which were characterized by cold mean-annual
temperatures, and the intervening Bølling-Allerød ‘interstade’ (B-A; 14,700 –
12,800 kyr ago) that was characterized by warmer mean-annual temperatures.
However, emerging evidence in the North Atlantic region indicates that, because
of surface-ocean freshening and sea-ice formation, the signature of mean-annual
temperatures in Greenlandic ice cores may reflect episodes of extreme
seasonality during stadials, with severe sea-ice-induced winter cooling masking
a divergent trend of summertime warming. Because glaciers are highly sensitive
to summer temperatures, records of glacier change during the termination of the
last ice age can therefore be used to evaluate the role of seasonality in abrupt
climate change. To test the seasonality hypothesis, the researchers will use a
combination of geomorphic mapping, terrestrial glacial geochronology, and marine
sediment geochemistry to reconstruct both the vertical thinning and lateral
retreat of the Maine ice cap and the relative pattern of meltwater release into
the Gulf of Maine. Mapping will be aided by recently acquired high-resolution
LiDAR elevation data, and the terrestrial chronology will be underpinned by 10Be
surface-exposure dating of glacial landforms and 14C dating lacustrine
sediments. Foraminiferal trace-metal measurements will be paired with δ18O to
reconstruct meltwater fluxes into the Gulf of Maine. The results of this work
will be used to determine whether or not glacial ice receded during HS1 and then
stabilized during B-A time, as predicted by the seasonality hypothesis and
consistent with the pattern of surface-freshening registered in North Atlantic
sediments. Glacier and meltwater reconstructions will serve as metrics for a
GFDL suite of Earth system models employed to test the response of the North
Atlantic seasonal cycle to imposed summer atmospheric warming and freshwater
fluxes, affording a data-model test of the seasonality hypothesis for abrupt
climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.