* 2202746
* Tropical hydroclimate change during the last deglaciation: a synthesis of isotope-enabled transient climate model simulations and proxy data
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* James Russell, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 343,657.00

The tropics have profound influence on the global climate system, but the
regionâ€™s response to changing climate remains unclear and the predictions of
tropical precipitation and water cycling remain highly uncertain. This project
aims to improve the ability of future climate projections in this region by
using numerical model simulation and proxy derived records of water tracers of
tropical hydroclimate to identify pan-tropical and regional responses to climate
drivers under different boundary conditions. The investigation will focus on the
last deglaciation period which is characterized by large shifts in atmospheric
greenhouse gases concentrations, seasonal insolation, ice sheets, and sea level.
Thus, the configuration of the last deglaciation creates a unique opportunity to
study the tropical hydroclimate changes under different boundary condition than
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to gain new
insight into the large-scale dynamics and controls on tropical hydroclimate
through (1) syntheses of tropical water isotope records to characterize the
spatiotemporal changes of tropical isotope hydrological records during the last
deglaciation, and (2) testing critical hypotheses about the impact of external
forcings and internal feedbacks on tropical rainfall. To accomplish this goal,
the researchers propose a comprehensive pan-tropical data model comparison
through integrating water-isotope based proxy-data, proxy system models, and new
simulations with a state of-the-art isotope enabled transient climate model
(iTRACE). Further, the researchers will perform new sensitivity experiments
under different boundary conditions with isotope-enabled Community Earth System
Model to test the influence of land-ocean configuration on orbital and
millennial-scale variability across the tropics.&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader
Impacts include a better understanding of the spatiotemporal changes and
regional drivers of tropical hydroclimate during the last deglaciation. The
proposed research will assess the influence of precipitation amount relative to
atmospheric circulation changes on precipitation thus potentially enhancing the
interpretation of regional paleoclimate records. The project will support the
professional development of an early career scientist at Brown University and
the education and research training of undergraduate students from minority-
serving-institutions through the Leadership Alliance-NSF-REU partnership at
Brown University. Additionally, the researchers will develop a new seminar
course on climate data analysis and data-model comparison for undergraduate and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.