* 2202620
* GOALI: 1.2 kV Vertical GaN FETs enabled Novel Ultra-High-Density Bidirectional Soft-switching Dc-Dc Charger Architecture with Scalable Electronic-embedded Transformer
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Yuhao Zhang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mahesh Krishnamurthy
* 07/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

The electrification of land vehicles, including personal cars and
transport/freight trucks, plays a critical role to accelerate the transformation
of energy eco-system from fossil-fuel to zero-carbon-emission based renewable
energies system. The high-efficient, high-density onboard battery charging
system propels such electrification transformation. Inside the onboard charger,
the galvanic isolation transformer represents one of the biggest and heaviest
components, occupying about 50% of the total system size and weight. To increase
the power density by an order of magnitude, the power transformer operation
frequency has to reach MHz range meanwhile efficiently delivering tens of kW and
even hundreds of kW power. This poses a huge challenge and many fundamental
knowledge gaps need to be addressed, including high-efficient ultra-fast
switching devices and ultra-high-frequency high power transformer. This NSF
GOALI program proposes to investigate and develop a novel bi-directional high-
power dc-dc onboard charger system with ultra-high-power density and scalability
operating beyond MHz by adopting novel medium-voltage vertical GaN field-effect
transistors (FETs) and proposed electronic-embedded transformer (EET) concepts.
The team from Virginia Tech will carry out the proposed research tasks. The
program will collaborate with researchers/technologists from two industry
partners: Carrier Corporation and NexGen Power Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
enable the order-of-magnitude power density improvement in onboard battery
charger, this proposal proposes four critical areas and scientific gaps: 1.
Design and demonstrate 1.2 kV GaN-on-GaN vertical GaN field-effect transistor
(FETs) based high-frequency power converters which operates over 1 MHz with over
800 V input. 2. Investigate a novel ultra-high-frequency “Electronic-embedded
Transformer (EET)” concept for ease of transformer integration and paralleling
operation for high power applications. 3. Investigate soft-switching (zero-
voltage switching, and close to zero-current switching) circuit operation with
auto-tuned operation point for high-efficiency operation over entire operation
life. 4. Characterize MV vertical GaN FETs static and dynamic performance,
establish device physics-based models, and create a comprehensive reliability
assessment of vertical GaN FETs under repetitive short circuit and surge energy
for automobile industry. The innovation circuit solutions and fundamental
knowledge can be applied to a wide range of applications, like solid-state
transformer; EV battery charger, commercial and utility energy storage system,
PV string optimizer, etc. The device modeling and characterization, circuit
operation, and reliability evaluation will offer the in-depth knowledge of
understanding vertical GaN technology and its comparison with SiC MOSFET for
both power semiconductor and power electronics
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.