* 2202008
* Expanding Pathways and Support for Transportation Technology Education and Careers at an Urban Minority Serving Institution
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Richard Saxton, Community College of Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 546,538.00

This Community College of Philadelphia ATE project will redesign outreach and
recruitment strategies to attract, recruit and enroll more female students in
the Transportation Technologies (T-Tech) programs. This will create a “Learn and
Earn” approach to successfully close the gender gap for women in technology and
train and place more technicians into sustainable employment. As a designated
Minority Serving Institution and Predominantly Black Institution where the
majority of students are low-income; this project focuses on supporting the
completion of short-term training and work-based learning experiences where
students can earn higher wages and advance within their chosen career path while
still enrolled in school. This project has the potential to broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM majors and STEM fields while
encouraging more women to choose career paths that provide higher wages and
growth potential. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance knowledge and
understanding within T-Tech education and technical STEM education through an
integrated approach that synergistically addresses industry and student needs.
Program design accesses both college and industry resources and expertise to
provide a program for students that effectively supports them from enrollment
through completion and transition to sustainable jobs in the workforce, meeting
industry needs for entry-level and advanced technicians. This ATE project is
designed to broaden the participation of women in the T-Tech program and support
all enrolled students both academically and professionally as they complete the
program. In partnership with the National Institute for Women in Trades,
Technology &amp; Science (IWITTS), the Community College of Philadelphia will
engage more female students in T-Tech and create recruitment, retention, and job
placement plans that can be replicated and scaled to improve overall student
success in STEM. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education
program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology
fields that drive the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.