* 2202611
* Collaborative Research: Intelligent Immersive Environments for Learning Robotics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Seth Corrigan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2025
* USD 99,600.00

The global economy is being rapidly reshaped by sophisticated robots that
enhance human dexterity, visual perception, speed, and strength. This intense
focus on creating and implementing new automation technologies is bringing
disruptive changes to job markets. In Architecture, Engineering, and
Construction (AEC) industries, robotics automation is transforming jobs at a
speed and scale never experienced before, leading to new demand for skilled
workers in advanced technologies and robotics. Addressing the learning needs of
AEC students, future professionals, and industry workers is critical for
ensuring the competitiveness of a large proportion of the US workforce. Our
proposal is inspired by recent technological achievements in self-adaptive,
data-driven, and autonomous systems for virtual learning. These technologies
bear the promise to transform education by personalization and tailoring the
learning content and sequence for differences in ability, experience, and
sociocultural background. Leveraging these technologies, we will research,
develop, and test a personalized learning tool for delivering an industrial
robotics curriculum to prepare the next generation of the AEC workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We plan to achieve this goal with five educational and
scientific innovations: 1) Artificial Intelligence (AI)-assisted Adaptive
Intelligent Learning System 2) AI-assisted coaching, 3) Novel curriculum content
and delivery in virtual reality, 4) Game-based learning user experience, and
user interface and 5) AI-enabled learning analytics. The design and
implementation of this project will contribute to technological advancement in
AI-assisted Adaptive Intelligent Learning systems and our ability to apply
state-of-the-art AI and Natural Language Processing techniques for the analysis
of learning data. Advancing this frontier is critical for our ability to
evaluate learner data at scale. Further, our development of AI-Assisted coaching
will lead to broadly applicable advancements in intelligent tutoring systems. It
includes a novel capacity to detect and identify learner failure patterns and to
apply known remediation to improve learning outcomes. In addition, the design
and implementation of a curriculum that dynamically changes in response to
learner input, skill level, and advancement toward learning goals can bring new
pedagogical approaches to curriculum development, reshaping our current
practices. Finally, our project will enrich learning analytics by integrating
biometric and performance data leading to a greater understanding of the
learning process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.