* 2202329
* Machine Learning-assisted Modeling and Design of Approximate Computing with Generalizability and Interpretability
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Cong Hao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2025
* USD 194,111.00

By 2040, the projected energy consumed by computers will exceed the electricity
the world can generate, unless radical changes are made in the way we design
computers. This project aims to develop approximate computing techniques to
drastically reduce the energy consumption in modern computation-intensive
computing, for example, video/image processing and machine learning
applications. Approximate computing is a promising technique that can trade off
accuracy for energy saving and performance improvement. This project addresses
one of the fundamental obstacles that has been impeding the practical usage of
approximate computing: how to accurately and quickly design approximate
computing systems to maximize the benefits of approximate computing without
introducing too much accuracy loss or errors. The success of this project can
greatly improve the practicality of approximate computing and enable its wide
usage in real-world applications, such as video/image processing and machine
learning. By paving the way for future approximate computing, this project can
lead to considerable energy saving for future computing paradigm and carbon
footprint reduction. It also advances the applications of machine learning
algorithms in circuit design area, as well as identifies several fundamental
machine learning questions motived by special features of the circuit design
problem, such that machine learning algorithms can better benefit hardware
design. This can lead to new design and testing approaches for a broad range of
computing systems, from low-power embedded systems to high-performance data
centers. The educational plan will integrate research activities into curriculum
development and will provide students with early research training. The team is
committed to broadening the participation of undergraduates and underrepresented
groups in engineering research and in STEM outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the huge
amount of energy consumed by modern computation-intensive computing such as
machine learning and video/image processing applications, energy efficient
computing is an urgent need. Approximate computing, by slightly trading off
accuracy for better performance and/or efficiency, e.g., computation latency,
area, and energy and power, has been a promising new computing paradigm. Many
approximate computing approaches, such as low-precision computing, voltage
scaling, inexact approximate circuits and memory, have achieved orders of
speedup or energy saving. However, to safely deploy approximate computing in
practice, two major challenges need to be addressed: (1) how to accurately and
quickly estimate the impact of approximation on application output quality; and
(2) how to accurately and quickly find the best approximation configuration to
maximize the benefits of approximate computing. &lt;br/&gt;This proposal
presents three closely-interacted research tasks to address these two challenges
and to seek the wide-reaching benefits of approximate computing: (1) to develop
input-aware error models of approximate circuits and input-aware simulation
platform for approximate computing; (2) to develop a graph neural networks
(GNNs)-based framework to quickly estimate application output quality; (3) to
develop a resource-aware approximation configuration framework to optimize
performance/energy while satisfying user-defined quality constraints. The goal
of this project is to unveil the underlining knowledge of the intrinsic
relations between output quality and input data, approximate circuits, and
approximate program structures. The project will provide a practical,
generalizable, and interpretable toolset that can learn to configure approximate
computing once and for all.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this project
include both AxC design innovations as well as machine learning innovations. (1)
This project will develop input-aware error models for approximate circuits
considering the impact of input data, which are usually overlooked; then, it
exposes the circuit-level errors to behavioral-level approximate programs by
developing an input-aware simulation platform. This will form the foundation for
a much-needed holistic evaluation of approximate computing. (2) This project
will develop inductive GNN models and machine learning models to predict the
output quality of any unseen approximate programs and approximation
configurations. This will provide key generalizability and interpretability of
approximate computing. In addition, the investigation of GNN in this project
will uncover two new fundamental studies to GNN community, increasing GNN
expressiveness power by amending graph connectivity, and utilizing graph
regularity. (3) This project will design a resource-aware reinforcement learning
(RL) based approach to automatically configure approximation settings for
optimal performance/energy-quality tradeoff. In addition, the investigation of
GNN and RL in this project will uncover a new research question, the joint
optimization of the RL agent and the surrogate model. This project is a
pioneering approach to the joint areas of reinforcement learning, graph neural
networks, and approximate computing. It aims to establish the technological
foundation for practical approximate computing.&lt;br/&gt;This project will
bring an unprecedented transformation in our ability to understanding and
designing approximate computing for practical use, by enabling a more
disciplined, generalizable, and interpretable approximation. The research team
will release models, tools, and infrastructures to the research and industry
community. This can lead to new design and testing approaches for a broad range
of computing systems, from low-power embedded systems to high-performance data
centers. The educational plan will integrate research activities into curriculum
development and will provide students with early exposure to research. The PIs
are committed to broadening the participation of undergraduates and
underrepresented groups in engineering research and in STEM outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.