* 2202217
* HVAC Fast Track: Establishing A Competency-Based HVAC/R Apprenticeship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Steve Tornero, Stark State College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2025
* USD 650,000.00

The United States heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and refrigeration
(HVAC/R) industry is projected to see an increase in value from $26.5 billion in
2019 to $35.8 billion in 2030. It is projected that over the 10-year period from
2016-2026, HVAC/R jobs nationally will grow 15%. This project will design an
accelerated HVAC/R apprenticeship program to support the HVAC/R industry in
Northeast Ohio. The program will be responsive to input from regional industry
partners regarding the design and implementation of the apprenticeship. It is
expected that the competency-based apprenticeship model will allow apprentices
to complete the program in three years rather than the five years for a
traditional, time-based apprenticeship as apprentices will be assessed for
competencies rather than tracked for completion of hours. The apprenticeship
will provide a guided pathway that pays participants while they learn and offers
apprentices the opportunity to earn a Journeyman credential upon successful
completion of the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will develop a
state-approved, accelerated, competency-based, HVAC/R apprenticeship program to
help meet employment demand in the HVAC/R industry and provide students the
field experience necessary to quickly move from an entry-level technician role
to a Journeyman-certified HVAC/R position. Project objectives include: 1)
establish a state-approved, competency-based HVAC/R registered apprenticeship
program at Stark State College; 2) enroll students into the apprenticeship with
a focus on veteran students and high school students/recent graduates; 3) retain
at least 80% of students/apprentices enrolled in the program; 4) prepare
students for HVAC/R Journeyman certification upon completion of the accelerated
apprenticeship; and 5) evaluate project outcomes and widely share best practices
for replication purposes. By working with regional HVAC/R industry partners,
local public school districts, community veterans agencies, and area workforce
development agencies, the project will recruit apprentices into a career pathway
leading to well-paying, high-demand occupations in the HVAC/R sector. The model
of a competency-based apprenticeship may be adapted for other industry areas.
This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.