* 2202723
* EAGER: Mechanistic Study of Extracellular Vesicle Production by Marine Microalgae using Advanced Imaging Technologies
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Gordon Taylor, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 294,467.00

This EAGER project is a proof-of-concept study on the composition, origins, and
dynamics of extracellular vesicles (EVs) produced by marine microalgae in
response to various environmental and biotic stressors. EVs are microscopic
lipid-encased particles that are released naturally from almost all cell types
and are vehicles for a variety of cargo, including genetic material (RNA, DNA),
proteins, and lipids. EVs have been variously postulated to serve as a defense
against viral attack, a waste disposal mechanism, a stress response, or a means
of cell-to-cell communication. Marine microalgae are pivotal players in the
global carbon cycle. By better understanding processes that govern their
population dynamics and responses to environmental changes, we can develop
better predictive models of responses to global climate change. The need to
understand these mechanisms is becoming increasingly urgent as climate change
becomes more manifest. Very recent findings suggest that EVs play a key role in
marine phytoplankton population regulation, but our understanding of their
function(s) in planktonic systems is severely limited and fragmentary. This
project addresses significant knowledge gaps and explores the potential
complexities of marine planktonic EV production. This project provides support
and training to a female graduate and undergraduate marine sciences students,
who are receiving unique opportunities to master new experimental approaches and
state-of-the-art research tools that are extremely rare in marine sciences
programs. The project supports high school students in marine sciences studies
as a part of the summer science camp (www.sigmacamp.org). A female postdoc is
also being trained on the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the cosmopolitan
and geochemically-important microalga E. huxleyi as a model system, this project
tests three major hypotheses to enhance our understanding of the purpose(s) of
microalgal EV production. (1) Microalgae produce distinctive types of EVs
(ectosomes or exosomes) in response to different environmental conditions, and
EV types have definitive functions (stress response, viral defense,
intercellular communication, waste disposal). (2) EVsâ€™ cargo is diverse, so
their production and release reflect a complex intercellular communication
mechanism. (3) Exosome genesis is a multistage process, and its stages are
separated in time. Therefore, algal cells may contain a pool of pre-formed EVs
loaded with different cargo that are stored internally, and when induced by a
sudden change in external conditions are released through the outer membrane. To
adequately test these hypotheses requires using single particle analytical
methods in addition to ensemble measurements. The investigators are using an
assortment of recently developed methods and original experimental approaches
developed by our group to investigate EV compositional variability under
selected stress conditions. They use single particle Raman microspectroscopy,
pulse-chase Stable Isotope Probing, and LC-MSMS for compositional analysis of
EVs, and Cryo-EM and AFM for morphological analyses. If experimental data
confirm our suspicions, then phytoplankton EVs represent a novel and essentially
overlooked mechanism of extracellular interactions that potentially govern a
wide range of globally-important processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.