* 2202107
* Developing PLC and Robotic Automation Technician Training for Service Industries
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Douglas Jahnke, Vaughn College of Aeronautics and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 05/31/2025
* USD 284,549.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by addressing the shortage of
technicians with the skills to maintain the programable logic controllers (PLCs)
and robots in the service industries. The project at Vaughn College of
Aeronautics and Technology provides a PLC and Robotic Automation (PRA)
Technician certificate program to address this shortage in the service
industries in the greater New York City (NYC) area. As a Hispanic-Serving
Institution, Vaughn has embraced students from low-income and first-generation
college families, as well as from underrepresented racial and ethnic groups. The
one-year certificate program reduces the financial and time commitments for
students who want to pursue education to improve their upward mobility.
Providing this additional pathway not only meets the needs of service industries
but also increases diversity in PRA technicians. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the project is to create a one-year 24-credit program to provide PRA
technicians with the skills they need for employment in service industries. To
ensure graduates of the program have the desired qualifications, the project (a)
collaborates with its Business and Industry Leadership Team to determine the
service industry needs and develop curriculum to meet them; (b) supports faculty
to obtain certifications; (c) recruits both high-school students and incumbent
workers using newly developed informational materials; and (d) increases
diversity in the PRA technician workforce by partnering with Vaughn’s existing
programs to recruit students from groups underrepresented in the technician
workforce including women and racial and ethnic minorities. Additionally,
advancements in the understanding of technical education for service industries
are shared through ATE Central and at regional and national conferences. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the Nation’s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.