* 2203761
* RUI: Photochemical Pathways and Photoproducts of Current and Emerging Sub-Arctic Aquatic Contaminants
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Patrick Tomco, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2025
* USD 299,997.00

This award is jointly funded by the Environmental Chemical Science Program in
the Chemistry Division and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR). Drs. Tomco and Redman at the University of Alaska-Anchorage
will investigate the environmental breakdown rates of three contaminants found
in Alaskan waterways, as caused by sunlight. The mechanism of this process can
be unique to cold, high-latitude regions, where extreme seasonal changes in
daily sunlight exposure occur. Several factors that affect this process will be
investigated, including the role of natural organic matter, reactive oxygen
species, and temperature dependence. The breakdown products formed as each
contaminant degrades will be identified. This study is expected inform the
development of predictive water quality assessments that can be useful for
identifying the attenuation rates in these systems. The project will engage
undergraduate and graduate students in research, provide opportunities to learn
advanced instrumental methods in mass spectrometry, and target inclusion of
Alaska Native students and women to work toward broadening participation in such
physical science studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will investigate the
aquatic photochemical pathways by which emerging contaminants in the sub-Arctic
are degraded and the extent to which high latitude environmental factors will
impact persistence. Subarctic environmental conditions have a unique timeline of
contaminant attenuation compared to temperate conditions, and a unique relative
contribution of direct and indirect processes. This study specifically assesses
three priority compounds: 12α-hydroxy-rotenone, 6-PPD quinone, and fluridone.
6-PPD quinone is the quinonoid oxidation product from oxidation of
N-(1,3-dimethylbutyl)-N′-phenyl-p-phenylenediamine, a widely used tire additive
and anti-oxidant. Each of these have recently been detected persistently in
Alaskan waterways, but no information exists regarding photochemical pathways
and photo-transformation products in natural waters. This study will determine
individual contributions of dissolved organic matter, hydroxyl radicals, singlet
oxygen, and triplet excitation states. The temperature dependence of each
process will be compared at 4, 12, and 20 degrees C, which spans the typical
range of surface water temperatures. Photoproducts resulting from each process
will be profiled using high resolution mass spectrometry combined with non-
targeted analytical approaches. This information is expected to provide a better
fundamental understanding of the environmental drivers for these photochemical
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.