* 2203717
* GERMINATION EXPANSION: Building Question Formulation Capacity through the Research Question Network (rQnet)
* ENG,EFMA
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Sara Wadia-Fascetti, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 06/30/2025
* USD 499,998.00

This project is funded through the NSF Directorate for Engineering Germination
program, which seeks to foster the development of pedagogical approaches to
increase the ability of academic researchers to formulate research questions and
ideas with potentially transformative outcomes. In this Expansion project,
Northeastern University and the Right Question Institute (RQI) will partner to
create rQnet, the Research Question Network, a networked community of diverse
researchers and higher education leaders trained to improve formulation of
research questions in pursuit of societally relevant, high-impact research. The
Question Formulation Technique (QFT) will be disseminated nationally through
rQnet. This project will also address a critical gap in learning science through
creation and validation of a rubric for evaluating research questions.
Successful development of rQnet has the potential to play a pivotally important
role in training scientists to ask paradigm-shifting research questions. Broader
impacts hinge on the fact that improved research questions should increase
academic researchers’ abilities to address societal challenges. Planned
inclusion of communities focused on supporting and empowering diverse groups –
such as INCLUDES, LSAMP, and ADVANCE communities – should broaden the question-
asking ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will create the Research
Question Network – rQnet - to serve as a networked community of diverse
researchers and higher education leaders trained to improve formulation of
research questions in pursuit of societally relevant, high-impact research. The
QFT has previously been piloted for use in training graduate students to improve
their question-asking skills. This project focuses on expanding QFT uptake by
establishing rQnet as a mechanism for capacity building through national virtual
workshops and Early Adopter Researchers (EARs) who serve as research leaders in
their own institutions. Importantly, this project proposes to develop and refine
a rubric to identify and assess high-impact research questions. During the
funding period, this research program will 1) create a rubric for evaluating
research questions; 2) validate this rubric with metrics to characterize high
impact research questions; 3) demonstrate effective strategies to implement the
QFT in teaching, research and mentorship; 4) assess indicators of
institutionalization of the QFT; and 5) articulate best-practices to implement
the QFT in research communities. Successful instantiation of rQnet could
establish a sustainable living network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.