* 2203934
* Collaborative Research: CAS-MNP: Radical-induced Weathering of Micro- and Nanoplastics in Water: Impacts on Suspensions, Agglomerations, and Contaminant Adsorptions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Julie Peller, Valparaiso University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 303,793.00

This award from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry supports Professors Julie Peller at Valparaiso University and Stephen
Mezyk at California State University-Long Beach and their students. This project
is exploring the formation and aging of small plastics pieces that are being
created from plastic items in the environment. The world is currently being
challenged with the problem of massive plastic waste pollution, especially in
water environments. Plastic pieces that are very small, known as microplastics
and nanoplastics, are extremely widespread and mostly not visible by the human
eye. These plastic particles, which are stable for decades in water, are now
being shown to negatively impact human health and ecosystems. The reactivity and
behavior of these small plastic particles will be determined in the laboratory
under various conditions that represent real world environments. The researchers
and their undergraduate and MS students will take advantage of ionizing
radiation sources to accelerate chemical and physical changes that happen to
these small plastics in the environment over a longer period of time.
Undergraduate students from the Hispanic Serving Institution (California State
University Long Beach, CSULB) and Valparaiso University (VU) will participate in
the research and share the data through conference/media venues related to
environmental and public health. Minority high school students will take part in
the VU summer research. These research findings will be integrated into courses
at both universities, including a CSULB MS course on kinetics that now includes
environmental pollution and VU chemistry laboratory
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recent determination for the facile
formation of small polyethylene microplastics and nanoplastics in water will be
utilized to study the properties and reactivities of multiple plastic polymers
as aqueous suspensions or solutions. Ionizing radiation techniques will be used
to study the radical reactions that simulate the real-world chemical changes of
nanoplastics, and to create various levels of weathered nanoplastics. The
chemical and physical changes of these weathered species will be probed in the
presence of other common dissolved substances and under different conditions.
These experiments are expected to generate information on the detection, long-
term changes and potential remediation of small micro and nanoplastics in
aqueous systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.