* 2203144
* Collaborative Research: Detecting Gait Phases with Raised Metabolic Cost using Robotic Perturbations and System Identification for Enabling Targeted Rehabilitation Therapy
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Keegan Moore, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 05/31/2025
* USD 235,290.00

Being able to walk easily is strongly associated with independence and quality
of life. Aging is accompanied by a significant reduction in mobility. Existing
treatments and therapies rely on respiratory measurements of walking effort.
These respiratory measurements can only quantify the average effort of walking.
As a result of this limitation, existing treatments and therapies sometimes fail
to target the phases of the walking motion that need the most assistance. This
project will use data-driven approaches and models to overcome limitations in
the ability to measure the effort of walking. Access to this new information
will enable evaluating how therapies affect different stages of motion. The
data-driven methods will be initially developed using a dataset generated by a
computer walking models with physically induced changes to specific stages of
motion. For example, forward-pulling forces will be applied to the waist of the
model to induce changes that can be leveraged to detect the fluctuations in
walking effort. This computer walking model provides access to a complete
measure of the effort required for walking, which will be used to validate the
data-driven methods. Next, the new data-driven methods will be validated using
measurements from real human walking experiments. In these human experiments,
pulling forces will be applied by a robotic tether connected to the waist of the
participant to induce changes that will be used to detect the effort of the
different motion stages. In the final studies, the methods will be used to
determine how the effort required for walking differs in younger and older
adults. The differences in the effort will be characterized in each stage of
motion using human experiments with both younger and older adults. The outcomes
of this project will help lead to the creation of enhanced treatments and
assistive devices that improve all stages of motion. Throughout this project,
the investigators will provide courses for older adults on the mechanics and
health aspects of walking and data science and digital engineering through the
Osher Lifelong Learning Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to leverage new data-driven approaches to characterize differences in
metabolic cost of phases of the gait cycle in old versus young adults. The
project will combine novel, data-driven approaches based on system
identification and robotic perturbations to characterize the time profile of
signals that cannot be measured directly, such as metabolic cost. The first
objective will produce the time profile of metabolic cost within simulated gait
data. Novel data-driven approaches will be developed based on weighted
regression, neural networks, and autoencoders to identify the metabolic cost
time profile from biomechanical signals. Initially, these methods will be
created in a predictive walking simulation from which the metabolic time profile
is fully known, such that the new methods can be evaluated during their
development. The second objective will evaluate different time profile
estimation approaches in human experiments. The methods created in the first
objective will be tested using human experiments with robotic perturbations. The
capacity of using the data-driven methods to detect changes in swing and push-
off will also be investigated using human experiments where elastic ankle
tethers or added mass are used to introduce direct changes to the gait cycle.
The third objective will characterize the differences in cost contributions of
the phases of the gait cycle between older and younger adults. The first subtask
will characterize the phase-specific differences in metabolic cost by applying
the data-driven methods to compute the instantaneous costs using measured data
from younger and older adults. The second subtask will determine the
generalizability of the data-driven time-profile estimation approaches across
different populations. This research will transform gait analysis by providing
access to dynamic metabolic cost time profiles, which cannot be measured using
existing techniques. Access to this new information will lead to improvements
across multiple biomechanics applications, including (1) diagnosis of motion
impairments, (2) prescription of targeted assistive devices, and (3) targeted
rehabilitation exercises. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
by the Disability and Rehabilitation Engineering Program (DARE) and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.