* 2203971
* Promoting the Self-Regulated Use of Effective Learning Strategies in Gateway Undergraduate STEM Courses
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Mark McDaniel, Rivers, Michelle L
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

Under the sponsorship of Dr. Uma Tauber at Texas Christian University and Dr.
Mark McDaniel at Washington University at St. Louis, this postdoctoral
fellowship award supports an early-career scientist investigating the
effectiveness of a multicomponent strategy-training intervention on college
student learning in Chemistry and Biology courses. The proposed research
promises to have a far-reaching impact on student achievement and science by
providing students with the tools necessary to overcome the barriers to using
effective learning strategies and mastering course concepts when studying on
their own. Because departure from science is particularly high among women,
ethnic/racial minorities, and first-generation college students, the strategy-
training intervention is expected to have the greatest benefit for students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many students enter college with
insufficient awareness of effective learning strategies and struggle to adopt
strategies that promote long-term retention and understanding of content, which
leads them to earn low or non-passing grades in challenging science courses.
Despite a multitude of research supporting the effectiveness of retrieval
practice (i.e., recalling information from memory), self-explanation (i.e.,
explaining how to-be-learned information is related to already known
information), and distributed practice (i.e., spreading study strategies out
across time) for improving learning and achievement in the sciences, little
research has focused on promoting students’ use of these strategies when
studying on their own. The current research proposes a multicomponent strategy-
training intervention to address four barriers that prevent students from using
these effective strategies during their own learning: (1) lack of knowledge
about the strategies and how to use them to master course concepts, (2) not
believing the strategy is effective for lasting learning, (3) lack of motivation
to exert the effort that these strategies require, and (4) poor management of
study time. Specifically, the proposed research aims to answer the following
questions: Does a strategy-training intervention informed by the Knowledge,
Belief, Commitment, and Planning framework (McDaniel &amp; Einstein, 2020) lead
to greater use of effective learning strategies compared to a control group? If
so, does this increased use of effective strategies lead to improvement on
measures of course achievement and persistence in gateway undergraduate science
courses? To answer these questions, two large-scale experiments will be
conducted in two gateway undergraduate Chemistry and Biology courses to evaluate
the effects of the strategy-training intervention on (a) student knowledge and
beliefs about effective learning strategies, (b) students’ self-regulated
learning behavior, (c) exam performance, and (d) persistence in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.