* 2203152
* CSR: Medium: Security and Isolation in the Era of Microservices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Aditya Akella, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 07/31/2023
* USD 618,530.00

Years ago, applications such as news, e-commerce, or banking websites ran on
computers deployed at organizations owning them. Today, with the advent of
"cloud computing", such applications instead run in a far-away server farm
operated by third-parties. Because the computers are shared by many
applications, it is crucial to ensure that one application in the cloud, such as
a news website, does not compromise the confidentiality or integrity of another
application (e.g., a banking website) running on the same set of computers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop systems that ensure
cloud applications are suitably protected without sacrificing their performance
and ability to grow/shrink. This goal will be realized by developing two core
building blocks to achieve optimal trade-offs between isolation and
performance/agility. The first is variable isolation, where we automatically
determine the least privilege and best isolation techniques needed for
components of an application, and deploy the highest (weakest) isolation where
needed most (least). The second is isolation-aware replication, where tenants
selectively replicate their compute and storage within higher-isolation
sandboxes. Finally, the project will develop new programming models for correct
distributed execution of microservices-based
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research, if successful, will improve
both the performance and the security posture of cloud-based applications.
Research outcomes of the project, including the experimental harnesses and
datasets, will be released open-source, enabling others in research and industry
to directly build on them. The project will lead to the development of new
courses and boot camps that focus on microservices, lambda-style computation,
and isolation. The course/boot camp material will be made publicly available.
The project aims to integrate the research into outreach efforts aimed at women,
under-represented minorities, non-traditional students, and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project and its research artifacts will be
hosted at https://bitbucket.org/uw-madison-networking-research/isolation. This
site will include research publications, software, datasets, presentations, and
tutorials. This site will be kept up to date for the entire duration of the
project and for 2-3 years immediately following the project's
culmination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.