* 2203175
* Making Security Work: Vulnerability Disclosure Programs (VDPs) and the Organizational Foundations of Cybersecurity
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* William Robertson, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 341,342.00

Cybersecurity is now an organizational imperative. High-profile data breaches,
ransomware attacks, and other costly exploits and attacks have made
cybersecurity a priority for all manner of public and private organizations.
Organizations are increasingly adopting vulnerability disclosure programs (VDPs)
as a key strategy for managing and mitigating cybersecurity risk. These programs
crowdsource security work—they invite independent security researchers to report
newly identified software bugs. Yet, the adoption and management of these
programs is rarely simple or straightforward. They can create new points of
stress and complication within organization. This project examines how these
programs work and, importantly, how they can be improved. Protecting digital
networks, devices, and software is a key national priority. Ultimately, the
research project’s insights will help organizations improve their
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While organizations have long relied on a blend
of in-house information technology expertise and contracted computer services,
VDPs are a different approach to harnessing expertise. This project uncovers the
ongoing intra-organizational work required to integrate these new intuitional
models of software review within organizations; and it assesses the ultimate
effectiveness of VDPs to improve organizational cybersecurity. Specifically, the
project addresses two related research questions: (i) What forms of
institutional work are needed to create and sustain VDPs?; (ii) How effective
are VDPs at improving security? To answer these questions, the project creates
and analyzes a novel set of qualitative and quantitative data drawn from select
ongoing VDPs. Collected data includes anonymized program data, administrative
data, and interviews with staff associated with managing VDPs. This project
provides a window into: (i) how new cybersecurity practices are adopted,
maintained, and transformed by and within organizations; and (ii) the efficacy
of VDPs to improve organizational cybersecurity. Answering these questions will
provide insight into larger organizational dimensions of cybersecurity and the
efficacy of VDPs to improve security outcomes. More broadly, in addressing these
research questions, the project advances insights into the often-overlooked
institutional work associated with adopting and sustaining new organizational
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.