* 2203209
* I-Corps:  Interactive Technology for Social Media Use Awareness and Intervention
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2022
* Nicole Taylor, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a diagnostic tool that uses analytics on self-reported emotional
state as well as content engagement and time spent on social media sites to
create personalized social media interventions for users. The proposed
technology also may gather aggregate level data to understand what the
thresholds are for social media engagement and emotional well-being. Currently,
more than 90 percent of teens and young adults are social media users, and
nearly half report being online almost constantly. Research correlates time
spent on smartphones with high levels of loneliness, anxiety, and depression.
The proposed technology aims to mitigate the effects of “always on” social media
culture. Current products that address this issue include apps that allow the
user to briefly lock themselves out of their phones to limit screen time. These
apps provide short-term solutions to a deeper problem – a culture of social
media that demands hypervigilance and constant engagement. Social media is
designed to be an immersive environment where users “lose time” mindlessly
scrolling for hours on end. The proposed technology aims to provide a long-term,
sustainable solution to social media dependence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a diagnostic tool to promote
mindfulness around social media use. The proposed technology is designed to: 1)
raise awareness of unconscious social media habits, including time spent on
these sites and socio-emotional triggers that prompt clicking on social media
apps; 2) stimulating reflection of how time spent on social media affects
emotional well-being; and 3) providing momentary interventions in screen time
through suggestions for non-screen related brain breaks. The goal is to make
visible unconscious, routinized behaviors related to technology devices and
social media. The proposed technology addresses the harms of excessive screen
time and social comparison on social media, especially among youth, a problem
that has been well-documented in the research literature. This idea emerged out
of findings from NSF research suggesting that youth struggle to self-regulate
screen time and a break in routine may serve as a powerful catalyst for self-
awareness of how social media affects self-esteem and emotional well-being.
Numerous studies have correlated depression, anxiety and low self-esteem with
time spent on social media among youth. Yet, few researchers offer solutions and
there are no widely used interventions at this time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.