* 2203359
* Imaging exocytosis via a combined fluorescence and amperometry approach
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Timothy Glass, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2025
* USD 560,163.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professors Timothy Glass and Kevin Gillis of the
University of Missouri are studying how neurotransmitters are released into
synapses. Neurotransmitters are critical to the regulation of the nervous system
and control a number of functions such as learning, memory, sleep, and movement.
Understanding the machinery of synaptic release, and the chemical activity of
neurotransmitters is vital to understanding both normal and atypical neuronal
processes. Furthermore, understanding the basic mechanisms of synaptic vesicle
fusion and transmitter release via exocytosis is of broad significance because
it will not only aid in the development of therapies for diseases where release
of neurotransmitters is compromised, but it will also advance our understanding
of FDA-approved treatments that modulate transmitter release, such as botulinum
toxin A and B. As part of the broader impacts of this work, a new robotics camp
for underserved high school students will be held. It has been demonstrated that
activities such as these camps enhances the likelihood that participants pursue
STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) coursework during their
secondary education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the preparation
and evaluation of fluorescent chemical sensors for catecholamines with a view
toward the fluorescent detection of neurotransmitters. These sensors are related
to the NeuroSensor class of probes developed in PI Glass’s lab, which have
already been used to detect norepinephrine in isolated chromaffin cells. Sensors
will be developed that produce fluorescence enhancements upon exocytosis. The
sensors will be used in combination with novel transparent electrodes developed
in PI Gillis’ lab to study mechanisms of exocytosis via fluorescence imaging in
combination with amperometric measurements. These combination experiments will
measure both release and retention of catecholamine from individual vesicles to
test the hypothesis that the amount of catecholamine released from a vesicle is
modulated by the stimulus intensity. This project is expected to result in the
development and application of a new set of important chemical biology tools for
the study of neurochemistry with potentially broad scientific
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.