* 2203159
* RAPID: The effects of extreme drought on sediment transport and deposition in water-supply reservoirs
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Irina Overeem, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The southwestern U.S. is experiencing an extreme drought that is reducing flow
in river systems and producing record low levels in water-supply reservoirs. For
example, the Elephant Butte Reservoir on the Rio Grande River in New Mexico was
only 5.6% full as of October, exposing a large wedge of sediment that has
extended an additional 1 km into the reservoir during the summer of 2021. During
the drought, flash floods are the principal means by which water enters the
reservoir. Flash floods bring sediment-laden flows that can accumulate in the
reservoir and reduce the capacity further. This project will collect time-
sensitive data to assess impacts of the extreme drought on water budgets, river
sediment transport, and reservoir sedimentation. The project will train one
graduate student in the integration of field, laboratory methods, and numerical
modeling. The research has applications to similar processes occurring in
coastal regions and will help in making complex decisions on water release and
management of wetlands in western river corridors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
severe drought in the Rio Grande River basin has caused a delta to emerge at the
entrance into the Elephant Butte Reservoir. During the drought year of 2021,
spring snowmelt was subdued, and flash floods from storm events became the
predominant mechanism for sediment transport into the reservoir. These flash
flood-derived sediments accumulate upon entering reservoirs to form a lacustrine
delta, which unlike marine deltas, typically experience hyperpycnal flows.
Initial research during a monsoon-driven flash flood in July 2021 indicate that
heightened sediment and organic carbon transport affected the geomorphology and
ecology during the event. This RAPID project will identify the mechanisms
driving flash flood sediment transport and morphodynamics in arid fluvio-deltaic
systems and determine how extreme drought amplifies these processes. The
research will also numerically model the Elephant Butte Reservoir deltaic system
to evaluate geomorphic changes in the subaqueous delta driven by highly
sediment-laden flash floods, which will also inform the carbon sequestration
potential of such rapidly prograding deltas. The proposed research involves two
field campaigns in the winter and spring of 2022 to collect water and bed
material samples, channel geometry, velocity, and water level measurements,
images of the delta front, and casts of a conductivity, temperature, and depth
sensor. The data will be incorporated into the hydrodynamics and sediment
transport model Delft3D to simulate sediment transport and deposition processes
during a flash flood at high resolution, which has never been done in a
reservoir setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.