* 2203626
* CAS: Portable Absorbable Organic Fluorine Analysis for Poly- and Perfluoroalkyl Substance Guided Sampling
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Charles Shelor, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2025
* USD 298,143.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Charles P. Shelor and his students from the University of
Texas at Arlington (UTA) intend to build a portable instrument for measuring
poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in the field. PFAS are a class man-
made chemicals utilized in fire-fighting foams and cleaning products. PFAS have
often been referred to as “forever” chemicals due to their environmental
stability. As such, they accumulate in the environment and pose a challenge for
generations to come. In addition, some types of PFAS may pose significant health
risks. Typically, PFAS are measured by liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), a highly sophisticated and expensive instrument. Due to
the high cost of capital equipment and the cost per analysis, the extent of
contamination of rural and less affluent communities is often unknown. Further,
heavily affected areas such as industrial centers, landfills, etc.
disproportionately affect marginalized communities. This project aims to develop
an inexpensive instrument capable of reliably measuring total organic fluorine
that would serve as a scouting surrogate for PFAS, such that detailed analyses
could an be carried by the latter when warranted. The size and weight of the
envisioned instrument makes it well suited for tracking contamination plumes in
the field enabling real time decisions and source attribution. By rapidly
identifying the extent of the problem, remediation measures towards protecting
public health would be facilitated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument being
developed first selectively concentrates PFAS from water on a filter. The
project intends to develop and functionalize the filter media. The PFAS on the
filter will be mineralized using a focused plasma produced by discharge. The
plasma generates energetic species to break down PFAS compounds. The digest
solution then passes through miniature solid phase extraction cartridge which
has high affinity for fluoride. Separation is then performed on either a
miniaturized packed capillary ion chromatograph or open tubular ion
chromatograph (OTIC). While the packed capillary system uses commercially
available components, the OTIC system is expected to offer an approximately
100-fold improvement in sensitivity. Additionally, the OTIC is more portable due
to the lower weight and reduced power requirements. If successful, development
and deployment of this instrument is expected to make a significant impact on
data acquisition for PFAS, particularly in isolated or in rural areas around the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.