* 2203703
* GOALI: Fine Particle De-Mixing in Granular Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Richard Lueptow, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 05/31/2025
* USD 461,982.00

A major problem in processing granular materials such as particles, beads, and
powders is that small particles fall between larger ones and de-mix, or
“segregate,” as the particles flow. Although methods to predict and prevent the
segregation of mixtures of large and “small” particles have been developed over
the past decade, the segregation behavior changes dramatically when small
particles are replaced by “fine” particles, which are so small that they can
easily fall between large particles even when the large particles are
stationary. Avoiding de-mixing in chemical or pharmaceutical processing is
essential for product quality (uniform distributions of ingredients in
pharmaceutical tablets), reducing waste (segregated fine particles are often
discarded), mitigating safety concerns (airborne fine particles are an explosion
hazard), minimizing health risks (inhalation of fine particles), and preventing
fouled equipment (fine particles coat surfaces of equipment and sensors). In
geophysical flows, fine particles can increase landslide hazards by acting as
friction-reducing ball bearings or becoming airborne (billowing clouds in rock
avalanches). Currently, however, the physics of fine particle de-mixing is
poorly understood. The goal of this award is to develop a fundamental
understanding of how fine particles segregate using computer simulations, which
could lead to an accurate and widely applicable model for such granular flows.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discrete Element Method (DEM) computer simulations,
validated with experiments, will be used to develop a fundamental understanding
of fine particle flow and segregation. At the flow level, the size and spatial
distributions of interstices between large particles through which fine
particles transit will be characterized for a variety of flow conditions and
particle size ratios leading to a relation for the dependence of the fine
particle percolation velocity on the shear rate, particle size ratio, and
species concentration. At the individual particle level, particle contact
forces, ballistic interactions, and free sifting percolation kinematics will be
characterized. The goal is to develop a predictive model for segregating fine
particles much like the advection-diffusion-segregation continuum model that has
been successfully implemented to predict the segregation of particles with small
size ratios (less than 3). This award will transform the understanding,
prediction, and control of the segregation and mixing of large and fine
particles from ad hoc approaches to a physics-based model. It may also result in
new insights into dry lubrication and geophysical flows where particle sizes
vary by orders of magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.