* 2203909
* The Role of Thioamides in Natural and Designed Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Ernest Petersson, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2025
* USD 340,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Sciences (CLP) program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor E. James Petersson from the University of Pennsylvania
is studying the effects of thioamides, oxygen-to-sulfur substitutions of the
peptide bond found in proteins. The results of these studies will further the
development of thioamides as tools for biophysical and medicinal chemistry by
providing rules for the rational design of thioamide proteins with or without
affecting stability, as desired. The work will also help to explain the
evolutionary value of the thioamides found in certain natural proteins. The
planned investigations of the fundamental properties of thioamides can impact
areas as diverse as epigenetics, the biophysics of protein folding, the design
of enzyme inhibitors, or even fluorescence-guided surgery using thioamide-
stabilized peptides as tumor imaging agents. The broader impacts of this work
include training undergraduate and graduate students in a multidisciplinary
laboratory environment that makes use of organic synthesis and physical
chemistry, as well as molecular and cellular biology, to investigate biological
phenomena. In addition, Professor Petersson and his research group will
participate in expositions both in-person, and virtual, to demonstrate their
findings to K-12 groups and interested adults. They will also help to build the
Penn Chemistry Summer Research Academy so that more students from groups under-
represented in science have opportunities to experience science and participate
in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this project, the physical
properties and reactivity of thioamides will be studied as a function of amino
acid sequence in model peptides. This will aid in the mechanistic understanding
of environment-dependent properties such as pKa, and in benchmarking quantum
mechanical (QM) calculations. For example, there is a need to better develop in
molecular mechanics parameters for tripeptides or polypeptides, rather than use
parameters based on small molecule values as has been done heretofore.
Reactivity studies will be performed that have the potential to develop tools to
identify new natural thioamide-containing proteins. Professor Peterssonâ€™s
laboratory will also study thioamide effects on the secondary and tertiary
structure of peptides, peptide/protein host-guest systems, and full-length
proteins. Using data from model systems, novel PyRosetta programs will be
developed in an effort to predict the effects of thioamides on protein
stability. These predictions will be tested on thioamide-containing proteins,
which will be characterized through X-ray crystallography and/or NMR as well as
solution-phase stability measurements. Taken together, these experiments are
expected to provide a better systematic understanding of the effects of
thioamides on protein properties from local sequence-based effects, to effects
on secondary, tertiary, and even quaternary structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.