* 2203123
* Enhancing Design and Construction Technology Education Through the Context of Mass Timber
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Chad Richert, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 07/31/2025
* USD 648,121.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by creating a national standard
design and construction curriculum for mass timber. Mass timber, a broad term
for a variety of engineered wood building materials, is an emerging construction
technology in the US with up to 2,500 mass timber buildings expected to exist in
the US by 2023, supported by an expected architecture, engineering, and
construction (AEC) workforce of over 90,000 technicians by 2029. Much of the
interest in increasing use of mass timber stems from the materials’ enhanced
sustainability performance via carbon storage and avoided emissions from
conventional building materials, as well as from potential construction time and
cost savings associated with substituting mass timber for other common building
materials. But several industry, government, and academic sources have suggested
that greater adoption of mass timber in the United States is limited by a lack
of focus on workforce education. This project will create new opportunities for
technician-level students in postsecondary AEC educational programs acquire
knowledge and skills in mass timber design and construction. This content will
be developed as a series of modules that can be readily integrated into academic
programs, facilitating uptake by a national audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will prepare students to move into technician-level design and
construction careers that include the pursuit and execution of mass timber
projects. The specific components and activities to be developed through this
project will be determined through interaction and collaboration with AEC
industry. Previous data collection efforts have indicated that modular
curriculum frameworks and virtual and augmented reality (VR/AR) environments are
in high demand among AEC faculty members for both students and faculty lacking
access to nearby mass timber buildings. This project will benefit the AEC
industry and broader society by providing a trained workforce for mass timber
design and construction in the United States. Efforts to maximize uptake of
curricular products by faculty include the creation of a faculty community of
practice and inclusion into the project leadership team diverse representatives
from a variety of institution types (2-year schools, 4-year schools, and
minority serving institutions) from across the country into the project
leadership team. By partnering with schools that have strong high school
outreach programs and diverse student bodies, the team expects to serve a
greater cross section of students and faculty than are traditionally part of AEC
programs. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program
that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields
that drive the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.