* 2203119
* NSF-ANR: REBIRTH: Understanding The Self-Assembly Of The Nervous System of Hydra Vulgaris
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Rafael Yuste, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 02/28/2025
* USD 380,000.00

To understand the physical and biological principles underlying the self-
assembly of the nervous system of the fresh-water polyp Hydra vulgaris, the PIs
propose a collaboration between theoreticians and experimentalists that will
focus on this problem. The PIs will image the activity of every neuron and
muscle cell during re-aggregation of Hydra, and analyze it with novel imaging,
statistical and mathematical tools, correlating the emergence of phase
transitions in the neuronal and muscle activity with the appearance of specific
behaviors. This work will provide a deep insight into algorithms and mechanisms
of self-assembly, with important repercussions for control theory, neuroscience,
soft-matter physics, robotics and network science. Due to Hydra's extreme
regenerative ability, this work may enable synthetic biology of an organism with
a nervous system; and the work will have future repercussions for the field of
neuroregeneration. The techniques developed for tracking of neurons in a moving
and distorting animal will be made widely available and will be of use in other
systems. The study of Hydra with the proposed integrated imaging/computational
approach will serve as an imaginatively appealing platform for a range of
outreach opportunities introducing members of the general public to mathematical
neuroscience, and training opportunities for students at all levels. In
particular, the Hydra system can be deeply integrated into the full spectrum of
courses at the Marine Biological Laboratory and provide cross-cutting projects
for students from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most
fascinating aspects of biological organisms is their self-assembly: bodies put
themselves together without external directions, to yield robust, resilient and
adaptive living systems. This is particular dramatic in the cnidarian Hydra
vulgaris. This small, transparent polyp has unique regenerative properties,
demonstrated in the ability to completely regenerate itself after its body has
been dissociated into individual cells. This remarkable self assembly,
regenerating a normal animal, is complete within a few days, occurs robustly in
culture dishes under a microscope and has surprisingly not yet been studied
systematically. This project goes to the heart of this problem and will apply
the a state-of-the-art toolset of modern neuroscience and computational
approaches to this fundamental problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
US/France project is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the
French Agence Nationale de la Recherche, where NSF funds the US investigator and
ANR funds the partners in France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.