* 2203977
* Photoinduced Initiation of Olefin Polymerizations
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Brian Long, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 04/30/2025
* USD 399,948.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Brian K. Long and his team at the University of
Tennessee-Knoxville are developing mechanistic insight and understanding of a
new polymerization methodology called photoinitiated olefin polymerization.
Olefins are small organic molecules composed of carbon and hydrogen in which
each carbon is bonded to another carbon through a conventional chemical bond,
and another unique bond called a pi-bond. When this pi-bond is broken, a
reactive molecule is created that can add to another olefin. This process can be
repeated many times resulting in the formation of long chain macromolecules,
commonly referred to as polymers or plastics. Plastics have benefited our
society in numerous ways. In fact, plastics has helped aeronautics technology
take giant steps forward over the past 70 years, including advancements in
satellites, shuttles, aircraft, and missiles. In addition, the building and
construction, electronics, packaging, and transportation industries have all
benefited greatly from the use of plastics. In this research, olefin
polymerizations will be initiated by light, in combination with acid and a metal
species. The use of light in these polymerizations is advantageous because it
causes cleavage of chemical bonds in non-invasive ways and is environmentally
benign. Sophisticated studies will be conducted in order to mechanistically
understand how the combination of these three components can be used to control
the polymerization of olefins. These investigations are expected to provide
insight into how plastics are produced with controlled length of polymer chains
and architectures. If successful, the fundamental knowledge gained will enable
the chemistry required for many advanced applications such as, for example,
olefin-based 3D printable polymers. The research spans multiple disciplines,
including polymer chemistry, polymer science, organometallic chemistry and
engineering. Consequently, it will provide a cross-cutting educational
opportunity for the students involved. The research team will also strive to
recruit undergraduate students from underrepresented groups through the
University of Tennessee-Knoxville SMaRT internship program, as well as
Appalachian Students Promoting the Integration of Research and Education
(ASPIRE) initiative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on the use
of photoacid generators to activate homogeneous metallocene and post-metallocene
catalysts for the controlled polymerization of ethylene, propylene and higher
Î±-olefins. To realize this important goal, the first objective will focus on
detailed mechanistic and kinetic studies of photoinduced activation of dialkyl
substituted zirconium and hafnium pre-catalysts. The designed strategy will
intercept the precatalyst activation pathway by replacing a commonly used
Bronsted acid activator with a photoacid generator (PAG). This PAG/ pre-catalyst
mixture will be dormant in the absence of light, but upon irradiation will
generate the open coordination site needed for the coordination-insertion
polymerization of olefins. The second objective will apply the generated
knowledge and principles to enable control over polyolefin tacticity and
molecular weight distribution. Finally, in the last objective, heterogenous
photoinduced initiation of olefin polymerization will be developed with a strong
focus on controlling polyolefin film formation on surfaces using a gaseous feed
of ethylene or propylene. If successful, the fundamental studies associated with
this research will expand the library of light-based, 3D printable polymer types
to include polyolefins. The knowledge gained from the mechanistic studies will
be impactful to organometallic chemistry and catalysis field in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.