* 2203904
* GOALI: Exploiting Dark Spins for Color-Center-Based Nanoscale Sensing and Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Carlos Meriles, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2025
* USD 449,978.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging program in the Division
of Chemistry and partial co-funding from the Divisions of Physics (Atomic,
Molecular and Optical Physics - Experiment) and Materials Research (Condensed
Matter Physics), Professor Meriles at The City University of New York is
developing new imaging techniques that leverage the special physical properties
of select light emitters in diamond. Capitalizing on cutting-edge
instrumentation and recent methodological progress, the central goal of this
project is to enhance the information content of observed signals and broaden
the techniques’ applicability in areas such as soft condensed matter and
biological systems, semiconducting polymers, and other energy-relevant organic
or inorganic materials. The project offers students a unique inter-disciplinary
scientific education and the ability to interact with a wide network of
collaborators, including scientists at Adamas Nanotechnologies, a company
contributing to the project through a range of activities that leverage their
extensive expertise in diamond synthesis, processing, and surface
functionalization. The partnership not only provides a broad dissemination
platform but also allows the PI to advance ongoing outreach programs designed to
provide meaningful research experiences to underprivileged students through
summer and/or year-round activities at CUNY/CCNY.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
overarching goal of enhancing nitrogen-vacancy (NV) scanning microscopy as a
broad magnetic-resonance-based imaging and characterization technique, work in
the Meriles lab focuses on two related research thrusts: &lt;br/&gt;(i)
Investigation of the ensemble of paramagnetic centers in all-diamond scanning
tips to gain improved understanding of tip composition and dynamics, for
applications to new forms of NV scanning imaging, with emphasis on ancilla-spin-
aided relaxometry. Included is the use of spectrally-resolved spin-noise
detection schemes relying on easy-to-use, AI (artificial intelligence)-assisted
protocols for spectral density reconstruction. &lt;br/&gt;(ii) Study of
interactions between the NV and individual electron and nuclear spins in
proximity, as a means to enhanced sensing based on non-Hermitian dynamics. This
thrust includes studies aimed at engineering “protected” NV spin states
featuring long coherence lifetimes, and their application to electric-noise-
selective sensing. &lt;br/&gt;The overall project aims to extend the
capabilities of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), not only its sensitivity and
spatial resolution, but also the types of materials and processes that can be
probed using NV magnetometry while retaining key traits that make MRI versatile
(particularly its ability to obtain spectroscopic fingerprints and introduce
different forms of contrast), and capitalizing on the spatial precision and
enhanced sensitivity of optical and atomic force
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.