* 2203729
* Mechanism and Scope of Prenylated-flavin-dependent (De)carboxylase Enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2025
* E. Neil Marsh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 11/30/2025
* USD 540,405.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Chemistry Division, Professor E. Neil G. Marsh from the University of Michigan
is studying how a newly-discovered class of enzymes add and remove carbon
dioxide to unreactive molecules to make them more chemically reactive. This
research addresses an urgent need to develop new, environmentally friendly
routes to make fuels and chemical feedstocks from renewable sources.
Understanding how these enzymes work will aid in developing highly efficient
“green” catalysts to replace current energy-intensive industrial processes.
Enzymes are biocompatible, biodegradable and non-toxic catalysts. Using enzymes
and biorenwable feedstocks in industrial processes helps to replace fossil
hydrocarbons for the production of commodity chemicals in ways that are cost-
effective, low-energy and sustainable. In synergy with the scientific goals, the
project will advance the education, training and professional development of
undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral scientists, including
those from underserved minority groups, in the interdisciplinary area of
chemical biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two scientific goals. The
first is to determine how the novel flavin cofactor, prFMN, facilitates
(de)carboxylation of aromatic molecules using phenazine-1-carboxylate
decarboxylase as a model enzyme. The experimental approaches include: in situ
native protein mass spectrometry to identify unstable covalent intermediates
formed between substrates and prFMN (prenylated flavin mononucleotide);
UV/visible stopped-flow spectroscopy to identify transiently formed
intermediates and determine their rates of formation and breakdown and natural
abundance 13-C kinetic isotope effect measurements to determine the order of
bond-breaking and bond-forming steps, and to provide information on the nature
of the transition state. The second is to survey the diversity of prFMN-
dependent decarboxylation reactions represented in the prFMN superfamily, with
the objective of identifying novel substrates and new (de)carboxylases. The
experimental approach will involve screening potential substrates for
carboxylation using compound libraries that contain aromatic, heterocyclic, or
conjugated double bond functionalities. Potential substrates will be identified
by their ability to undergo H/D exchange when incubated with the appropriate
enzyme. Many compounds will be screened in parallel using LC-MS (liquid
chromatography with mass spectral detection). The approach will be applied to
sample a diverse cross-section of the prFMN superfamily. These studies are
expected to provide fundamental information about the mechanisms of this
important class of enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.