* 2203429
* Conference on Hyperbolic Groups and Their Generalizations
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Jingyin Huang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 04/30/2024
* USD 33,600.00

This award provides travel support for a delegation of US-based early-career
mathematicians to attend the conference “Hyperbolic groups and their
generalisations” in Paris, held June 20-24, 2022. The conference is part of a
series of conferences and lectures in the “Groups Acting on Fractals” thematic
trimester at Institut Henri Poincaré, which is one of the major events in the
field of geometric group theory in year 2022. The conference invites a range of
speakers of different career stages and arranges several discussion sessions
aiming at creating a conductive collaboration environment. The grant will allow
the supported US-based mathematicians to learn about important recent
development in the field, to communicate their research results and exchange
research ideas with their European colleagues, and to spark new research
collaborations. Special effort will be devoted to identify and support members
of groups under-represented in mathematics who will benefit from attending the
conference.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The study of Gromov hyperbolicity is a central
topic in geometry group theory, and has deep connections in geometry, topology,
dynamics, and logic. In recent years, several important properties of hyperbolic
groups were established, together with an explosion of new theories aiming at
identifying traces of hyperbolicity in a highly non-hyperbolic setting. This
leads to new angles of looking at hyperbolicity, as well as many new connections
to other subjects. This conference will bring together prominent researchers in
geometric group theory and neighboring fields and feature talks given by leading
experts on recent major development of hyperbolicity and its generalizations.
The conference will cover several recent major advances on the geometry of
groups acting on Gromov hyperbolic spaces, as well as feature a variety of
connections between Gromov hyperbolicity with topics in random walks, logic,
higher Teichmüller theory, and geometric measure theory. This conference will
also disseminate knowledge to the broader mathematical community by hosting all
the talks for the conference digitally. For more information, see the conference
website:
https://indico.math.cnrs.fr/event/6577/overview.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.