* 2203179
* Role of Monomer Sequence and Polymer Topology in Polymer Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Rachel Segalman, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2027
* USD 824,997.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As very long molecules,
polymer chains can take on many shapes ranging from fully extended to collapsed.
While the shape of some natural polymers, namely proteins, has evolved to be
very complex and embeds significant functionality, synthetic polymer chain
shapes are comparatively crude. Improved control of chain shape could,
therefore, advance the design of materials for applications as diverse as
organic electronics, structural plastics, and complex fluids. Recently,
synthetic methods have improved to the point where we can make polymer chains
with chemistry as complex as proteins, but the ability to design materials that
attain specific shape remains out of reach. Taking inspiration from proteins,
the PI's group will leverage these developments in polymer chemistry to
determine the design rules controlling the chain shape and assembly of these
polymers. Further, insights connecting the molecular design of a polymer to its
three-dimensional shape will improve our understanding of natural protein
folding and develop the tools necessary to synthesize materials with the
complexity and function inherent in biology. An important component of the
project focuses on broadening participation in polymer science at all levels
including: (1) Engaging incoming community-college transfer students in research
efforts, (2) A robust program of “Science Night” outreach activities, and (3)
The training of undergraduate and graduate student
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monomer sequence and polymer topology are two
essential design handles to control polymer conformation and self-assembly.
Recent advances in the gram-scale synthesis of sequence-controlled polypeptoids
now make it possible to directly test predictions of how monomer sequence and
polymer topology control chain collapse and leverage access to previously
unrealized mesostructures. This project spans both chemical patterning and
polymer topology as handles for fine-tuning material properties and, thus,
builds a foundation for designing made-to-order soft materials and synthetic
biological systems. Beyond precisely defined monomer sequence, junction
location, and arm length, polypeptoids also provide user-defined chain
stiffness, offering yet another handle to control chain shape and interfacial
curvature. The PI's group will use this platform to explore how sequence and
dynamic intramolecular interactions can be used to tune collapsed molecular
structure, providing insight on protein folding and colloid design. In addition,
they will synthesize polypeptoids with non-linear topologies and study their
melt self-assembly, thus eliminating the dispersity effects intrinsic to most
synthetic routes. In particular, the project will determine the role of
interfacial curvature on resulting morphologies and explore how conformational
asymmetry and complex topologies (graft and star architectures) can be combined
to fine-tune self-assembly. Further, the PI's group will model polypeptoids as
controlled platforms to generate insights for graft polymer design, beginning
with systems to address two outstanding questions: (1) where does the limit
between graft/star/bottlebrush lie? and (2) can the inherent competition between
backbone orientation in inhomogeneous bottlebrushes be used to access new
morphologies?&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.