* 2203847
* Azole Antifungals Coordinate Metals and Create Reactive Oxygen Species That Damage DNA and Cause Chromosomal Instability
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Julia Brumaghim, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2025
* USD 492,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Julia Brumaghim and Lukasz Kozubowski of Clemson
University are studying possible resistance mechanisms to commonly used azole
antifungal compounds. In both agriculture and medicine, fungal development of
resistance to azole compounds is a major worldwide problem, causing crop loss
and agricultural-to-human-pathogen fungal resistance. Due to resistance
development, azoles are increasingly failing as both agricultural and human
antifungal treatments: the percentage of azole-resistant strains of one fungus
increased from 5% to 20% in five years, and high patient mortalities are
reported for azole-resistant fungal infections. This resistance may stem from
DNA instability, yet little is known about the mechanisms that lead to changes
to fungi DNA upon azole treatment. Understanding the development of resistance
to antifungal compounds will impact the broad areas of biology, chemistry,
agriculture, and medicine. This proposed work also will promote participation of
a first-generation, economically disadvantaged graduate student, strengthen
collaborative research efforts with Professor Ken Marcus (Clemson), and combat
implicit bias in chemistry in a collaborative effort with Professor William
Pennington (Clemson). In addition, Professor Brumaghim will introduce middle
school and high school students to bioinorganic chemistry through teaching a DNA
damage lab as part of a week-long residential summer chemistry camp. This
research will train next-generation interdisciplinary researchers as it explores
the chemistry behind a fundamental biological process with global implications.
Results of this work have the potential to advance understanding of antifungal
resistance mechanisms and to guide future antifungal
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Azole compounds are the most widely used class
of fungicides for crop protection as well as a first-line treatment for human
fungal infections worldwide. Crop loss and agricultural-to-human-pathogen fungal
resistance is a major global issue, since fungi are developing resistance to
azole compounds. Azole resistance mechanisms include mutations in the ERG11 gene
that encodes the antifungal target protein and upregulation of ERG11 or genes
encoding azole efflux pumps. Azole resistance may stem from DNA instability and
increases in chromosomal copy numbers (aneuploidy), yet the mechanisms that lead
to these changes to fungi DNA upon azole treatment are unknown. Initial data
from PI Brumaghim and co-PI Kozubowski indicate that despite sharing Erg11 as a
common target, different azoles display a wide range of resistance development
in the human pathogen Cryptococcus neoformans. In addition, the azole drug
fluconazole binds to copper and iron, enhances reactive oxygen species (ROS)
generation, and promotes metal-mediated DNA damage in vitro. Fluconazole also
increases ROS and cellular damage in C. neoformans. The proposed work will test
the hypothesis that ROS generation and DNA damage by azole antifungals
interacting with copper and/or iron is a general mechanism for the DNA damage
and genetic instability that causes azole resistance. This novel mechanism for
azole antifungal resistance will be established by: 1) quantifying the ability
of chemically diverse azole compounds to bind iron and copper, promote ROS
generation, and damage DNA in vitro, and 2) determining the effects of the same
azole compounds on cellular ROS, DNA integrity, and development of drug
resistance in two model fungi Saccharomyces cerevisiae and C. neoformans under
normal and elevated copper or iron conditions. This work aims to establish the
role of metals and ROS in azole-mediated DNA damage and enable correlations of
azole properties with their effects on DNA damage and resistance development. By
investigating the hypothesis that azole-metal binding and DNA damage underlie
azole antifungal resistance, the PI and co-PI is asking an important
experimental question with potentially broad scientific implications for fungal
resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.