* 2203879
* Iron-sulfur Clusters as Biological Sensors: Mechanistic Investigations by Synthetic Modeling Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Eunsuk Kim, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2025
* USD 450,223.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Eunsuk Kim from Brown University is studying
the development of synthetic modeling systems to understand how iron-sulfur
(Fe-S) clusters act as sensors for environmental signals. Iron-sulfur clusters
are ubiquitous cofactors present in all animal kingdoms. Organisms have evolved
to exploit the inherent reactivity of Fe-S clusters with small molecules like O2
and NO to assess their environment. For example, bacteria sense environmental O2
and NO and adjust their gene expression profiles for survival using regulatory
proteins that contain Fe-S clusters. The human Fe-S mitoNEET protein acts as a
redox sensor and regulates mitochondrial functions, failure of which leads to
metabolic and neurodegenerative diseases. The proposed study will offer
molecular insights into the modification and repair of iron-sulfur clusters by
small redox signaling molecules. Molecular insights gained in this project will
inform research focused on the development of biomarkers for disease detection,
of antimicrobial agents, and of therapeutics for metabolic diseases. Students
who will implement the research will gain knowledge, expertise and skills in
chemical synthesis, reactivity, structural characterization of molecules, and
spectroscopy. This project is also integrated into an outreach program focused
on the improvement of the educational environments of students from groups
underrepresented in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) and
students from public high schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
seeks to understand strategies used by Fe-S regulatory proteins to battle
oxidative and nitrosative stress at the molecular level. This goal is achieved
by studying the geometric and electronic structure, reactivity, and bonding
properties of discrete biomimetic, model Fe-S complexes. The chemical reactivity
of Fe-S clusters will be studied in three different areas. Firstly, mechanistic
details for the reactions of 4Fe-4S clusters with NO will be examined. These
include the characterization of novel iron nitrosyl products and investigations
on how reactive sulfur species are generated through the action of NO upon Fe-S
clusters. Secondly, mitoNEET model clusters will be synthesized and bonding
properties of the Fe-S cluster will be correlated to cluster transfer activity.
Lastly, persulfide-ligated Fe-S clusters will be synthesized used to study the
role of persulfides in the Fe-S repair process. Overall then, these fundamental
mechanistic and spectroscopic studies have real promise to enhance understanding
of Fe-S complexes in biology, in general, and their specific roles in electron
transfer-initiated processes including interactions with signaling molecules
such as NO and persulfides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.