* 2203593
* The Chemistry of Dihydropyrimidine Dehydrogenase
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Graham Moran, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2025
* USD 378,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Graham Moran from Loyola University of Chicago
is studying the chemistry of the enzyme dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD).
The movement of electrons and hydrogen ions in biological processes is
fundamental to the chemistry of life. The mechanism of transfer of electrons in
biological systems involves complex networks of electron carriers and hydrogen
ion donors and remains poorly understood. DPD transfers two electrons from an
electron donor to reduce a base, which initiates degradation in a class of bases
that includes DNA and RNA. DPD has a complex set of cofactors that transmit the
electrons one at a time over long distances, which is unlike any other similar
enzyme. The study of this enzyme is expected to advance the understanding of how
charge transfer is used to favor specific reactions. The graduate and
undergraduate students engaged in this research will gain knowledge and
experience in spectrophotometry, transient state kinetics, and X-ray
crystallography. Students will also learn in a yearly free virtual kinetics
workshop that will illustrate how kinetic ideas are employed to glean
information about the properties of molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DPD
catalyzes the rate limiting step in the degradation of pyrimidine bases but it
is significantly different from other dehydrogenases that accomplish similar
chemistry. Specifically, DPD contains two flavin cofactors, FAD and FMN,
separated by ~56 angstroms and connected by a molecular wire of four iron sulfur
centers. The research plan is designed to test the hypotheses that pyrimidine
reduction by DPD is the instigating step in the catalysis of base degradation
and that NADPH is oxidized to backfill the enzyme and re-establish its two-
electron reduced active state; in other words, the oxidative half reaction
precedes the reductive half reaction. The research involves the modification of
specific charged residues clustered around the FAD and FMN cofactors to slow or
stall the passage of electrons through these junctions and thus to reveal
different parts of the catalytic cycle. Specifically, mutations that reduce the
number of negative charged residues proximal to the FAD will be used to raise
the reduction potential of FAD and slow electron transfer to FMN. Similarly,
mutations that reduce the number of positively charged residues near the FMN
will be used to decrease its capacity to act as the electron sink. The research
is designed in a way that makes it possible to track the movement of electrons
and protons using combinations of variants with isotopic substitutions for
substrates and solvent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.