* 2203203
* SBIR Phase I:  Tele-Directed Artificially Intelligent Medical Robot
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Aaron Crookes, CROOKES RESEARCH LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 11/30/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Phase I project is to develop a
novel artificial-intelligence (AI) robot-control paradigm to facilitate real-
time tele-robotics and advance humankind’s robotic capability. This AI
constantly interprets the intent of the operator in the context of the robot’s
environment, and makes real-time adjustments to the motion of the robot to
accomplish the intended task. Ultimately, this allows the operator to focus on
the objective instead of operating the robot. This project will allow tele-
robotics to become a viable solution in uncertain environments where traditional
control schemes, with inherent latency and precision issues, currently prevent
adoption of robotic solutions. This benefits applications in which a higher
degree of expertise and decision-making is required to perform tasks in a
dangerous or inaccessible location. The first application of this technology
will allow nurses to provide patient care within hospital isolation environments
to prevent exposure to the patient and care-providers. Additional applications
include military, industrial maintenance, aerospace, public safety, energy,
mining, and undersea solutions. Tele-robotics is a $62B market in 2019 growing
by 13.5% annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to address the nursing
crisis with an AI-enhanced robotic in patient-isolation environments. Instead of
delaying care to don and doff personal-protective equipment, nurses can
instantly work through the eyes, ears, and arms of these robots. The key
innovation in this Phase I project is novel AI which will intuit the intent of
the operator to successfully complete tasks. The proposed research will develop
a robot control policy which observes the robot’s current environment as well as
the users control inputs, and actuates a robot to achieve the desired task. The
robot will self-correct for errors made by the user through an understanding of
the desired outcomes. At the end of this Phase I project, we expect the robot to
perform a demonstration of accurate and timely object manipulation while
controlled by a remote operator without line of sight to the work area. In a
subsequent phase, the ultimate technical objective is for the solution to be as
intuitive and invaluable as a modern smartphone. The business objective,
developed in partnership with healthcare systems, is to provide better
isolation-patient outcomes while improving productivity and reducing health risk
for nurses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.