* 2203907
* Ion Hydration and Nanodrops in Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Evan Williams, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2025
* USD 570,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Evan Williams and his group at the University of
California, Berkeley are investigating the chemistry and physics of charged
aqueous nanodrops, with particular focus on characteristics relevant to the
capabilities of electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI MS), a
revolutionary chemical analysis method for which John B. Fenn received the Nobel
Prize in Chemistry in 2002. The Williams lab is investigating how the size and
shape of ESI droplet emitters affect the initial droplet size and resulting
performance of ESI MS. Charge detection mass spectrometry - a technique that is
being developed in the Williams lab - is used to weigh both droplets and
residues from dehydrated droplets in order to infer information about initial
droplet sizes. The physics of droplet breakup from excess charge is also probed
using this device, with goals of improved understanding of the ion formation
process, and improved analytical performance. Computational modeling supports
these efforts, providing a more detailed understanding of the physics behind
these processes. The nanoscale emitters enable measurements from biochemical
systems using the same types of buffers as used for measurements with other
methods. Heating these emitters enables assessment of the thermal stabilities of
proteins and protein complexes - information that is important in understanding
phenomena such as drug-target interactions and protein therapeutics. A laser
heating method that extends these measurements to aggregation-prone proteins and
improves measurement speed by at least a factor of ten is being developed and
could replace traditional methods that are widely used in protein chemistry and
in pharmaceutical labs. Students working on this project learn important skills,
including how to design rigorous experiments, to interpret data without bias,
and to communicate their results to the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Williams lab is studying the chemistry and
physics of charged aqueous nanodrops with diameters between ~10 nm and 1 micron
formed using custom electrospray emitters. Charge detection mass spectrometry
provides a means of detecting how the emitter tip diameter and taper affect the
initial nanodrop sizes, and to establish conditions needed to achieve a single
analyte molecule per droplet. The work seeks improved understanding of how
analyte ions are formed from charged nanodrops and how anions affect cation
emission. Molecular dynamics simulations of ion emission of small folded
proteins are being tested through direct measurement of ion emission in trapped
aqueous nanodrops below 40 nm diameter. A parallel goal is to explore emitter
characteristics that improve performance of native mass spectrometry using
traditional biochemical buffers containing high concentrations of nonvolatile
salts. This will facilitate direct comparison of mass spectrometry data with
that obtained from complementary biophysical methods using the same solutions.
The effect of different matrices on protein stability, structure, and
stoichiometry in solution are being investigated using resistively heated
capillaries to measure thermal stabilities. A new laser-based method to make
these measurements significantly faster is being developed for application to
proteins that are prone to aggregation at elevated temperatures. These
measurements should enhance our understanding of phenomena such as the formation
of chiral-selective serine octamers in solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.