* 2203094
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: EDU: A Hands-on Approach to Securing Self-Driving Networks
* EDU,DGE
* 02/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Ali Tosun, University of North Carolina at Pembroke
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 226,438.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Today’s computer networks have grown both in complexity
and in scale, in part as a response to diverse connectivity requirements in the
era of the Internet of Things, Cloud 3.0, and Big Data. Existing network
management solutions cannot keep up with the demand for solutions to real-time
network management problems resulting from these increasingly complex networks.
Network management requires a fundamentally new approach in which networks can
autonomously control, configure, and manage themselves. While these “self-
driving networks” offer numerous opportunities for efficient network management,
they introduce new threats and attack vectors that must be addressed to secure
them. Unfortunately, there is currently a shortfall of professionals trained in
autonomous and intelligent network security and a shortfall of content with
which to train these professionals. This project will address these shortfalls
by developing lab-intensive modules that enable undergraduate students to gain
fundamental and advanced knowledge in securing next-generation self-driving
networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will develop six self-contained
modules with comprehensive coverage of the techniques, tools, and methods
required to secure self-driving networks. The modules will cover (1) attack
investigation and analysis of legacy, Software Defined Networking (SDN), and
adversarial attacks; (2) hunting for vulnerabilities using static analysis,
software component analysis, automated known attack patterns, and behavioral
analysis; (3) network-wide data collection using classic and OpenFlow based
approaches; (4) protection using runtime application self-protection, automated
patching, and security information and event management; (5) evaluation using
continuous adaptive risk and thrust assessment; and (6) action using security
orchestration, automation and response. In addition, this project aims to
increase the participation of underrepresented groups in STEM by organizing
workshops and participating in professional conferences. The project team will
also organize a workshop to disseminate the modules to interested faculty
members from other organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds proposals
that address cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case specifically
cybersecurity education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity
Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research
Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic benefits of
cyber systems while ensuring security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.