* 2203605
* EAGER GERMINATION: TRANSPIRE – A transdisciplinary pedagogy for postdoctoral development
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Linda Vigdor, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 269,500.00

This project is funded through the NSF Directorate for Engineering Germination
program, which seeks to foster the development of pedagogical approaches to
increase the ability of academic researchers to formulate research questions and
ideas with potentially transformative outcomes. This project seeks to develop an
evidence-based, transferrable pedagogical strategy for training and mentoring
postdoctoral researchers. The planned program involves: a series of weekly
bootcamps designed to introduce specific transdisciplinary skills; a research
interval for the participants to work on reformulating their own problems with
their supervisors; further bootcamps; and will culminate in chalk talk-based
presentations. The workshops are designed to instill skills and techniques
associated with working across disciplines and then to use those in service of
designing an independent research project, with the support of their
supervisors. Given that the postdoctoral years represent a key inflection point,
this program may yield substantial broader impacts through fostering the
development of a new generation of scientists with well-developed capacity for
broad thought and interdisciplinary engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will pilot and evaluate TRANSPIRE as a theory of change model and assess
whether, how, and why habits of mind transform from a traditionally siloed
disciplinary focus towards a more systems-oriented worldview. The pedagogical
model integrates practices from team science, reflective practice, and adult
learning theories to inform the design of transdisciplinary bootcamps.
Postdoctoral fellows will be guided to develop research questions, engage in
iterative writing, and present their ideas to a panel of senior faculty. Methods
used to evaluate the TRANSPIRE model will include surveys, interviews,
reflective journals, observations, and focus groups. A discourse/content
analysis will (a) describe the model and how it functions in practice, (b)
evaluate the model as a theory of change, and (c) assess the potential
scalability of the model. Opportunities for scaling through leveraging
professional organizations will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.