* 2203769
* Relationship Maintenance Knowledge and Self-Efficacy
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Katie Adams, Adams, Katie N
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2023
* USD 69,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Christopher
R. Agnew at Purdue University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating a novel and integrative analysis of
relationship maintenance strategies. A variety of thoughts and behaviors have
been shown to promote relationship satisfaction and commitment, which, in turn,
contribute to long-term stability. However, many adults are unaware of these
strategies and there is a disconnect between relationship attainment and
relationship sustenance. This project examines whether adults are aware of these
relationship maintenance strategies, whether they perceive themselves as able to
employ such strategies, and how their readiness affects these perceptions.
Disseminating information on effective maintenance strategies and ways to
implement them can improve relationship success and longevity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines what it is that adults know about
relationship maintenance strategies and how their knowledge affects their
efforts to achieve a desired relationship state. The first aim in this research
is to assess and validate adultsâ€™ beliefs regarding relationship maintenance
strategies, including their belief in strategy efficacy and self-efficacy for
maintaining relationships. Specifically, adults are provided with strategies
that vary in effectiveness for maintaining relationships, and they report on
their perceptions of (a) whether a specific strategy is effective and (b) their
own self-efficacy in implementing the strategies. The second aim investigates
whether reports of relationship maintenance efficacy and commitment readiness
obtained from participants and from members of their social network predict
their future relationship success. This aim involves a prospective, longitudinal
design in which participants provide responses over time as they initiate a new
relationships, people in their social network provide similar responses, and
these are combined to predict relationship success. The third aim tests whether
raising awareness of effective maintenance strategies and/or bolstering
maintenance self-efficacy leads to greater likelihood of subsequent relationship
initiation(s) and use of strategies. The project improves the prediction of
relationship stability in a way that simultaneously improves the probability of
relationship maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.