* 2203297
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Process of Faunal Domestication
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Caitlin Ainsworth, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2024
* USD 9,080.00

In this doctoral dissertation project researchers will examine management of
birds at several archaeological sites. In these instances birds were used for
diverse purposes, including as sources of food, feathers, companionship, beauty,
and song. And although birds were rarely domesticated, they were often fed and
housed in and around human settlements. The goal of this project is to establish
how bird biology and human social organization together influenced human-bird
interactions and to use this information to understand when and why birds were
kept in captivity. Captive birds represent an understudied, gray area in between
wild and domestic—sometimes referred to as low-intensity management. Currently
information about the use of captive animals in the past comes largely from
studies of ancient nation-states. This project will provide details on the role
of managed birds in complex, non-state societies. It will broaden understanding
of the role of captive animals in the past and explore the role specific avian
attributes and societal structure play in shaping animal management decisions.
Further, by improving understanding of specific forms of past animal management,
the research will make an important contribution to broader areas of
anthropological inquiry including domestication processes, human and non-human
agency, and the variable nature of human-animal relationships. Finally, the use
of existing collections to address new questions respects the finite nature of
the archaeological record and the need to conserve it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
dissertation student will conduct her doctoral dissertation research on bird
bones from two archaeological sites. Analysis will focus on detailed recording
of skeletal portion, completeness, modifications, skeletal pathologies, age, and
sex. These data will be combined with the results of archival and ornithological
research and used to reconstruct details of bird use and management at these
sites, addressing the following questions: 1) Does a bird species’ biological
suitability for human management relate to how it was obtained or kept in the
past? 2) Are the birds under human control used for different purposes than wild
caught individuals?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.