* 2203380
* Thermally Activated Dynamics in 2D Colloidal Glasses and Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* John Kosterlitz, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2025
* USD 651,108.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the team seeks to
uncover the microscopic mechanism(s) by which many materials change suddenly
from a liquid to a solid without the usual crystallization process. The most
familiar one is the window glass. Whether the window glass is a slowly aging
liquid or a true solid is a longstanding unresolved question in science.
Building on the recent research in two-dimensional (2D) colloidal glasses, the
team plans to use both experiment and theory to study the origin(s) of the glass
transition. The experimental and theoretical activities will benefit each other,
providing motivation and testing of the hypotheses. The results of this research
can benefit scientists and engineers in designing new materials. For example,
understanding the mechanism(s) of how impurities or particle size variations
impact the stability of the glassy material may allow scientists to artificially
engineer such impurities to improve the properties of the materials, similar to
introducing impurities into superconductors to make stronger magnets. The
proposed research provides excellent training for two Ph.D. students, and
undergraduate and master students in condensed matter physics. Training the next
generation American scientists in materials science is of great importance in
maintaining the US preeminence in science and technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team plans to
use video microscopy and Monte Carlo simulations to study two sets of related
questions in condensed matter physics: (1) What is the microscopic mechanism in
the recently discovered 2D colloidal glasses of anisotropic particles? (2) Does
an array of edge dislocations formed along a low-angle grain boundary in a 2D
colloidal crystal undergo a finite temperature phase transition and what happens
to the phase transition when there are impurity particles in the hosting 2D
crystal? The underlying fundamental question is how phases of matter and phase
transitions are impacted by disorder. The first project will investigate the
physical mechanism of a two-step 2D colloidal glass transition of rods. The
proposed experiments will be used to distinguish various competing scenarios of
the glass transition in 2D. The second project is to study a possible novel
phase transition in an array of edge dislocations formed along a low-angle grain
boundary in a 2D colloidal crystal and the effects of disorder on the phase
transition and dynamics. The results will have a significant impact on the
understanding of defects and the glassy states in condensed matter systems. The
results of this research can help scientists and engineers in designing new
materials for the benefit of society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.