* 2203157
* RUI: Leaf as a Biodegradable Material for Electronic Components
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Ramesh Adhikari, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 199,834.00

As the global household income continues to rise and the overall cost of
electronic components continues to fall, a record number of electronic devices
are produced every year to satisfy the demand. However, the usable lifetime of
these devices has also fallen as consumers are enticed by newer versions of
devices that arrive on the market every few years and built-in obsolescence from
manufacturers takes effect. This has resulted in the generation of a record
amount of electronic waste (e-waste) every year. Most of the e-waste is
discarded in landfills which results in environmental pollution. Some e-waste is
sent for recycling in the developing world where workers are protected by sub-
par health and safety regulations if any. The problem appears to grow only worse
as the amount of e-waste is projected to increase to new levels. One way to help
address the issue to some extent is to develop electronic devices from materials
that are biologically sourced and biodegradable so that these devices can be
discarded with minimal environmental impact. This NSF project aims to develop
leaf-based electronic devices as an environmentally friendly alternative to
conventional electronics with a short lifespan. Leaves are abundant and are
available in various textures and morphology. The investigators will study the
intrinsic charge transport mechanism within leaves and the charge transport
mechanism through the conducting polymers introduced in the leaves. By using
this knowledge and taking advantage of the various architecture of the leaves,
the investigators plan to develop various electronic devices for harvesting
residual energy, storing energy, and sensing the surrounding environment such as
ion contents within leaves or in solutions exposed to the leaves. The work to be
carried out by the investigators will lay the groundwork for ultimately
developing an integrated system of leaf-based self-powered environmental
sensors. The PI will mentor a team of undergraduate students which will include
members of underrepresented groups to carry out the research and fulfill
proposed project goals. In addition, the PI will integrate knowledge gained from
the research in a university-wide seminar course that the PI recently developed
which focuses on the civilizational consequences of the discoveries in
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a world with an ever-increasing amount of
electronic waste, growing applications for use-and-throw electronics, and
significantly limited recycling mechanisms for such waste, there is a need to
develop biodegradable electronics that minimize environmental impact during
fabrication as well as after they are discarded. Leaves are readily available
biological materials rich in morphological diversity and therefore could be an
environmentally friendly cost-effective alternative as active materials,
substrates, or enclosures. The investigators will study electron and ion
transport mechanisms in leaves, both in their naturally occurring state and when
conducting polymers have been introduced. By using this knowledge and taking
advantage of the leaf architecture, the investigators will develop electronic
devices such as triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) for residual energy
harvesting, supercapacitors for storing the energy, transistors and logic gates
for environmental sensing, and resistive switching mechanism based in-vivo
monitoring of hydration level in plants. The proposed work would not only help
expand knowledge in the field of “green electronics” but also help explore the
potential for developing electronics integrated within living systems and
generate ideas for bio-inspired electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.