* 2203354
* Emergence of Structure and Function from Sequenceable Sequence-Defined Macrocyclic Oligourethanes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Eric Anslyn, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 600,003.00

With the support from the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) program and co-funding from
the Chemical Synthesis (SYN) and Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry (MSN) programs in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Eric V.
Anslyn of the University of Texas-Austin, is developing a general protocol for
optimizing abiotic (non-natural) polymers for molecular recognition and
catalysis. The chemical structure of natural peptides, polymers of alpha-amino
acids, controls their chemical function as materials, catalytic entities, and
information carriers. To develop non-natural analogues of peptides with
alternative tunable reactivity, the Anslyn group will prepare macrocycles of
urethanes (a common linkage) via automated methods, test their catalytic
activity for the degradation of nerve agent surrogates, assess the fine
structure of promising hits, and use a recursive strategy for optimization.
Machine learning methods will also be integrated into the optimization protocol
to link oligo-urethane fine structure information to desired reactivity and to
establish fundamental connections. This carefully crafted data collection and
analysis system is being used to determine how to guide the multivariable
process for non-natural supramolecular catalyst synthesis to compete with and
expand the activities of enzymes for the selective hydrolysis of V-agent
surrogates. This program is further being used to integrate data science and
automated synthesis concepts into two course-based undergraduate chemistry
research programs run by Professor Anslyn, and to support research experiences
for high school teachers to develop educational projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the field of supramolecular chemistry has had
considerable success creating receptors, catalyst production has lagged
considerably due to the challenges of multivariable optimization. Professor
Anslyn and his research team are working toward addressing this gap in
supramolecular chemistry by creating a new approach to supramolecular catalyst
optimization. An integrated protocol is being developed that combines: 1) the
computer-controlled synthesis of macrocyclic oligourethanes from a curated group
of monomers, 2) analysis of the activity of these foldamer-type catalysts for
the hydrolysis of nerve agent surrogates, 3) sequencing routines to elucidate
oligourethane structure, and 4) recursive optimization using machine learning
techniques. Algorithms involving partial least squares regression (PLSR) are
being trained on sequence space and CD spectroscopy to predict which monomers,
and their synergy, lead to improved binding and catalysis. Based upon the ML
predictions, a script will be used to reprogram the synthesizer, allowing
recursive cycling through synthesis, screening, and sequencing to optimize
catalysis using an automated workflow. These activities will be used to train a
diverse group of graduate and undergraduate researchers in the Anslyn group and
further supporting course-based research experiences for undergraduates and
educational research experiences for high-school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.