* 2203905
* Collaborative Research: Controlling Nanoscale Self-Assembly via Binding-Induced Polarization
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Robert Riggleman, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2025
* USD 275,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Robert Hickey of Penn State University and Robert
Riggleman of the University of Pennsylvania aim to provide fundamental molecular
level insights into how non-covalent interactions in associating polymers drive
nanoscale self-assembly. In this project, the research team will use a
combination of experiment, theory, and simulation to explore the effects of
changes in polarization on the interactions between polymer strands in solution
and nanoscale self-assembly. The project involves the training of both
undergraduate and graduate students in macromolecular, supramolecular, and nano-
science from both the experimental and computational perspective. Furthermore,
the team will create polymer learning modules that incorporate experiment and
theory/simulation to supplement the undergraduate chemistry
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on using a family of
Lewis acids (LAs) and Lewis bases (LBs) that can be incorporated in either
monomeric or polymeric form to change polymer polarization upon formation of
Lewis adducts. Over the course of this project, the collaborative Penn
State/Penn research team will systematically: i) investigate the impact of the
binding strength and resulting dipole moment on the non-covalent interactions
and phase behavior of polymer/molecule/solvent systems, ii) determine and
control the entropy and enthalpy of Lewis adduct formation using polymerized LAs
and polymerized LBs, and iii) explore reversible self-assembly of block
copolymers triggered by LAs or LBs. The Hickey group at Penn State will
synthesize and characterize the polymers, and the Riggleman group at the
University of Pennsylvania will use polarizable field-theoretic simulations and
analytic polymer field theory to study equilibrium nanoscale self-
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.