* 2203891
* Magnetic Ionic Liquids as Tunable Solvents for Chemical Analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jared Anderson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2025
* USD 442,553.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program in
the Division of Chemistry. Professor Jared L. Anderson of Iowa State University
is developing new approaches and platforms for chemical measurement that exploit
the physical and chemical properties of magnetic ionic liquids (MILs) in
chemical separations. MILs are non-molecular solvents that possess low melting
points, tunable viscosities, and can be readily manipulated using an applied
magnetic field. The proposed work has the potential to provide additional
approaches by which nucleic acids are analyzed from clinical samples, and could
transform numerous interdisciplinary fields including clinical diagnostics,
biomedicine, and forensics research. Graduate and undergraduate students acquire
training in separation science and bioanalytical chemistry in an environment
that teaches and encourages innovation and entrepreneurship through modules
developed with the Liberal Arts and Sciences Deanâ€™s Innovation and
Entrepreneurship Academy at Iowa State University. High school students
participate in the research through the American Chemical Society Project SEED
program. A social networking program is used to disseminate scientific videos to
young children and the general public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal
focuses on three areas where magnetic ionic liquids are studied and used in the
chemical measurement of nucleic acids. Magnetic ionic liquids with stronger
magnetic properties are designed and incorporated into bioanalytical assays and
chromatographic separations; approaches using MILs for the capture of nucleic
acids relative to other components in biological samples are developed; and new
chemical measurement platforms using 3D printing are studied to enable
differentiation of nucleic acid sequences that contain single-nucleotide
polymorphisms. 3D printed droplet generators provide customization of droplet
size and volume and are extended to the production of uniform MIL droplets
within aqueous samples. This research provides fundamental new knowledge about
these materials and catalyzes the development of new approaches for achieving
rapid and selective nucleic acid analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.