* 2203968
* CDS&amp;E: Theoretical, Numerical and Experimental Analysis of Gas-Ion Energy Exchange in Ion Mobility for the Separation of Polyatomic Ions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Carlos Larriba Andaluz, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2026
* USD 392,249.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Carlos Larriba-Andaluz and his group at Indiana University-Purdue
University in Indianapolis are working on improving the understanding of how
ionic compounds may be separated and characterized in the gas phase via a
technique known as Ion Mobility Spectrometry (IMS). Understanding how this
separation occurs is not only vital to analytical chemistry, but also to aerosol
science and plasma physics. One of the reasons that IMS has become quite
relevant is that it is able to distinguish ions that have the same mass but
different shapes, known as isomers. Distinguishing isomers is extremely
important - small changes in shape can result in drastic changes in chemical and
physical properties. In fact, IMS systems have arrived at such sophistication
that the existing theory is incapable of describing some of the observed
separation capabilities. The Larriba-Andaluz group is working to fill this
knowledge gap through novel theoretical approaches and numerical tools. The team
is engaging undergraduate students, including members of underrepresented
groups, through summer courses. They are also developing online IMS training
materials to captivate both new and seasoned users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ion
Mobility Spectrometry (IMS) is becoming one of techniques most employed in
combination with Mass Spectrometry (MS). As IMS systems become more sensitive
and accurate, commonly used modeling and theory approximations have been unable
to explain some recently observed capabilities, including separations of
isomers, isotopologues, and even isotopomers. Interchange of energy between
translational and internal degrees of freedom accompanying ion-molecule
collisions is a potential contributor to these phenomena which has not yet been
incorporated into existing theories. The Larriba-Andaluz group is investigating
the mechanism and role of this energy exchange under conditions of varying
electric field and temperature. Specifically, they are developing 1) higher-
order ion mobility approximations using two-temperature theory, followed by the
inclusion of ion energy calculations and inelasticity effects, and 2) models of
mobility and energy balance using an in-house Molecular Dynamics-Monte Carlo
hybrid code. Comparison of experimental results at different fields and
temperatures is being used to predict the effect of inelastic contributions. The
resulting insights are expected to help explain the remarkable separation
ability of ion mobility spectrometry and to broadly advance the field of ion
mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.