* 2203628
* Collaborative Research: Directed Enzyme Evolution Accelerated by Machine Learning for Enhancing the Biodegradation of Emerging Contaminants
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Wenwei Zheng, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 18,512.00

The Environmental Chemical Science Program in the Division of Chemistry supports
Professors Mengyan Li and Edgardo Farinas at the New Jersey Institute of
Technology and Professor Wenwei Zheng at Arizona State University for this
project. An increasing number of human-made chemicals are being released into
the environment where they can deteriorate the water quality. Bacteria living in
nature can secrete enzymes to degrade some of these chemicals and exploit them
as carbon sources. However, the naturally occurring biodegradation process can
be slow or inadequate to remove these contaminants. In this project, bacterial
enzymes will be modified and optimized in the laboratory to speed up their
degradation rates. The experimental results will be input data to train a
computational model that simulates the interaction between the enzyme and the
contaminant. In return, this computational model will promote the design of new
enzymes with greater degradation rates. This project will initiate vigorous
activities to engage graduate and undergraduate students, especially those who
are members of underrepresented groups. Summer exchange workshops will be
organized to promote communications between students and researchers from the
New Jersey Institute of Technology and Arizona State University. Outreach
efforts will be made to promote the green treatment of water contaminants and
technology innovation by combining laboratory-based enzyme evaluation and
computation-based machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some emerging
contaminants pose imminent threats to public health and natural biota due to
their frequent detection and enduring persistence in the environment. The
project selects 1,4-dioxane (dioxane) as a model contaminant and employs state-
of-the-art directed enzyme evaluation to gain fundamental biochemical insights
into essential bacterial enzymes and ultimately optimize their biocatalytic
performance for dioxane removal. Directed enzyme evolution will be used to mimic
and accelerate the natural evolution in a laboratory setup, creating enzyme
mutants with increased degradation efficiency towards dioxane. The rich
empirical data set provided by directed enzyme evolution can be used to guide a
machine learning process to predict key molecular determinants that link the
protein sequence with its function and suggest new mutations for further
improvement of their catalytic performance. This integrative framework will
advance our fundamental knowledge regarding the biochemistry of bacterial
enzymes and promote the technological transformation to combating the global
challenges caused by emerging contaminants in water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.