* 2203758
* Initiation Strategies From Common Functional Groups in Photocontrolled Polymerizations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2026
* Brett Fors, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 598,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
program in the Division of Chemistry, Brett P. Fors of Cornell University is
developing initiation strategies from common chemical functional groups to
prepare polymers with controlled structures. Polymers, or long chains consisting
of repeating units derived from monomers, are essential and ever-present in our
everyday lives. We encounter them in industrially manufactured plastics,
naturally occurring cellulose in plants, and even plant-derived materials like
cotton. Controlled polymerizations have revolutionized the way the scientific
community makes polymeric materials, enabling the synthesis of well-defined
macromolecules in which the size and functionality can be precisely tailored.
However, controllably grafting polymers from small molecules, biomolecules, or
other polymers, requires the synthesis of initiating species on those molecules.
This typically involves tedious multistep syntheses that are inefficient and
often the limiting factor in the plastics that one can access. This research
will utilize photocatalysis to directly initiate radical polymerizations from
common functional groups. Specifically, polymerization processes that are
directly grafted from either hydridic C–H bonds or carboxylic acids will be
developed and studied. The ability to graft polymers from C–H bonds will offer
an opportunity to circumvent pre-functionalization, holding opportunities in
polymer upcycling and surface modification. Polymer initiation from carboxylic
acids will open an avenue to controlled and direct site-selective formation of
protein-polymer conjugates for potential applications in protein therapeutics.
Additionally, a photocontrolled radical polymerization using a simple
nitroalkane initiator will be examined. The nitroalkane imposes unique
reactivity on the polymer chain end, allowing the pairing of radical and anionic
processes to make well-defined graft polymers. Overall, the initiation
strategies in this research are expected to provide new avenues for the
synthesis of advanced functional polymers. This work will offer a substantial
training opportunity for students in Ithaca, New York that represents a cross-
pollination between polymer chemistry and photocatalysis. It will expand the
existing educational outreach activities to include virtual laboratory tours and
polymer science tutorial videos. These approaches will distribute high-quality
remote STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) educational
materials to schools across the country and extend the impact of the research
beyond the scientific community to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will focus on the development of initiation strategies from common
functional groups in photocontrolled polymerizations. In the first objective,
photocontrolled radical polymerizations initiated selectively from hydridic C-H
bonds will be developed to circumvent challenges of initiator synthesis and
enable the streamlined formation of functional polymers. Model studies will
include dioxane as the hydrogen-atom source and methyl acrylate as the monomer
in reversible addition-fragmentation chain-transfer (RAFT) polymerization. In
the second objective, the methodology will be extended to carboxylic acid-based
initiators. Strong emphasis will be placed on understanding the catalytic cycle
including the oxidative decarboxylation and chain capping steps and the position
of RAFT equilibrium. Lastly, nitroalkane initiators will be explored as
alternatives to conventionally used alkyl bromides in atom transfer radical
polymerization (ATRP). This approach to new chain-end functionality will take
advantage of reversible mesolytic cleavage of a nitroalkane to generate an alkyl
radical and corresponding nitrite anions. This work represents an important new
approach to the initiation of controlled polymerizations, with the potential to
directly graft polymers from a vast array of commodity, specialty, macro, and
biological molecules without pre-functionalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.