* 2203595
* CAS: Advancing the Chemistry and Applications of Azadipyrromethene-based Complexes through Molecular Design and Structure-property Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Genevieve Sauve, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Genevieve Sauve of Case Western Reserve
University is employing innovative chemical design to create low-cost solution-
processable semiconductors with high electron affinity, excellent charge
transport and low optical gap. These features are critical for a variety of
organic electronic and solar energy conversion applications. Organic aromatic
molecules that contain pi-conjugation will be developed with the ability to
manipulate the molecular geometry by chelation with a variety of metals. As a
result of pi-conjugation, these materials will become conductive when one
applies a voltage (like in transistors) or shine light on them (like in
photovoltaic cells). The purpose of metals in these materials is not only to
control the molecular geometry, but also to tune optoelectronic properties,
crystallinity and solution processable properties. The ability to solution-
process these organic semiconductors will impact the printable electronic
industry, providing portable devices and alternatives ways to convert solar
energy to high value electricity. This project, if successful, will provide
access to much needed high-performance optoelectronic materials that are low-
cost and use sustainable chemistries and earth abundant elements. The research
team will broaden participation of women in science through the Flora Stone
Mather Center for Women Mentoring Program at Case Western University. This
program pairs upper-level undergraduate students or advanced doctoral students
with professionals to foster a sense of community and provide professional role
models. Mentors are matched with mentees based on career interests, educational
focus, and mentoring relationship expectations. To broaden participation of
minority students in STEM, local high school students will be recruited through
the American Chemical Society project SEED program. This outreach activity will
place economically disadvantaged students into research laboratories during the
summer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will focus on the development of
novel azadipyrromethene (ADP)-based complexes that have the rare combination of
solution processability, excellent charge transport, absorption in the visible
to NIR spectrum, and low synthetic complexity. In the first objective,
difluorinated naphthyls and trifluoromethyl functionalization of non-planar
zinc(II) complexes of ADP will be explored to further the understanding of how
the dipole moment strength and direction effects self-assembly. This will also
establish generalized guidelines to improve charge transport in non-planar
systems. Organic photovoltaic efficiency will be increased by optimizing the
polymer donor. Planar aza-BODIPY ligands as well as N2O2-type ADP ligands
coordinated with group IV elements will also be researched. The second objective
will focus on the synthesis and studies of novel NIR semiconductors based on
aza-BODIPY ligands by extending pi-conjugation using noncovalent conformational
locks. This research will provide fundamental structure-property relationships
that have the potential to transform the field of pi-conjugated molecules and
polymers, dyes with visible NIR absorption, ADP chemistry, and organic
electronics. The findings could also impact applications including NIR
photodetectors and sensors, bioimaging, solar energy conversion and
photocatalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.