* 2203403
* 3D analysis of collagen alterations in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis by Second Harmonic Generation Excitation and Emission Tomography
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Paul Campagnola, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 04/30/2025
* USD 600,691.00

Collagen is the most abundant protein in mammals and forms the structural basis
for many connective tissues including skin, bone, tendon and also the supporting
matrix for organs including liver, ovaries and pancreas. Collagen is organized
into fibers of approximately 1 micron in diameter and and in the range of 10-200
microns in length. In normal tissues, the collagen organization is highly
regulated with a balance of degradation and synthesis of old and new collagen.
However, in many diseases, including all fibroses, cancers, cardiovascular
disease, and connective tissue disorders, this regulation fails, and for the
purposes of improved diagnostic/prognostic abilities, it is important to
visualize and understand these underlying processes. The sizescales are too
small for conventional clinical imaging modalities, including magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT), and approaches using microscopes are
thus needed to visualize the collagen fibers. This project will develop new and
enhanced tools based on the physical process of Second Harmonic Generation
(SHG), where this method can selectively image collagen fibers with high
sensitivity and specificity. While SHG microscopy has been known for some time,
the tools developed in this project will greatly enhance the capabilities over
state of the art. Validation will be performed by using these new tools to image
human idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), as this disease is characterized by
extensive collagen changes and moreover, has a poor prognosis. Despite increased
collagen deposition being the clinical hallmark of the disease, the resulting
fiber organization changes have not been well explored. These new enhanced SHG
microscopic probes could enable better diagnostic and prognostic purposes as
well as provide new insight into IPF disease origin and progression and also
inform optimal treatment strategies. The new imaging tools can readily be
extended for analogous studies in a wide range of diseases characterized by
abnormal collagen organization. The trainees on the project will be immersed in
a highly interdisciplinary research environment that involves aspects of
fibrosis biology, physics, optical engineering, and image analysis engineering.
Additionally, the research will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The native extracellular matrix (ECM) in many
tissues has complex 3D collagen architecture, where both the structure and
composition are altered in many diseases, including all fibroses, epithelial
cancers, cardiovascular disease, and connective tissue disorders. Current
microscopy and clinical imaging techniques lack either sufficient resolution,
specificity, or sensitivity for effective differentiation between normal and
these diseased states. In this project, new Second Harmonic Generation (SHG)
instrumentation and imaging tools will be developed in the form of both
excitation and emission tomographies to afford better characterization of 3D
collagen structure in tissues. The excitation tomographic approach is critical
as it is necessary to acquire the true 3D collagen fiber architecture which is
not possible by other means due to constraints of the electric dipole
interaction. Here, the acquisition speed will be improved through the
implementation of multifocal excitation through the use of a diffractive optical
element. Additionally, by drawing upon principles of Fourier Ptychography
Microscopy, 3D super-resolution SHG will be attainable for the first time. This
implementation will be coupled with SHG polarization analysis to determine
collagen macro/supramolecular structural aspects. The SHG emission tomographic
instrument combined with the accompanying theoretical phase-matching treatment
will be the first microscope approach that can provide quantitative sub-
resolution fibril size and packing structural information. In contrast, this has
historically has been only afforded by electron microscopy. The SHG emission
tomographic approach has higher throughput (numbers and volume) than TEM and
does not require the complicated sample preparation needed by TEM. Validation
will be performed by using these new tomographic tools to image human idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), a serious lung disease that is characterized by
extensive collagen remodeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.