* 2203301
* Resonance Raman polarization and high-energy excitonic states in semiconductor nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* David Kelley, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2025
* USD 543,733.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Anne Kelley and David Kelley of
the University of California, Merced are exploring how the size, shape, and
composition of semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) influence their interactions
with light. When the size of a semiconductor particle is just a few nanometers,
or about a million times smaller than the period at the end of this sentence, it
interacts with light in unique ways that depend on the nanoparticle's size and
shape. Usually, NCs are assumed to be perfect spheres or cylinders with smooth
surfaces, but in actuality this is not the case. Professors Kelley and Kelley
and their research group will synthesize NCs with a variety of shapes and
compositions to explore how shape and surface imperfections affect the excited
states created by light absorption. Their discoveries could lead to improved
materials for displays such as optical light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), artificial
lighting, and biomedical imaging. This project will contribute to the education
and training for graduate students and postdoctoral scholars and provide
research opportunities for undergraduate students from diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will use the
polarization of resonance Raman (RR) scattering and photoluminescence to examine
the symmetries of the excitons in II-VI semiconductor NCs, particularly the
higher-energy excitons that are difficult to access by other techniques. The
focus will be on pure CdSe and core/shell NCs for which synthetic routes to
producing high-quality materials are well developed and where the extent of
shape anisotropy can be varied systematically. Spectroscopy and spectroscopic
simulations will be performed on NCs of different shapes (quantum dots, cubes,
nanoplatelets, nanorods, and dot-in-rods) and as a function of size, surface
ligands, and annealing of core/shell interfaces. The project will exploit the
polarization properties of RR scattering to probe the local environment of the
excitonic states at different excitonic energies and at interior versus surface
or interface regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.