* 2203033
* SHF:Small: Distributed Key Manager for higher functionality KV Stores
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* A.L. Narasimha Reddy, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2025
* USD 499,971.00

Key-value (KV) stores have been widely deployed in a variety of enterprise
applications such as online retail, big-data analytics, social networks and
others. Key-Value Solid-State Devices provide a key-value interface directly
from devices aiming at lowering software overheads and reducing I/O
amplification for such applications. With the advent of KV devices, new research
is needed to architect higher-layer systems on top of these novel devices. This
project plans to address the research issues to enable wider adoption of these
novel KV devices. (1) Current KV stores rely on replication for providing fault
tolerance. While replication is simple and effective, it incurs high storage
overhead and high write amplification. Developing alternate lower-cost fault-
tolerance options would support wider adoption of KV devices. (2) Many
applications require support for range queries. Providing efficient indexing of
keys at the KV devices could enhance these applications. (3) Currently available
systems interface with block devices, and the semantic information about the KV
records is only retained within the application. This project proposes to
exploit the semantic information at the KV devices to provide additional
functionality and optimizations for a KV store, such as near-storage processing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the following objectives. (1) Design,
develop and evaluate a distributed key manager to rearchitect KV stores on top
of KV devices. (2) Investigate mechanisms for extracting information and
organizing metadata within the distributed key manager. (3) Investigate
mechanisms for efficient processing of stored data near the KV devices. (4)
Explore options for architecting enhanced functionality and interfaces within
the distributed key manager. (5) Investigate cost-benefit tradeoffs in
supporting this new functionality within the distributed key manager. In order
to achieve the project goals, the researchers plan to employ indirection, novel
indexing, intelligent processing near storage and collaboration across devices.
The project is expected to provide new enhancements that can be layered on top
of KV devices and point to new ways of architecting applications to reduce
software overheads. The proposed research is expected to lead to the development
of new ways of utilizing emerging storage devices with new interfaces, enable
advances in near-storage processing applications. These advances will enable
important societal benefits such as big-data processing, facilitating new
scientific achievements and understanding. Educational impact will include
training graduate and undergraduate students with valuable research skills while
advancing the state of the art in computer architecture and distributed storage
systems, contributing to the technology workforce. Minority students will be
involved in the project. The planned industrial collaborations related to the
project are expected to hasten commercial adoption of developed
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.