* 2203308
* Floer Theory, Arc Spaces, and Singularities
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Mark McLean, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2025
* USD 349,981.00

This project is concerned with the development of certain tools for use in two
areas of mathematics: algebraic geometry and symplectic geometry. Algebraic
geometry studies mathematical objects called varieties that are solutions of
equations built from addition and multiplication. Symplectic geometry is the
natural geometry that emerges when one studies Hamilton's equations, which are
equations describing the motion of classical physical systems. A very important
collection of tools, called Floer theory, has been utilized to solve many
problems in both of the subject areas above. However, these tools are hard to
use since the computations involved can be quite difficult. A part of this
project involves finding better computational techniques via an object called
the arc space. Another part of this project is concerned with finding more
refined ways of counting curves inside varieties as well as establishing
efficient foundations for such counts using ideas from symplectic geometry.
Additionally, the PI will help mentor a summer workshop for graduate students as
well as engage with the Stony Brook math summer camp for high school students.
In his role as the graduate director at Stony Brook, the PI will be involved in
many student-centered activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad aim of this
project is to better understand Floer theory and its relationship with
symplectic and algebraic geometry. To this end, the PI will utilize arc spaces
to compute various Floer algebras. The arc space of a variety is the space of
holomorphic maps from a disk to that variety. The PI will show that Floer
cohomology of iterates of the monodromy of an isolated hypersurface singularity
is compactly supported cohomology of jets of certain arcs. Another project is to
compute the full contact homology of any isolated singularity in terms of its
arc space. The PI aims to prove that there is a spectral sequence computing
symplectic cohomology of affine varieties whose pages are also compactly
supported cohomology groups of jets of certain arcs at infinity. The PI, along
with collaborators Abouzaid and Smith, has a project defining Morava K-theoretic
Gromov-Witten invariants in a more efficient way as well as over some other
generalized cohomology theories. This project will also use the new idea of
constructing a global Kuranishi chart from an enlarged moduli space of curves.
Finally in joint work with Ritter, the PI will investigate the crepant
resolution conjecture using Hamiltonian Floer
cohomology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.