* 2203087
* Conference: The 23rd Penn State Plant Biology Symposium: RNA Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Michael Axtell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 02/28/2023
* USD 25,000.00

This award will provide partial support for the 23rd Penn State Plant Biology
Symposium: RNA Biology, to be held May 18-20, 2022 on the Penn State Campus in
College Park. The conference will feature established and emerging leaders in
all aspects of plant RNA biology. This is the continuation of two long-running
conference series, and is expected to draw an international group of attendees.
The conference will include two keynote addresses, 19 invited lectures, and 15
contributed presentations, as well as two poster sessions. Travel awards and
outreach will ensure a diverse group of participants. Students will have
prominent roles at the conference, helping to organize and run the sessions, as
well as presenting their own research. A publication describing findings from
the symposium will be led by graduate student attendees, providing valuable
professional experience and tangible outcomes for their career advancement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNA biology is a fast-moving field that is impacting all
areas of the life sciences. Plants are at the forefront of RNA biology, both as
tractable model systems and in the context of enhancing agricultural
productivity. Pivotal discoveries in RNA structure, gene regulation, and
epigenetics are coming from plant systems. The conference will cover exciting
advances in the areas of small regulatory RNAs, RNA structure, RNA processing,
RNA localization, translational control of gene expression, and epigenetics and
chromatin modifications. This symposium will gather leading investigators, early
stage scientists, trainees, and students in an intimate setting. This will allow
for information sharing on the cutting edge of this field. The comprehensive
plan for recruiting participants will ensure that the gathering will catalyze
collaborations that may not otherwise happen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the Genetic Mechanisms program in the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences and the Plant Genome Research Program in the Division
of Integrative Organismal Systems of the Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.