* 2203353
* Chemical Insights into High Entropy Alloy Nanoparticle Formation and Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Raymond Schaak, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 566,931.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Schaak of Pennsylvania State University
will develop chemical reactions to form nanoparticles of high entropy alloys,
which contain five or more elements. The large number of elements in these
nanoparticles may lead to unique properties that are useful in many
applications, including as catalysts for chemical reactions relevant to clean
energy technologies. Prof. Schaak and his group will develop chemical reactions
for making high entropy alloy nanoparticles in solution and understand how, why,
and when they form. They will also define the chemical reactivity of these
nanoparticles to understand how they transform when exposed to different
reagents. The knowledge gained from this research will lead to future advances
in catalysis and other fields by allowing the properties of high entropy alloys
to be tuned in new ways through control over nanoscopic features. Prof. Schaak
and his group will develop tutorials and learning modules based on unique
aspects of high entropy alloy nanoparticle synthesis and characterization, which
will impact a broad community of students and researchers. Prof. Schaak will
also launch a virtual networking and mentoring initiative for early-career
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most strategies for synthesizing high entropy
alloy nanoparticles require high-temperature heating and rapid cooling of metal
salts loaded onto refractory supports, which provide nanoscale stabilization.
However, these methods do not allow finer control over nanoparticle features
that are well known to influence properties, including size, uniformity, and
shape. Chemical reactions that occur in solution are well suited for
nanoparticle synthesis, but solution routes to high entropy alloys remain
limited, and little is known about how they form, grow, and transform. Prof.
Schaakâ€™s research team will elucidate the pathways by which selected high
entropy alloy nanoparticles form in solution and evaluate how diverse reaction
parameters influence reaction outcomes. There also is limited knowledge about
the chemical reactivity of high entropy alloy nanoparticles, which is important
for using them in applications. The large number of constituent elements in high
entropy alloy nanoparticles is likely to lead to unique synergistic properties,
such as modified selectivity and increased stability in catalysis. Prof. Schaak
and his group will study the reactivity and stability of high entropy alloy
nanoparticles, including in solution with a broad range of inorganic reagents.
These experiments will lead to the formation of new classes of high entropy
alloy nanoparticles and provide foundational knowledge about how application-
relevant features of colloidal high entropy alloy nanoparticles can be
controlled and tuned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.