* 2203318
* EAGER: Superlattice-induced polycrystalline and single-crystalline structures in conjugated polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Zhenan Bao, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2024
* USD 299,998.00

NON-TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer semiconductors are promising for
flexible electronics. However, their charge carrier mobilities are limited by
the highly disordered thin film morphology and trap-dominated charge transport.
Thus, it remains a grand challenge to reduce the disorder and realize the full
potential of conjugated polymers for charge transport. The goal of this project
is to explore a method for epitaxial growth of polymer semiconductor single
crystals with two-dimensional metal halide perovskite (MHP) single crystals as
interacting substrates. If successful, it will allow direct measurement of
intrinsic intra- and interchain charge transport in polymer semiconductors. With
less defects as traps, it may be possible to observe unprecedented charge
transport. This work will provide fundamental insights on conjugated polymer
heteroepitaxial crystal growth. The techniques investigated here may be further
developed in the future for larger-scale assembly and for systematic
investigation of the structure-property relationship for charge transport in
polymer semiconductors. Breaking the disorder-dominated charge transport limit
of conjugated polymers may potentially bring the field to a new level and opens
new applications previously not possible for various optoelectronic and sensing
applications. The materials investigated here can be readily integrated into
teaching, education, and outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer
semiconductors are promising for flexible electronics. However, their charge
carrier mobilities are limited by the highly disordered thin film morphology and
trap-dominated charge transport. Thus, it remains a grand challenge to reduce
the disorder and realize the full potential of conjugated polymers for charge
transport. The goal of this project is to explore a method for epitaxial growth
of polymer semiconductor single crystals with two-dimensional metal halide
perovskite (MHP) single crystals as interacting substrates. If successful, it
will allow direct measurement of intrinsic intra- and interchain charge
transport in polymer semiconductors. With less defects as traps, it may be
possible to observe unprecedented charge transport. Polymer semiconductors will
be prepared to systematically investigate structure property relationships for
single crystalline structure formation and charge transport. Various types of
two-dimensional perovskite single crystals will be used as templates to guide
the assembly of organic semiconducting oligomers and polymers. This work will
provide fundamental insights on conjugated polymer heteroepitaxial crystal
growth. The techniques investigated here may be further developed in the future
for larger-scale assembly and for systematic investigation of the structure-
property relationship for charge transport in polymer semiconductors. Breaking
the disorder-dominated charge transport limit of conjugated polymers may
potentially bring the field to a new level and opens new applications previously
not possible for various optoelectronic and sensing applications. The materials
investigated here can be readily integrated into teaching, education, and
outreach. &lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.