* 2203369
* Ruthenium Coordination Complexes as Tools for Studying Biological Hydrogen Sulfide
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Justin Wilson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2025
* USD 296,540.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Justin J. Wilson of Cornell University is developing new
tools to study the role of the gas hydrogen sulfide in biological settings and
human health. Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is a small gaseous molecule, sometimes
referred to as a gasotransmitter, that is biosynthesized and plays an important
role in regulating a number of processes associated with normal and healthy
cellular function. Because hydrogen sulfide is a gas, its controlled delivery to
biological systems, in vivo, is challenging. Therefore, a deeper understanding
of how this gaseous signaling molecule operates in livings systems is of great
interest. This project will develop new chemical tools that can deliver small,
biologically relevant amounts of hydrogen sulfide to cells upon activation by
selective stimulation. If successful, these tools will enable researchers to
probe the biological relevance and importance of H2S in human health. In
addition, this project will develop new educational activities for high school
STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) teachers. These
activities will be designed to highlight how compounds such as hydrogen sulfide,
that can be toxic, may be present in “natural” or “organic” foods at
sufficiently low concentrations that do not present a health hazard. Rather,
this compound has a critically important role in human biology and these
activities will be designed to educate the public about the fascinating roles of
gasotransmitters that are so critical to heathly human biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Wilson research group at Cornell University will
design new ruthenium-based hydrogen sulfide-releasing molecules as chemical
tools to study the biological roles of the gasotransmitter, hydrogen sulfide
(H2S). Hydrogen sulfide regulates a wide range of critical biological processes
in eukaryotic cells and is known to elicit therapeutic effects for the
management of heart disease, stroke, and cancer. The direct administration of
H2S to biological systems, however, is limited by its gaseous nature and
toxicity at high concentrations. To overcome these challenges, researchers have
developed easily handled compounds that slowly release this gasotransmitter to
study its biological function. These efforts have been focused on organic
compounds that are designed to release hydrogen sulfide via uncontrolled
hydrolysis, blue or ultraviolet light irradiation, oxidation by reactive oxygen
species, enzymatic activity, and reactions with thiols. The objective of this
project is to expand the toolkit of hydrogen sulfide-releasing molecules by
developing compounds based on the transition metal ruthenium. By using ruthenium
coordination complexes, the Wilson team aims to gain access to hydrogen sulfide-
releasing agents that are selectively activated by stimuli that are inaccessible
with conventional organic compounds. Through these efforts, the redox chemistry
and photochemistry of ruthenium coordination compounds will be leveraged to make
hydrogen sulfide donors that are triggered by chemical reduction and light
irradiation, respectively. Lastly, the Wilson group will use these new tools to
understand the mechanisms by which hydrogen sulfide can protect against
ischemia-reperfusion injury in vitro. Collectively, this research will expand
the toolkit of available hydrogen sulfide donors and will demonstrate their
value by applying them to identify new roles for this gasotransmitter in healthy
human biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.