* 2203857
* Chemical Determinants of Complexation in Polyelectrolyte Complexes and Coacervates
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jennifer Laaser, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 424,999.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Jennifer Laaser's research team at
the University of Pittsburgh will investigate how changes in specific chemical
features of charged polymers, such as inclusion of hydrophobic chemical
components that do not want to mix with water, affect the properties of these
materials. Her team will then develop methods for rapidly identifying the
combination of chemical features that will generate the physical properties
needed for any given application. This research will provide new fundamental
insight into how different chemical interactions affect the behavior of charged
polymer mixtures and inform development of new functional materials. Mixing
positively and negatively charged polymers in water leads to formation of
materials with a wide range of uses in medicine and consumer products. These
materials can be either liquid-like or solid-like. Understanding how to control
their solubility and physical properties is important for making materials that
can meet the needs of new applications. This project will provide training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students and serve as the
foundation for both new teaching materials for college courses in polymer
science and outreach activities in the local community. These teaching materials
will incorporate application-oriented activities in which students will apply
fundamental chemistry and physics knowledge to make predictions about real-world
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Laaser's team will investigate how specific
chemical interactions, such as hydrophobic and cation-pi interactions, affect
the properties of polyelectrolyte complexes and coacervates by using post-
polymerization functionalization to synthesize polymer libraries with well-
defined and systematically-varied compositions. The team will use these
libraries to investigate how the presence of hydrophobic and aromatic functional
groups affects the phase behavior, thermodynamics, and viscoelasticity of
complexes of oppositely-charged polymers. The team will then investigate the
role of chemical composition in self-coacervating polyampholytes. The new
fundamental knowledge developed here is expect to enable precisely targeted
properties by of charged-polymer mixtures tailoring the polymer chemistry,
rather than solution conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.