* 2203321
* Collaborative Research: Electron Heat Flux Regulation in the Solar Wind
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Peter Yoon, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 04/30/2025
* USD 426,760.00

Understanding and characterizing fundamental processes that take place within
the heliosphere and throughout the universe is important, and it could be vital
for future human explorations of space, as well as for studying the space
environmental impact on modern civilization. Solar wind is the medium through
which harmful radiation travels. An accurate description of the solar wind is
necessary to understand the propagation of these disturbances from the Sun to
the Earth. This project studies solar wind physics. The work supports training
of a graduate student and post-doctoral researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research aims to address the compelling science question of "what regulates the
solar wind heat flux?" The electrons in the solar wind efficiently conduct heat,
thus carrying the heat flux along the anti-sunward direction. Among physical
processes that regulate the heat flux, whistler heat-flux instabilities are
suggested as being important in the collisionless heat flux regime, while in the
collisional regime, the binary collisions are the classical regulation
mechanism. Both processes compete against the radial expansion effects. The
relative importance of these competing processes, that is, instabilities,
collisions, and expansion, remains an outstanding and thus, together they
constitute a compelling research topic. The project will use the self-consistent
quasilinear theory and kinetic theory of collisions in magnetized plasma to
model the evolution of the waves and electron heat flux in the radially-varying
solar wind. The theory will be driven by inputs from, and tested against, the
well-calibrated measurements of the solar wind electron distribution function
from various spacecraft between 0.3 and 1 AU, as well as proton parameters,
magnetic field and plasma wave data. Such an integrated and collaborative
research on the nature of solar wind electrons and the heat flux they carry will
greatly contribute toward improving our understanding of the fundamental
processes that take place within the heliosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.