* 2203457
* ISCAS 2022 Student Participation Grant
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2022,09/30/2022
* Randall Geiger, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2022
* USD 25,000.00

This proposal requests funding to support a number of US-based students for
attending the 2022 version of the annual IEEE International Symposium on
Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) with the intention of exposing them to the
discipline and to encourage them to pursue careers in emerging issues in the
area of Circuits and Systems research. Participation in this symposium is
considered an important part of the graduate-school experience of students in
computer engineering, providing the opportunity to interact with senior
researchers and to be exposed to leading-edge work in the field. The support
will enable dissemination of scientific knowledge to students who would
otherwise not have the experience. This student-travel support will also
facilitate the development of promising graduate students, and will thus
indirectly also help train the workforce of the future in the important area of
computer engineering. Women and underrepresented groups will be given due
consideration for receiving support through this grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) for more than 50 years
has been the premier conference where emerging trends and novel concepts of
Circuits and Systems research have been explored. The 2022 version of this
annual conference will return to the US soil in Austin, TX after 5 years. The
2022 edition of this conference will address key trends and challenges in the
area and includes Keynote and Plenary Talks, Technical Paper Sessions,
Tutorials, Panels, Special Sessions. The conference committee has set up
adequate evaluation criteria to select qualified students from a pool of
applicants formed via open advertisement. While the requested funds will
primarily be used for supporting graduate students, the committee may also
consider a small number of undergraduate applicants in order to better reach a
diverse population of potential researchers in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.