* 2203763
* Investigation of Protein Transport in Functionalized Polymeric Nanopores
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Xiyun Guan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2025
* USD 371,082.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Xiyun Guan and his research team at the
Illinois Institute of Technology are investigating protein transport in
functionalized polymeric nanopores. Facilitated translocation of molecules
through channels and pores is of fundamental importance for transmembrane
transport in biological systems. The Guan group will focus their research
efforts on investigating the interactions between proteins and synthetic
nanoscale-sized pores fabricated in poly-(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) films,
and developing new strategies to improve the resolution and sensitivity of PET
nanopores and expand their utility. Results from this work have the potential to
advance understanding of PET nanopore systems and provide insight into rigorous
design of PET nanopore stochastic sensors. The proposed research has the
potential to have a broad impact on a variety of areas, such as biomaterials,
biosensing, nanotechnology, and electrochemistry. This project provides unique
research opportunities for graduate, undergraduate and high-school students,
including individuals actively recruited from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project, the Guan team at the Illinois
Institute of Technology aims to address a bottleneck, i.e., poor resolution and
sensitivity, which has limited the utility of PET nanopores as single-molecule
stochastic sensing elements for various applications in the past decade. The
intent of this project is to systematically examine the effects of various
factors on the interaction between proteins and the PET nanopores, and establish
the relationships between the kinetic and thermodynamic properties of proteins
inside a PET nanopore and the pore diameters, pore inner surface functions and
physical conditions. Specific objectives include (i) developing a simple, cost-
effective, easy to create, stable, transportable and reusable functionalized
single-track etched conical-shaped PET nanopore platform for protein
characterization at the single molecule level; (ii) developing a new label-free
strategy to investigate the dynamic structural information (e.g., conformational
change) of biomolecules in real time; (iii) understanding the mechanisms
regarding how various factors affect the kinetic and thermodynamic properties of
protein interactions with the PET nanopores; and (iv) the using existing
physico-chemical models or developing new models, as needed, for nanopore
systems to predict the kinetic and thermodynamic properties of protein transport
in nanopores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.