* 2203559
* Metal-mediated ligand affinity chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Samuel Awuah, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2025
* USD 390,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Samuel G. Awuah of the University of Kentucky (UK) is
developing new chemical tools to study protein function. Chemical reagents that
modify peptides and proteins have led to a wide variety of biomolecule
conjugates that has accelerated our understanding of protein function and the
development of improved therapeutics. Despite the advancement, inherent
limitations of current methods make new chemical tools a necessity for protein
chemical modification and biomolecule manipulation particularly within their
native sites in cells or whole animals. The Awuah research team will apply a
combination of synthetic chemistry and molecular biology to study reactions of
specific amino acids with metal-based compounds towards protein modulation. If
successful, this study will establish fundamental principles that have potential
long-term impact for elucidating complex biological pathways and protein-protein
interactions as well as the design of therapeutics and biocatalysts. The project
has the potential to develop biocompatible metal-mediated reactions that
transfer desirable ligands to intended biological locations irreversibly, thusly
providing a potentially useful tool for scientists across disciplines.
Undergraduate students including those of underrepresented in the STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics) fields are to be introduced to
interdisciplinary science at the interface of inorganic, organic, biological,
and analytical chemistry, to build their confidence and scientific abilities in
an interdisciplinary, discovery-based manner. The ultimate long-term goal is to
greatly leverage the resources at UK to increase the participation and retention
of diverse student groups in STEM fields.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant
efforts are underway to design site-selective chemical conjugation of synthetic
molecules to expand the functional and therapeutic capacity of proteins. The
chemical modification of natural amino acids in peptides and proteins including
protein-protein interactions (PPIs) has proved challenging due to the use of a
bioorthogonally-labeled partner restricted to the N- or C-terminus or the need
for extensive sequence engineering. Importantly, the reactions employed in site-
selective protein conjugation need to be chemoselective, regioselective, and
operational under mild, physiologically relevant conditions. This project aims
to develop metal-mediated cysteine and lysine arylation as an elaborate tool for
bioconjugation, and to utilize this tool to explore structure-function
relationships on select peptides and proteins to establish the intracellular
target potential of this S- and N-arylation strategy. The aims of the proposed
work are to investigate cysteine/lysine arylation with gold-based reagents; to
conduct structure-function studies on proteins and to explore lysine reactivity
and ligandability within the human proteome. If successful, the studies being
undertaken in this project could provide critical solutions to longstanding
problems in chemical biology by introducing powerful methods to selectively
modify peptides and proteins within their native
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.