* 2203235
* A Spatiotemporal Investigation of Heat Wave Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,05/31/2023
* David Keellings, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 05/31/2023
* USD 135,988.00

This project will analyze changes in the spatial and temporal patterns of heat
waves and explore relationships between their size and physical variables, such
as soil moisture and land cover, with the goal of developing predictive models
of heat wave occurrence. Extreme heat is the most common weather-related cause
of death. A better understanding of heat wave size, intensity and drivers of
these characteristics will enhance public safety by identifying where and under
what conditions heat waves are likely to be larger and/or more intense, so that
public health interventions such as warnings, education, and staging of
cooling/hydration stations, etc. can be planned. Novel integration of methods
from climatology and landscape ecology will allow for development of a spatial
database of heat waves that can be used to answer questions, such as how climate
and land-surface change impacts heat wave size and intensity. Broader impacts of
the project include implications for public health, urban planning, and disaster
management and preparedness as well as land management and policy. Through
workshops with heat-health stakeholders the project will promote dissemination
of results and their translation into recommendations for public health and
emergency management. The project has education and outreach activities designed
to promote the inclusion of underrepresented groups and foster increased
minority participation in geography and related STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the critical need to
improve the spatial and temporal modeling of heat waves. Spatial analysis
techniques from the fields of geography, landscape ecology, and climatology will
be combined to examine the spatiotemporal evolution of heat waves. Heat waves
will be tracked daily using a novel combination of simple geometric concepts,
formalized as shape metrics, and a clustering algorithm. Regions within heat
waves where conditions are expected to pose a significant risk to human and
environmental health will be a key focus. Using statistical models and the
concept of critical climate periods these regions will be linked to geophysical
variables including atmospheric and land surface variables that influence
surface air temperature and humidity. The two main research questions are: (1)
what changes can be observed in spatiotemporal characteristics of heat waves,
such as size and shape? and (2) what are the relationships among statistical
characteristics of heat waves (frequency, magnitude, duration), spatial
characteristics of heat waves (size, shape, connectivity), and geophysical
variables? The overarching goal of the project is to develop models to predict
these heat wave characteristics. This research project will focus on heat waves
in the continental United States, with implications for managing heat wave
impacts globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.