* 2203204
* RAPID: Too hot to hold: Effects of unseasonable warming on the Azores nekton community and its keystone taxon
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2023
* Aran Mooney, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 196,083.00

Across the globe it has become increasingly clear that climate change is
influencing animal movement patterns. The daily vertical migration of marine
animals such as squid is often termed “the largest migration on Earth.”
Understanding the impacts of climate change on diel vertical migration is
essential for an understanding of how ocean ecosystems will fare with increasing
temperatures. Central Atlantic waters are ca. 2-3 °C above normal; this unusual
warming event provides a short and urgent window of opportunity to examine how
global warming will affect this huge migration. The movements and energetics of
squid and their larger community are being measured using traditional
oceanographic methods and innovative, new high-resolution sensor and motion
tags. The new data are providing novel insights into how warm temperatures are
affecting movements, migrations, changes in biomass, and other energetic
consequences of behavioral responses to environmental change. The project
leverages an animal group (squid) that links top predators and smaller prey
within a complex trophic web. As a group, squids are one of the world’s largest
fisheries, they are of global food-resource importance, and they are prey for
many commercially important fish species (tuna, swordfish), sea birds and marine
mammals. Predicting climate-driven changes on these animals and their daily
migratory patterns is critical for sustainable resource management. Educational
broader impacts are focused on training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students with emphasis on recruiting participants from
underrepresented groups. The graduate students are gaining international
experience in field work and scientific
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diel vertical migrations are a vital
process of ocean energy exchange that are influenced by the physical
environment, yet few experimental data address how warming affects these
migrations. Central Atlantic waters are ca. 2-3° C above normal, extending
stratified summer conditions and stressful warmer waters into a key time of year
when organisms “expect” greater mixing and cooler oceans. These fleeting warm-
water conditions present a unique opportunity to study how a vertically
migrating nekton community and its key component (squid) are adjusting their
movements to balance energetic demands and expenditures. Building from a suite
of before-and-after data, this project is examining the response of the
migratory community and the squid to unusually warm, physiologically stressful,
ocean conditions during a critical life-stage. The prediction is that the
community and squid are utilizing an energetically costly set of responses,
leading to altered movement patterns and decreased densities of migratory
organisms in surface waters at night. The timeframe of the project coincides
with a period when squid invest in somatic and reproductive growth via
substantial foraging and interactions within the larger nekton community. New
data are being collected to (i) examine movement ecology and energetics by
tagging Loligo forbesii squid near the Azores using novel motion tags and
environmental sensors (ITAGs), (ii) quantify the nekton community and prey layer
density and movements via scientific echosounders in locations overlapping with
tagged animals, (iii) characterize environmental conditions using standard
oceanographic casts, surface satellite data, and the eco-sensor data from
animal-borne tags, and (iv) assess vertical movement and habitat use changes as
seasonality progresses using longer-term, lower resolution, movement tags. The
central hypothesis being tested is that the migratory community is responding to
thermal stress by changing vertical migration patterns and feeding strategies.
These responses have negative consequences on the squid’s energy balance and
lead to higher foraging costs and decreased feeding
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.