* 2203972
* Creating Chirality by Magnetic Assembly of Plasmonic Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Yadong Yin, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2025
* USD 501,641.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Yadong Yin of the University of
California – Riverside is exploring how magnetic fields can drive nanoparticles
to assemble into larger structures that have an inherent “handedness,” analogous
to the left-right mirror symmetry seen in many living organisms. Since
structures with different handedness interact with light differently, this
property is very useful for decoding the fine structures of many important
biomolecules such as nucleic acids and proteins. However, practical applications
in sensing and detection based on this property face significant challenges due
to subtle differences in light-molecule interactions. Professor Yin and his
students are developing hybrid nanoparticles that contain magnetic oxides and
noble metals. The magnetic component allows the hybrid nanoparticles to be
assembled into larger structures with the desired handedness under a magnetic
field. The resulting handedness can be transferred to noble metal components,
exhibiting substantial handedness-dependent optical responses. Their discoveries
could lead to the development of more effective mechanical and chemical sensors
and novel anti-counterfeiting devices. The team is also working on promoting
research-based learning approaches for K-12 and undergraduate students at UCR,
local schools, community colleges, and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on a
theoretical understanding of the inherent chirality of gradient magnetic fields,
Professor Yin and his co-workers are developing magnetic assembly strategies to
create novel plasmonic chiral superstructures. Magnetic/plasmonic hybrid
nanostructures are assembled in magnetic field gradients into superstructures
with substantial and wavelength-controllable chiroptical responses. Hybrid
nanospheres and nanorods will be used as the model building blocks to explore
their interactions with magnetic field gradients, the formation of chiral
superstructures, and the field-responsive chiroptical properties of the
resulting assemblies. In parallel, the team is also exploring the creation of
chirality in uniform magnetic fields by taking advantage of the unique assembly
behaviors of colloidal hybrid nanostructures with specially designed shape
anisotropy. Systematic studies will be carried out to understand how
nanoparticle shape can determine assembly behavior in uniform magnetic fields.
An in-depth understanding of these two systems would allow for further
exploration of nanostructure assembly with specific shape anisotropy in magnetic
field gradients. The ultimate goal is to generate hierarchical superstructures
featuring primary and secondary chirality of different length scales. By taking
advantage of the field-responsive chiroptical properties of these novel chiral
materials, the team is designing systems that have the potential for application
as highly sensitive mechanical sensors, color-switching materials, and even
anti-counterfeiting devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.