* 2203180
* RAPID: Understanding the Interrelationships Among Floods, Building Characteristics, Mold Growth and Occupantsâ€™ Asthma Symptoms in the Aftermath of Hurricane Ida
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Ebrahim Ahmadisharaf, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 129,422.00

Extensive dampness and mold growth in buildings are some of the most common, yet
overlooked indirect impacts of floods, which adversely affect the human
respiratory health, particularly among asthmatic individuals. Threats posed by
these events are anticipated to intensify in the future due to the climate
change, aging infrastructures and rapid population growth, exposing a broader
range of communities to flooding. There is currently a lack of understanding on
interrelationships among flood characteristics and drivers, building and HVAC
system properties (e.g., ventilation rates), human behaviors (e.g., time spent
in homes) and vulnerability to mold growth (e.g., asthma symptoms) in the built
environment, particularly in residential buildings. Hurricane Ida, a
catastrophic event with huge losses, created a rare and unique opportunity to
study these interrelationships since it caused various flood intensity levels
within a short timeframe and affected a wide range of communities with diverse
demographics and asthma prevalence. This Grants for Rapid Response Research
(RAPID) project will collect critical data in the aftermath of Hurricane Ida
across West South Central and Northeastern Regions of the US in order to study
the abovementioned interrelationships in submerged or water-damaged residential
buildings. The collected data and identified relationships can be used to guide
building designers and occupational health scientists to establish resilient
indoor environments, provide a foundation to develop flood-induced mold growth
and asthma risk models, assist public health officials and emergency managers to
have a better understanding of indirect health-related impacts of floods and
support the development of timely strategies for disaster management in
population centers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our interdisciplinary team seeks to
answer the following scientific questions: (1) what flood characteristics and
drivers, building and HVAC system properties and human behaviors cause higher
levels of mold growth in residential buildings? and (2) how does living in
submerged or water-damaged houses after floods affect asthma symptoms among the
residents? To answer these questions, we will investigate the aftermath of
Hurricane Ida and collect critical data required for examining human respiratory
health risks associated with mold growth in water-damaged and submerged wooden
single-family houses located across New Orleans, New York City and Philadelphia
metropolitan areas. We will explore a comprehensive range of factors influencing
mold growth in submerged or water-damaged buildings of two distant regions
affected by a catastrophic hurricane event. A combination of online surveys,
comprehensive questionnaires, home inspections and existing datasets will be
used to collect information on flooding, respiratory health and built
environment. The project will develop a unified empirical database of flood
characteristics and drivers, building and HVAC system properties, human
behaviors, mold growth and asthma symptoms, which is essential to advance the
scientific understanding of flood impacts on human respiratory health in the
built environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.