* 2203214
* Empowering Wireless Networks with Collective Wisdom
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Tianfu Wu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 348,573.00

Artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies are advancing at an
accelerating pace nowadays, expected to reshape modern industry and human
society in a profound way. The prevalence of a massive number of intelligent
devices, supported by high-speed and large-scale connectivity, generates a
wealth of data waiting to be explored and utilized. This great opportunity also
imposes severe challenges to the current networking system and centralized
computing paradigm, as they are not designed to handle the sheer volume and
velocity of data flow and make inference and decisions in a timely manner. In
addition, many applications are hindered due to privacy concerns involved in
data sharing. Federated learning has emerged as a promising solution to address
these challenges, and this project aims to advance the frontiers of knowledge
and practice of federated learning through exploring the multi-faceted tradeoffs
among learning performance, communication efficiency, privacy protection, and
system robustness under a generalized hierarchical and hybrid learning
framework. The proposed research is expected to facilitate the integration of
intelligent services into future wireless systems, provide an attractive
business model to promote collaborative exploitation of sensitive data (for
example in spectrum sharing and personalized medicine), and help establish a
society where data and knowledge can be shared with confidence and safety. It
will naturally help promote cross-disciplinary education and well-rounded
training of future IT workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research problems
tacked in this project are laid out as follows. First, built on promising
preliminary results, this project will further push the limit of algorithmic
performance considering various forms of data heterogeneity and communication
constraints. The study will be extended to personalized and multi-model
settings, transforming data heterogeneity from a challenge to an opportunity.
The privacy of federated learning systems will be further enhanced through the
rigorous framework of differential privacy, and multiple privacy protection
tools will be effectively integrated to provide privacy in depth. During this
process, learning performance, communication efficiency, and system robustness
will be jointly considered, and their intricate relation with privacy will be
examined. This project will culminate when relevant research problems are
studied under a generalized federated learning framework, which further
accommodates peer-to-peer distributed learning and assumes a multi-layer
hierarchical structure. This new learning model can distribute machine learning
across the device-to-edge-to-cloud continuum with flexible adaptation in
learning structure, greatly expanding the application scope of federated
learning in emerging wireless networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.