* 2203740
* RUI: Chemically Modified Enzymes to Control Adsorption on Gold Nanoparticles for Enhanced Structure/Function
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jeremy Driskell, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2025
* USD 376,862.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jeremy Driskell of Illinois State
University is combining chemical synthesis and advanced chemical analysis tools
to study how proteins adsorb onto gold nanoparticles and maintain or enhance
their biological function. The study identifies key interactions between the
protein and nanoparticle that can be exploited to prevent protein unfolding and
to facilitate controlled release from the nanoparticle surface. Professor
Driskell and his students are chemically modifying proteins to install chemical
anchors with high affinity for the gold nanoparticles and measuring the
stability and biological function of the adsorbed protein layer. Their
discoveries could lead to predictive design parameters to form robust and highly
functional protein-nanoparticle probes and broadly impact modern biosensing,
medical imaging, drug delivery, and biocatalysis. This project provides support
for undergraduate students to participate in an immersive research experience to
learn advanced analytical techniques and gain an appreciation for a
multidisciplinary approach to problem solving. Additionally, in collaboration
with the Illinois Research Academy, Dr. Driskell and his supported undergraduate
students provide high school students with an intense, yet supervised, research
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A detailed understanding of the protein-
nanoparticle interface is critical to mitigate structural changes that
negatively impact the function of the adsorbed protein and to leverage
stabilizing interactions that enhance protein function. Surface accessible
thiols on a protein are hypothesized to be primarily responsible for the
adsorption onto gold nanoparticles and the formation of a hard corona; thus, the
ability to precisely control the number of protein thiols can be exploited to
optimize bioconjugate function. A synthetic strategy is proposed to install
thiol functional groups on a series of enzymes. The reaction conditions are
optimized to precisely control the number of thiols, and monitored by high-
resolution mass spectrometry, zeta potential, and Ellman’s reagent. Adsorption
affinity, quantitatively assessed using nanoparticle tracking analysis, and
protein exchange rate, measured via a competitive protein binding, is correlated
with the number of surface accessible thiols presented by the protein.
Additionally, the structure and function of the free and nanoparticle-
immobilized protein is compared to identify any relationship between protein
thiolation and protein structure/function upon adsorption to a nanoparticle.
Successful completion of this project drives the novel design of highly active
and stable protein-AuNP conjugates that is critically needed to advance
bioconjugate-enabled platform technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.