* 2203286
* Pattern-triggered Immunity in Plant-nematode Interaction
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Gitta Coaker, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 06/30/2027
* USD 796,385.00

Plant parasitic nematodes are among the most destructive plant pathogens,
causing an estimated $8 billion annual losses to U. S. growers and nearly $78
billion globally. Plants use their innate immune system to resist infection by
various classes of pathogens. This project will advance our understanding of how
plants recognize and respond to nematode infection. Specifically, the
researchers will identify nematode-derived molecules whose perception activates
plant innate immunity. Because innate immune systems of plants and animals share
remarkable similarity in structural components and activation mechanisms,
successful completion of this project will enhance our understanding of innate
immunity in a broad range of organisms. This project also involves mentoring of
high school and undergraduate students in the research process, and use of
cutting-edge molecular biology tools. A display focusing on themes such as plant
damage caused by nematodes will be created in the Bohart Museum of Entomology,
Davis. The research will strengthen the bioeconomy by laying the groundwork
needed for the development of nematode controls in agricultural
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant parasitic nematodes are highly evolved
obligate parasites that threaten global food security. These nematodes have a
remarkable ability to modify host cells that serve as their only source of
nutrients throughout their life cycle. Plants have evolved an innate immune
system comprising germline-encoded immune receptors capable of recognizing
various classes of pathogens. Plant immune receptors are structurally similar to
their animal counterparts and include membrane-located pathogen-recognition
receptors (PRRs) as well as intracellular nucleotide-binding domain leucine-rich
repeat (NLR) receptors. PRRs recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs) and activate pattern-triggered immunity (PTI), the plant’s first line of
inducible defense. Extensive studies over the past two decades have identified
numerous PAMPs that bind PRRs to activate PTI, providing protection against
infection in a wide range of plants. However, the mechanisms that underlie the
activation of PTI in plant–nematode interactions remain unclear. Building on our
preliminary results, this project aims to identify and characterize nematode-
derived PAMPs whose perception activates PTI in plants. The identification of
such a molecule will provide a powerful means to galvanize research examining
immune perception in plant-animal interactions. Signaling mechanisms linking
activation of PTI to downstream immune signaling will also be investigated. This
project provides a pathway to developing sustainable and broad-spectrum methods
for nematode control in crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.