* 2203582
* RCN: The Herbivory Variability Network: Expanding beyond the mean to embrace higher moments in the ecology and evolution of species interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Philip Hahn, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 09/30/2026
* USD 593,263.00

The importance of variation to the outcomes of interactions between organisms is
understudied. Typically, studies of ecological and evolutionary interactions
focus on means of interaction metrics, although other aspects of distributions
of those metrics, such as variance and skew, can also be critical for ecology
and evolution. The Herbivory Variability Research Coordination Network will
advance science by expanding thinking beyond a focus on means to include the
causes and consequences of variability itself. To illustrate, variation in
temperature and precipitation can be more important than averages to species
performance and interactions. Less appreciated is that variation in the
abundance of one species across space and time can drive the outcome of its
interactions with other species and may even impact evolutionary trajectories.
Understanding the role of variability in the ecology and evolution of species
interactions is becoming increasingly important as climate change and
biodiversity loss lead to increased environmental variability and decreased
biological variability. The network will focus on herbivory because it is an
ecologically and economically important interaction that is easy to measure,
exhibits great variation within and among species, and is a key variable in many
important ecological and evolutionary theories. The foundations developed for
studying variability in herbivory, however, could be extended to better
understand any type of species interactions. Because the causes and consequences
of interaction variability relate to so many disciplines, the network will bring
together ecologists, evolutionary biologists, mathematicians, statisticians,
chemists, and other scientists to collaborate via working groups that tackle
synthesis, theory, data, and education projects.This project will also afford
research training opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will form a
Research Coordination Network (The Herbivory Variability Network, “HerbVar”),
which will bring together scientists from across fields and career stages with
the common goal of understanding the causes and consequences of interaction
variability. This diverse and interdisciplinary network will (1) synthesize
existing data and knowledge on interaction variability and identify directions
for future work; (2) assemble a quantitative toolbox for studying variability in
species interactions; (3) coordinate globally distributed data collection; and
(4) educate students about the importance of variability and how to study
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.