* 2203162
* Investigation on the electrodes applied in the locally enhanced electric field treatment (LEEFT) for water disinfection
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Xing Xie, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

Water disinfection is essential for the protection of public health. Chemical
oxidants such as chlorine, chloramine, ozone, and hydrogen peroxide are widely
utilized in water treatment as disinfectants to deactivate water-borne pathogens
from drinking water sources. Unfortunately, these chemical oxidants can also
react with organic contaminants and dissolved organic matter to generate various
disinfection byproducts such as trihalomethanes and N-nitroso-dimethylamine
which can adversely impact human health due to their toxicity. Locally enhanced
electric field treatment (LEEFT) has emerged as a promising disinfection process
that can deactivate water-borne pathogens without using chemicals. During water
disinfection by LEEFT, a device with two parallel plate electrodes is utilized
to generate a strong electric field that can deactivate microbial pathogens by
disrupting their cell membranes as the water flows through the device. Although
high water disinfection efficiencies have been demonstrated using lab scale
LEEFT devices, electrode durability remains a critical and unresolved challenge
limiting device lifespans to only a few days. The overarching goal of this
project is to improve the durability and lifespan of LEEFT electrodes to enable
their utilization in water disinfection. To advance this goal, the Principal
Investigators propose to study the process and mechanisms of erosion of LEEFT
electrodes with the aim of identifying effective solutions for improving their
durability and lifespans. The successful completion of this research will
benefit society through the generation of new fundamental knowledge and more
durable electrodes materials to advance the development and implementation of
LEEFT-based water disinfection systems. Additional benefits to society will be
achieved through student education and training including the mentoring of a
graduate student at Georgia Tech. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Locally enhanced
electric field treatment (LEEFT) has emerged as a promising physical
disinfection process that utilizes a device with two parallel plate electrodes
to generate a strong electric field that can deactivate water-borne microbial
pathogens. The electrodes of current LEEFT devices are typically functionalized
with nanostructures (e.g., nanowires) to enhance the electric field while
reducing the operational voltage required to achieve the target extents and
rates of pathogen deactivation. The goals of this project are to 1) investigate
the process and mechanisms of erosion of nanowire-functionalized LEET electrodes
and 2) identify and evaluate effective solutions for improving electrode
durability. To advance these goals, the Principal Investigators (PIs) propose to
(1) fabricate and characterize a series of new nanowire-functionalized LEET
electrodes and (2) carry out a systematic investigation of the durability of
these electrodes when there are exposed to different electrochemical and
hydraulic conditions using a combination of imaging and analytic tools to
visualize and quantify electrode erosion and transformations including scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) with energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS),
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). To identify effective solutions for improving
electrode durability, the PIs propose to explore several strategies including 1)
the fabrication of LEET nanowire electrodes using precursor materials that are
less soluble in acids or bind more strongly to the electrode substrates and 2)
the coating of LEET nanowire electrodes with thin protective layers. The
successful completion of this research has the potential for transformative
impact through the generation of new fundamental knowledge and more durable
electrode materials to advance the development of next generation high-
performance LEEFT systems for water disinfection. To implement the education and
outreach activities of the project, the PIs plan to integrate the findings from
this research into existing environmental engineering course modules at Georgia
Tech. In addition, the PI plans to leverage the GIFT (Georgia Intern Fellowship
for Teachers) program at Georgia Tech to provide research training to a local
K-12 teacher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.