* 2203474
* Lipid derived signaling involving chloroplasts
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Jinjie Liu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,076,813.00

The basic knowledge generated under this project will inspire novel strategies
to produce more resilient crop plants that can better cope with a rapidly
changing climate. During millions of years of evolution, plants have established
the ability to live on land in a fluctuating environment, encountering harsh
environmental conditions such as cold, drought, nutrient shortage, pathogen
attack, insect outbreaks, or other abiotic or biotic stresses. To combat these
challenges, sessile plants resourcefully adjust their internal biological
processes, for example by shifting their metabolism from growth to defense. The
project explores the interplay of two plant hormones, abscisic acid (ABA) and
jasmonic acid (JA), in mediating responses to abiotic and biotic stresses,
respectively. The latter originates from membranes in the chloroplast, the place
of plant photosynthesis. This project has the potential to discover novel
signaling molecules and mechanisms and their modifiers, thereby increasing our
understanding of the integration of biotic and abiotic stress responses beyond
our current knowledge about the roles of individual signaling molecules. The
concepts and techniques of this project offer an exciting experimental platform
for studying the integration of biotic and abiotic stress responses that are
readily accessible to scientists at all training levels. The project is ideally
suited for undergraduate student involvement in a classroom setting as well as
through in-lab participation exposing them directly to ongoing real-life
research, while teaching them basic scientific principles. A laboratory course,
namely a Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE), has been
developed to engage students in the isolation of project-relevant plant mutants
and their initial characterization. Individual undergraduate students are
involved in the deeper characterization of specific mutants in a research lab
environment under the direct mentorship of the participating postdoctoral
researchers, who in turn gain mentoring experience preparing them for their next
stages in their careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chloroplasts are dynamic
organelles characterized by an extensive photosynthetic membrane with unique
lipids and often respond to biotic and abiotic stresses by lipid remodeling.
Lipid turnover in response to external cues often involves the release of acyl
groups. These can be further converted into signaling mediators such as JA,
divinyl ethers, aldehydes, or other molecules, which can be perceived by plants
and trigger plant responses. In many instances, lipases with their lipid
hydrolytic activity catalyze the first reaction during lipid remodeling, leading
to the initiation of acyl group recycling, when plants are facing insults such
as nutrient deprivation, cold, or heat. The project is based on recently
characterized plastid lipases, PLIP1-3, from Arabidopsis. Overexpression of the
respective coding sequences redirects the metabolism from growth to defense by
initiating the biosynthesis and overproduction of oxylipin metabolites such as
JA. Loss of PLIP1-3 function triple mutants show sensitivity to ABA. Moreover,
the expression of two of the genes, PLIP2 and PLIP3, is responsive to abiotic
stressors and ABA, suggesting a possible PLIP2,3-based mechanism in connecting
JA and ABA signal transduction pathways in Arabidopsis. Although JA production
is most commonly induced by biotic stressors such as wounding due to herbivorous
insects, and ABA production is mainly increased by abiotic challenges such as
cold, heat, or dehydration, there is increasing evidence of interaction of these
signaling pathways as abiotic stressors can stimulate JA biosynthesis and JA can
affect the sensitivity of the plant to ABA. The long-term goal of the project is
to gain a deeper understanding of how chloroplast membrane lipid-derived signals
are produced, transported, perpetuated, perceived, and integrated with different
signaling pathways in Arabidopsis to coordinate biotic or abiotic stress
responses. To accomplish this goal, the project follows three objectives: 1.
Using a genetic suppressor screen in the PLIP3-OX (PLIP3 overexpression)
background, the entire information chain from the origin of the lipid-based
signal to its perception, transduction, and modification by other signaling
pathways is being queried. 2. Suppressor loci are identified by bulk sequencing
analysis of segregating suppressor mutant populations. 3. Individual suppressor
mutants and affected proteins are characterized for their roles in JA
biosynthesis, signaling, and modification by other signaling pathways. Objective
1 and partially objective 2 are conducted by undergraduate students in a
classroom setting. Objective 3 involves individual undergraduate students under
the mentorship of the participating postdoctoral
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.