* 2203362
* CAS-Biophysical Studies of Lipid Droplets and their Associate Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Wonpil Im, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 329,071.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Drs. Kerney Jebrell Glover, Nathan Wittenberg, and Wonpil Im
from Lehigh University to investigate lipid droplets and the protein oleosin
that is associated with lipid droplets. Lipid droplets are sphere-like entities
found within cells that store energy for future use. Oleosin is a protein that
is important to help stabilize these droplets in plant cells. The goals of this
research are to use biochemical, biophysical, and computational methods better
to study the structure of the oleosin protein and how it maintains the integrity
of lipid droplets. Results from this study will be applied to explore the
potential use of lipid droplets to remove pharmaceutical and personal care
product pollutants from waterways. The project will provide research
opportunities to undergraduate students and will develop a set of laboratory
experiments in a capstone course for students to explore the use of lipid
droplets to absorb environmental toxins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research project is to understand the role that oleosin plays in lipid
droplet homeostasis. Lipid droplets are quasi-spherical cellular entities that
function as reservoirs of high-energy metabolites and consist of a
triacylglycerol core encapsulated by a phospholipid monolayer that is punctuated
extensively with the protein oleosin. The three-dimensional structure of oleosin
will be modeled using a combination of NMR spectroscopy, Förster resonance
energy transfer (FRET)-based fluorescent spectroscopy, and all-atom molecular
dynamics simulations. Additionally, the mechanism by which oleosin prevents the
coalescence of lipid droplets will be investigated through mutational studies.
Finally, the ability of synthetic lipid droplets to act as pollution
sequestration agents for the removal of pharmaceuticals and personal care
products from waterways will be systematically investigated and optimized by
varying the core polarity of the droplet. An important result of the proposed
work will be the development of a ‘Membrane Builder’ extension to the graphical
interface for the CHARMM molecular simulation program. This CHARMM-GUI will be
made freely accessible to researchers who desire to run molecular dynamics
simulations on lipid droplets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.