* 2203527
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and Computational Examination of Biomimetic Peptides Acting as Anti-freeze Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Amir Haji-Akbari, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 162,238.00

This award from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the NSF Division
of Chemistry supports this collaborative project of Profs. Daniel Knopf and
Robert Grubbs at Stony Brook University and Prof. Amir Haji-Akbari at Yale
University to examine and generate organic molecules that can control the
freezing of water. The ability to inhibit ice formation is crucial in critical
technological applications such as preservation of biological materials, food
processing and storage, and preventing ice growth on exposed surfaces such as
those on aircraft and offshore platforms. In nature some organisms can produce
so-called antifreeze proteins (AFPs) to control ice formation allowing their
survival at freezing temperatures. This collaborative project aims to understand
and mimic those AFPs to allow for generation of designed synthetic antifreeze
molecules that can be used in various research areas and industries. This
project will train three graduate and two undergraduate students and provide a
course module for a summer outreach program for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will design AFP mimetics (AFPMs) with
less complex structures than natural AFPs that can lead to practical and cost-
efficient ice inhibitors and anti-icing coatings. A mechanistic understanding of
the antifreezing capability will be sought by translating arrangements of
hydrophilic and hydrophobic amino acid side chains found in ice-binding faces of
β-helical AFPs to peptide-polymer conjugates covering various length scales from
single molecules to arrays of substrate-anchored AFPMs. Ice nucleation and ice
recrystallization inhibition experiments will determine the antifreezing
efficacy of synthesized biomolecules. Theoretical studies using path-sampling
will resolve the water-AFP mimetic interactions on length scales similar to
those in the experiments. This comprehensive approach will determine the
importance of the location and strength of the hydrophobic and hydrophilic
groups and the flexibility of the AFPMs for antifreezing efficacy, thereby
advancing the design of biomimetics that influence ice nucleation and
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.