* 2203731
* GOALI: Developing an Eco-Genomic Framework for Biofilter Operation.
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Ameet Pinto, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2023
* USD 225,824.00

Biofilters use naturally-occurring microorganisms to filter and remove
pollutants in drinking water without the need for disinfectant chemicals.
Adoption of biofiltration is hindered by concerns that undesirable
microorganisms will be released into the drinking water. Overcoming this concern
would help pave the way for wide-scale adoption of this technology. The goal of
this project is to develop a novel framework to control the biofilter microbial
community. Such control will allow management of biofilter performance. To
achieve this goal, the research team will perform laboratory and pilot-scale
experiments using state-of-the-art genomic techniques to enrich beneficial
microorganisms. The project team includes experts in drinking water treatment,
biofiltration, and microbial ecology. The academic and industrial collaboration
will help speed the transition of research to full-scale industrial
implementation.

Biofilter operation is guided by chemical and microbiological endpoints, yet
current biofilter control approaches lack the nuance necessary for managing
microbial communities. Considering this lack of control, it is no surprise that
there is little to no knowledge of how biofilter microbes contribute to
biofilter performance. This knowledge gap coupled with concerns about the
seeding of the water distribution system with biofilter microbes has been a
major stumbling block for the wide-scale industrial adoption of this technology.
To overcome this barrier, this project will develop the novel Eco-Genomic
Framework (EGF) for controlling the biofilter microbial community. This project
focusses on using the EGF to tailor the biofilter microbial community to enhance
post-filtration disinfection efficacy while maintaining biofilter performance.
Preliminary EGF research results suggest that microbial disinfection resistance
is associated with nitrogen species availability and resultant genetic stress
response in biofilter microorganisms. This project will experimentally test EGF
predictions 1) to establish a relationship between nitrogen species availability
and nitrogen stress response exerted by biofilter microbes, 2) quantitatively
link nitrogen stress response and disinfection resistance, and 3) optimize
nitrogen species availability in the biofilter to maximize disinfection efficacy
while minimizing potential deleterious impacts. These objectives will be
accomplished through laboratory- and pilot-scale experiments coupled with state-
of-the-art molecular, bioinformatics, and statistical approaches. The outcomes
of this project will serve as proof of concept for the utility of the novel EGF
for biofilter operation led by academic and industrial researchers with a track
record of productive collaboration, thus increasing the likelihood of successful
EGF development and industrial deployment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.