* 2203810
* SBP: Promoting Structural Understanding of STEM Gender Disparities in Early Childhood
* SBE,SMA
* 11/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Gail Heyman, Amemiya, Jamie
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 51,750.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Science of Broadening Participation program. The goal of the SPRF program is to
prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers
in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Lin Bian at the University of
Chicago, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist
studying STEM gender disparities. This research aims to promote young children’s
structural understanding of gender disparities in science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM). From early in life, children notice gender
disparities and make sense of these patterns. Among the many possible causal
factors, it is critical for children to consider structural causes, such as
historical societal discrimination against girls and women in science. A
structural understanding of gender disparities may enhance girls’ persistence in
male-dominated fields by helping them realize that current gender inequalities
do not simply reflect their group’s lack of ability or interest. Moreover,
structural thinking may encourage children to rectify gender disparities and
include their female peers more in STEM activities. Together, promoting
structural thinking in early childhood may help mitigate later gender
inequalities in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research examines the
cognitive mechanisms and behavioral outcomes of 5- to 7-year-old children’s
structural thinking about STEM gender disparities. The studies will use a
social-cognitive experimental approach in which we will randomize children to
storybooks that provide different levels of structural information about gender
inequality. Aim 1 will examine whether certain types of causal evidence support
structural thinking. Results will provide insight into what types of information
are most effective for educational materials on structural inequality. Aim 2
will include behavioral experiments to test whether structural explanations for
a prior gender inequality in STEM have positive behavioral consequences for
girls’ STEM persistence and children’s inclusion of their female peers. The
findings will inform which outcomes can be improved through structural thinking
interventions, and thus situate a structural thinking approach within broader
efforts to increase women’s representation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.