* 2203856
* Step-wise Assembly of Nanocrystal Synthons for Precision Doping
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Kevin Kittilstved, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 514,921.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Kevin Kittilstved of the University of
Massachusetts Amherst will study the formation of clusters that can be used as
precursors for preparing semiconductor nanocrystals or quantum dots.
Semiconductor nanocrystals are useful for a wide range of optoelectronics,
sensing, and biomedical imaging applications. The deliberate incorporation of a
small amounts of chemical impurities (or dopants) into the semiconductor
nanocrystals introduces tunable functionality and novel properties. This
research aims to gain a thorough understanding of the formation mechanism of
doped semiconductor clusters and to develop a bottom-up synthetic approach to
enable precise control of the dopant level and distribution. This project will
contribute to the preparation of a skilled workforce in STEM fields by training
graduate and undergraduate students in chemical synthesis and characterization
using sophisticated techniques. Members of the Kittilstved group supported by
this funding will be involved in developing and executing a hands-on lab
experience for the Eureka! Program organized by Girls Inc of Holyoke and the
College of Natural Sciences at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. To
facilitate effective collaboration amongst group members, Dr. Kittilstved and
his research team will engage with the various research mentoring and
professional development workshops available through the Graduate School at the
University of Massachusetts Amherst. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of
this project is to establish the chemical parameters that promote precise doping
of targeted impurity ions within magic-size clusters, which are known to be
critical metastable precursors in the synthesis of quantum dots, nanowires, and
nanoplatelets. To achieve this goal, the team led by Dr. Kittilstved will first
examine the effect of transition metal dopants in mononuclear precursors and
multinuclear CdS-based molecular clusters on the formation mechanism of magic-
size clusters and determine what chemical factors promote stepwise assembly of
molecular clusters into a precisely doped magic-size clusters. In conjunction
with the synthetic aspect of this study, this team will use conventional and
state-of-the-art spectroscopic and analytical methods to characterize dopant
speciation in the magic-size clusters, to study the kinetics of magic-size
cluster formation, and to follow the evolution of the electronic structure from
the molecular to the quantum confinement regime. This research strives to
provide fundamental knowledge to inform the rational design of high-quality and
homogeneously doped designer semiconductor nanostructures for spin-based
electronics or optoelectronics applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.