* 2203230
* Collaborative Research: Research: Agency in Chemical Engineering Experiments
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Eva Chi, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 01/31/2026
* USD 199,640.00

The Agency in Chemical Engineering Experiments (ACEE) project will investigate
how different approaches to teaching laboratory experiments impact students’
learning and development as chemical engineers. Laboratory experiments play a
key role in the professional formation of chemical engineers, who use
experiments in industry to develop innovative products, in research to conduct
studies, and in design to gather information and test solutions. Yet at many
institutions, laboratory courses have remained relatively unchanged, and
modernizing efforts have primarily focused on updating equipment, content, and
procedures. There are many different decisions students could make — in other
words, many ways they could have agency — from choosing variables to choosing
which audience to report their results to. This project will evaluate the effect
of giving students differing levels of agency throughout the experiment on the
students’ lab experience. The ACEE project will study chemical engineering
laboratory courses at the University of New Mexico and Montana State University
to better understand how such courses can better support student development
toward independent problem-solving and communication, thus producing graduates
better prepared for the challenges of professional engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary aim of the ACEE project is to extend theory
about how consequential agency functions to support learning and engineering
identity. Past research has connected agency, learning, and identity, and
provided insights into both benefits of and barriers to high-agency learning
experiences. To identify experiences critical to professional formation, the
ACEE Project will investigate students’ agency in four domains: (1) experimental
design prior to doing the lab; (2) experimental oversight during the lab,
including variables to manipulate, data collection frequency, and documentation
during their experiments; (3) data analysis and interpretation; and (4)
communication of their purpose, methods, and conclusions. This project extends
recent research on agency to answer the following research questions: (1) To
what extent do existing laboratory experiments offer students consequential
agency in the four domains (i.e., experimental design, experimental oversight,
data analysis, communication)? (2) To what extent does perceived consequential
agency in the four domains contribute to students’ sense of belonging in
engineering/engineering identity and learning how to design and report
experiments? (3) Across these, are there differences between minoritized and
privileged groups? The team will examine the agency students might have,
differentiating between lower agency and consequential agency, which is defined
as having and taking up opportunities to make decisions that are consequential
to how students learn, to what students learn, and to the learning activities
themselves. In the context of a laboratory experiment, this means that students
can make decisions that affect later steps of their work; for instance, if
students choose some parameters of their experiment, this impacts the data they
collect and the kinds of analysis they will do. The ACEE Project will
investigate existing upper-division, undergraduate laboratory experiments across
two chemical engineering programs which will offer a chance to conduct
comparisons of various existing and common teaching approaches. Students’
opportunities for consequential agency in specific domains will be assessed
using the Agency Levels in Learning Opportunities Tool (ALLOT) while students’
perceptions of agency and engineering identity will be measured using surveys.
By answering the proposed questions, the ACEE Project will extend a more nuanced
understanding of the criticality of agency in the conjoined learning/identity-
formation process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.