* 2203217
* SHF:Small:RUI: Deep Induction Rules for Advanced Data Types
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Patricia Johann, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2025
* USD 613,086.00

A particularly successful approach to software verification is deductive
verification. Deductive verification generates mathematical proof obligations
from software specifications, and, when these proof obligations are met,
software implementations are guaranteed to conform to the specifications from
which they were generated. Generated obligations can be discharged by means of
hand-written mathematical proofs, but modern software is sufficiently complex
that this is often tedious and error-prone, if not outright infeasible.
Increasingly, therefore, proofs are developed in proof assistants like Agda,
Coq, Idris, and Lean. Induction is one of the most important proof techniques
available in such proof assistants. Indeed, almost all non-trivial proofs
involving data types are either proved by induction outright or rely on lemmas
that are. For this reason, every time a new data type is declared in, say, Coq,
an induction rule is automatically generated for it. But because they traverse
only the top layer, rather than all of the layers of a data structure, there are
some properties of data types that should be amenable to induction but that the
structural induction rules generated by Coq cannot prove. Deep induction is a
recently developed generalization of structural induction that does indeed
induct over all of the data present in data structures. This project's novelty
is that it extends deep induction from the algebraic data types (ADTs) and
(truly) nested types typically handled by Coq to their more expressive
generalizations known as generalized ADTs (GADTs) and inductive families (IFs).
The project's impact is thus to make it possible to detect errors and verify
program properties that cannot be expressed just using ADTs and nested types,
but that can be expressed using GADTs and IFs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
involves developing a principled, conceptually simple, uniform, and
comprehensive framework for deep induction for GADTs and IFs, including: i) a
grammar that generates a very general class of GADTs, including all those from
the literature; ii) a novel endofunctor initial-algebra-like semantics for GADTs
that justifies their deep induction rules; iii) translations between GADTs and
IFs that yield similar semantics, and thus deep induction rules, for IFs; and
iv) implemented tools that generate deep induction rules for GADTs and IFs,
together with witnesses that prove them correct, directly from their syntax.
Overall, the project applies state-of-the-art theory to improve state-of-the-art
verification practice. Theoretically, endofunctor initial algebra semantics is
one of the cornerstones of the theory of data types, and is key to deriving even
structural induction rules for them. A particularly compelling feature of the
project's framework for deep induction is that the novel "maximally functorial
interpretations" of GADTs and IFs that serve as its foundation are based on the
same well-established principles as, and indeed specialize to, the standard
initial algebra semantics for ADTs and nested types. It thus delivers a uniform
semantics for ADTs, (truly) nested types, GADTs, and IFs, as well as a uniform
methodology for deriving their deep induction rules. Practically speaking, this
makes it possible to incorporate deep induction for GADTs and IFs into modern
proof assistants by conservatively extending the standard induction techniques
currently in use for ADTs, rather than by developing fundamentally new
approaches. Even incorporating deep induction just for ADTs into existing proof
assistants will significantly extend and improve them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.