* 2203750
* Collaborative Research: Interfacing Students at Three Universities to Elucidate Enzymatic Transformations of Guanide Compounds that Impact Health and the Environment
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Lawrence Wackett, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 05/31/2025
* USD 263,186.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program in the
Division of Chemistry, Drs. Martin St. Maurice from Marquette University,
Lawrence Wackett from University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, and Betsy Martinez-
Vaz from Hamline University are studying the enzymes and metabolic pathways that
microbes use to degrade guanide and biguanide compounds that are commonly found
in fertilizers, fuel propellants and pharmaceuticals. The most notable example
is the biguanide drug metformin, which represents the fourth most prescribed
pharmaceutical on the planet. Metformin is entering wastewater treatment plants
at an alarming rate, with no clear sense of how it is being degraded by
microorganisms. Using detailed studies of enzyme structure/function, chemical
biology, comparative genomics and microbiology, this project aims to identify
the metabolic pathway(s) and characterize the bacterial enzymes responsible for
biodegrading metformin and related guanide and biguanide compounds. This project
is expected to provide useful data to assist scientists and engineers in the
development of better bioremediation practices in municipal water treatment
plants where metformin is a major entering chemical. Further, this project
integrates teaching, mentorship and training across three universities by
incorporating the proposed research directly into graduate training, multi-
institutional undergraduate courses, career mentorship and summer internships,
significantly broadening the impact of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to generate a comprehensive description of the metabolic pathways
that are available naturally for the degradation of guanidinium compounds by
microbial species and their relevant enzymes in wastewater and also in the human
gut environment. The central metabolic artery includes the combined activities
of guanylurea hydrolase, guanidine carboxylase, carboxyguanidine deiminase and
allophanate hydrolase. The molecular contributions to the substrate selectivity
of guanidine carboxylase will be characterized by x-ray crystallography and
enzyme kinetic analysis. The structure and function of the carboxyguanidine
deiminase enzyme will be examined by investigating the mechanism of catalysis,
the functional role of the subunits and the potential for substrate channeling.
The pathway and enzyme(s) responsible for bacterial metformin degradation will
be identified by a combination of enzyme isolation, purification, and
comparative genomics, across potentially relevant bacterial species, followed by
detailed structural and functional characterization of the metformin-degrading
enzyme(s). This project is expected to provide new information on how biguanide
compounds are funneled into biodegradation pathways, providing a gateway to
better understanding of how one important class of nitrogen-rich man-made
compounds, produced across a variety of industrial sectors, is environmentally
degraded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.