* 2203243
* Scalable Three Terminal Memory Devices based on Silicon-Compatible Antiferromagnetic Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Pedram Khalili Amiri, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2025
* USD 359,500.00

Antiferromagnetic materials are magnetically ordered materials without a net
macroscopic magnetization. They offer characteristics that make them promising
for high-density, fast, and low-power nonvolatile memory devices: Firstly, there
is no inter-bit dipole interaction between neighboring bits, making it possible
to place adjacent bits closer together than with ferromagnetic devices.
Secondly, antiferromagnets can potentially have ultrafast write times in the
picosecond range, due to their exchange-dominated dynamics. Thirdly, devices
based on these materials would be immune to tampering by magnetic fields, making
them more secure than ferromagnet-based devices. However, to date, the
realization of these devices has been hindered by the difficulty of electrically
interacting with antiferromagnetic materials, particularly in industry-relevant
materials and at nanoscale dimensions. This project aims to develop three-
terminal antiferromagnetic memory devices with full electrical read and write
capability, based on silicon-compatible antiferromagnetic materials that can be
integrated in existing semiconductor manufacturing processes. This project will
have a significant economic impact by enabling magnetic memories to address
broader markets than currently possible, including dynamic random-access memory
and embedded static random-access memory. In addition to its economic impact,
this project will achieve broader impact through the incorporation of
significant outreach and education activities. This includes outreach to the
broader public through performance arts (science-themed plays and film
screenings) through the Engineering Transdisciplinary Outreach Project in the
Arts at Northwestern University. Research results will also be integrated into a
newly developed course that the PI is teaching at Northwestern University, which
focuses on the fundamentals and applications of magnetism and
spintronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal is in
the device design, modeling, fabrication, and electrical characterization of
three-terminal nonvolatile memory devices. The devices will be primarily based
on noncollinear conductive antiferromagnetic materials that can be sputter-
deposited on silicon substrates (e.g., SnMn3, GaMn3, IrMn3 and related
compounds). The magnetic state will be controlled electrically via current-
induced spin-orbit torque from an adjacent heavy metal. The project aims to
demonstrate scaling of this device operation down to industry-relevant bit
diameters. The project will also integrate the electrical write mechanism with
electrical readout via a tunneling magnetoresistance structure, translating the
Néel vector modification into an electrical resistance change. The separation of
read and write paths allows for higher cycling endurance and separate
optimization of material parameters for the read and write steps. Thermal
budgets, statistical variations induced by device variability, and other effects
of the fabrication process on device characteristics will be investigated. The
developed memory devices will be fully characterized to compare their
performance to existing ferromagnet-based memory devices in terms of write time,
write energy, write error rates (i.e., switching probability), read disturb
rates, and cycling endurance. The device-level tradeoffs (e.g., between speed
and endurance) will be characterized and compared to other existing and emerging
memory technologies. Modeling will be performed both at the micromagnetic level
to aid in device design, and at the physics-based compact model level, to allow
for implementation into circuit design environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.