* 2203621
* Quantum Charge Tunneling through Self-Assembled Monolayers (SAMs)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* George Whitesides, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2026
* USD 800,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor George Whitesides of Harvard
University is studying how electrons are transported through molecules.
Electrons do not move through molecules like they do when they flow through a
metal. Instead, they tunnel through them. Tunneling is a quantum mechanical
behavior that pertains only to very small particles, like electrons. The length
that an electron can tunnel through a molecule, and how efficiently it can do
it, depends on the molecule's structure and the arrangement of the chemical
bonds. However, studying electron tunneling through molecules presents a
significant challenge, as it requires separating two electrodes by a distance
equivalent to the length of a single molecule. Professor Whitesides and his
group will develop new methods for studying quantum tunneling in organic and
bioorganic matter. Their discoveries could lead to new electronic devices and
sensors, as well as a better understanding of molecular catalysis and enzymes
that catalyze electron transport. This highly interdisciplinary project will
also contribute to the development of the future science and technology
workforce by training postdoctoral scholars on how to combine concepts,
techniques, and tools in chemistry, biology, and
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance the liquid eutectic
Gallium-Indium (eGaIn) electrode system for characterizing quantum tunneling in
organic self-assembled monolayers (SAMs). Surface plasmon spectroscopy, x-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and atomic force microscopy (AFM) will be used
to relate structural features to observed electrochemical behavior. The project
aims to correlate rates of tunneling with molecular electronic structure and
understand the effects of applied electric and magnetic fields on tunneling
currents. Studies of bio-relevant SAMs in liquid environments will provide
insights into the role surrounding liquids (and dissolved ions) play in charge
conduction and establish a basis for electron-transfer rates in bioorganic
systems. Studies of SAMs with embedded catalysts will examine the effect of
oriented electric fields on catalytic transformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.