* 2203405
* Solution-State High Field DNP on Large Volume Samples: Sensitivity-Enchanced NMR for the Organic Chemist
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Lucio Frydman, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Dr. Sungsool Wi and his team at the National High
Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) at Florida State University are devising new
methods to advance the capabilities of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy – a leading means of characterizing the structure and dynamics of
organic molecules. Complementary innovative paths are being pursued to
substantially improve the NMR sensitivity and to provide correspondingly lower
limits of detection for a wider range of target molecules. If successful, these
methods would provide new opportunities for characterizing molecules in many
different areas of scientific and industrial applications, including studies of
pharmaceuticals, metabolites in human and animal studies, natural products, food
and polymer additives, and small molecules in natural crude oil. Tools developed
will be made available to local and remote users of NHMFL. This project provides
valuable training opportunities to participating student and postdoctoral
trainees, including summer internships offering hands-on experience for
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Wi team has identified two
independent, complementary approaches to enhancing the NMR signals of arbitrary
molecules. One relies on the use of low-viscosity supercritical solvents to
enable electron-to-nucleus Overhauser-based dynamic nuclear polarization (ODNP).
The other relies on hitherto unknown relaxation processes arising in biradicals
to enable transfers from two J-coupled electrons to one nucleus over a wide
variety of fields and correlation times. The Wi group will leverage these
technological and conceptual breakthroughs to enable sensitivity-enhanced DNP
spectroscopy at high fields on ~100 μL solution-state samples containing dilute
organic molecules, with the aim of potentially creating a new paradigm in
NMR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.