* 2203550
* EAR-PF: What drove localized pyrite formation and taphonomic bias in the fossil record?
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Kelsey Moore, Moore, Kelsey R
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Kelsey Moore has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out research and education activities at Johns Hopkins University under
the mentorship of Professors Emmy Smith and Maya Gomes. For the first 2-3
billion years of Earth history, life was dominated by microbes—simple organisms
like bacteria and early unicellular eukaryotes. This early life played a
fundamental role in in setting life on its evolutionary course and in driving
the evolution of our atmosphere and our planet. To learn about this ancient
life, how it evolved, and how it interacted with the early Earth, we turn to the
fossil record. However, this record is biased because the processes that
facilitate fossilization require special circumstances that often selectively
fossilize only certain organisms. Fossilization of soft, microbial organisms is
especially rare. Luckily, some minerals, like pyrite (FeS2), did preserve a
record of ancient soft-bodied microbes. An important example is an assemblage of
pyritized Obruchevella, cyanobacterial fossils preserved in the Neoproterozoic
Ikiakpuk Formation. These are fossils of photosynthetic bacteria that thrived in
the aftermath of a global glacial event—the Sturtian glaciation of the Snowball
Earth event. But how these cyanobacteria interacted with the environment and
became fossilized remains unclear. This project seeks to better understand the
microbial biosphere in the aftermath of this extreme climatic event, how it
coped with environmental stresses, and how it became fossilized. It is possible
that the cyanobacteria may have played a role in their own fossilization. Modern
cyanobacteria produced sulfur-rich organic compounds in responses to
environmental stresses and these compounds may have contributed to the formation
of pyrite and fossilization in the past. This project will test this hypothesis
by conducting fossilization experiments with living organisms that are similar
to the fossils. These experiments will be paired with in-depth analysis of the
Ikiakpuk Formation and the pyritized fossils that it contains. The aim of this
work is to determine how the organisms became fossilized and what biological and
abiotic factors contributed to pyrite formation. With these insights, it may be
possible to paint a more complete picture of the shallow marine environments
after this global glaciation, the microbial communities that thrived in the
aftermath of the glaciation, and how those microbes evolved and coped with
environmental stresses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While different models for
pyritization have been suggested, little attention has been given to the organic
compounds produced by the organisms being fossilized and their role in sulfur
cycling and iron sulfide nucleation. In particular, the fossils preserved by
pyrite in the Ikiakpuk Formation are similar to modern cyanobacteria that
produce sulfated polysaccharides, organosulfur compounds that may play a key
role in localized pyrite formation. To address this, this project will test the
contribution of organosulfates to local pyritization. Through a combination of
taphonomy experiments and fossil analysis of pyritized fossil assemblages, this
study seeks to determine (1) whether or not organosulfates can be used as a
sulfate source for MSR, (2) whether or not this specific localized sulfate
source can account for localization of pyritization and preferential
preservation of some organisms over others, and (3) whether organosulfur imparts
a characteristic sulfur isotope composition in fossil pyrite. This work will
take place at Johns Hopkins University in collaboration with Professors Emmy
Smith and Maya Gomes, as well as external collaborators Sara Pruss (Smith
College) and Francis Macdonald (University of California at Santa Barbara).
Experiments with modern microbes will help constrain how microbial
biogeochemical makeup, nutrient cycling, and ecological interactions drive
fossilization, taphonomic bias, and sulfur isotope fractionation. Analysis of
analog fossil assemblages then provides a means of applying these findings to
the fossil record and testing hypotheses related to organism diversity and
abundance as they relate to taphonomic bias. These combined analyses also
provide a means of applying sulfur isotope fingerprints to test the application
of a pyritization model that accounts for organosulfates to the rock record. The
combination of experimental taphonomy and fossil analyses provides a novel
approach to gain insight into ancient microbial communities, seawater chemistry,
and the global biosphere beyond the information offered by a single fossil
assemblage. This is especially important as we attempt to understand the
evolution of environments and the biosphere following a global glacial event
like the Sturtian Glaciation. More broadly, this work will inform how we
interpret pyritized fossil assemblages in the rock record during other intervals
in Earth history and reveal what the isotopic signatures can tell us about
ecology, cell physiology, and preservation of organic
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.