* 2203926
* CAS: Magnetic moment-induced adaptability of vertically-oriented 1D electrochemical systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Luisa Whittaker-Brooks, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2025
* USD 467,473.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Luisa Whittaker-Brooks of the University
of Utah is developing one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures for all solid-state
electrochemical energy storage. While electrochemical systems can store
significant amounts of energy, the charging and discharging cycles lead to
irreversible changes in the structure and composition of the electrode and
electrolyte, degrading performance. Dr. Whittaker-Brooks and her students will
use magnetic fields to make electrochemical systems more resistant to
irreversible changes, and their discoveries could lead to batteries that store
more energy and degrade more slowly. The project will also contribute to the
development of a National STEM (science, technology, engineering and
mathematics) workforce by providing research opportunities for postdoctoral
scholars, graduate, and undergraduate students, as well as high school students,
and the team will develop science demonstrations to introduce the concepts and
research results to K-12 students at local schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under
this award, Luisa Whittaker-Brooks at the University of Utah will use non-
covalent interactions to interface TiS2 (electrode) nanowires, Li10GeP2S12
(solid-state electrolyte), and self-doped perylene diimide organic small
molecules (solid-electrolyte interphase modifier and magnetic moment inducers)
to enable the design of magnetic moment-induced (non-metallic) vertically
oriented 1D electrochemical systems where their electrochemical properties can
be tuned under an applied magnetic field. The studies will integrate: (i) the
synthesis and characterization of organic-inorganic heterostructures with
tunable interfaces; (ii) elucidation of the electrochemical properties of
heterostructures with an emphasis on interfacial charge/spin dynamics correlated
to compositional and morphological characteristics; and (iii) the use of
electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and magnetometry to investigate and
control heterogeneities, tailor interphases, and guide ion/charge transport in
model systems under a magnetic field. The studies could shed light on both
materials design and modulation of fundamental physical phenomena by carefully
elucidating the role of interfaces and solid-state crystal chemistries on the
properties of organic-inorganic 1D heterostructures to promote adaptability,
self-healing, control of the complex interphase region formed at dynamic
interfaces, and the elimination of detrimental chemistries to extend the
lifetime and improve the safety of electrochemical energy storage
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.