* 2203519
* Dipolar Correlations in Amphidynamic Crystalline Rotor Arrays
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Miguel Garcia-Garibay, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 390,134.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crystalline solids have all their
molecules aligned in a precise periodic manner. One can visualize molecules
coming together to form ordered chains and layers that stack closely together to
make up a three-dimensional crystal. While it is known that molecules with
arbitrary shapes pack so tight together that they become essentially static, it
has been shown that some molecular shapes and framework architectures result in
the formation of amphidynamic crystals. These relatively new architectures
possess static, crystal-forming elements, linked to molecular units that can be
highly mobile. A class of amphidynamic crystal-former of particular relevance to
this project contains molecules that have the structural elements of a toy
compass: they have needle-like, electric and/or magnetic rotary units shielded
in a box, known as dipoles, which spontaneously reorient to interact with each
other and with strong external magnetic (or electric) fields. These dipole-
dipole interactions, or dipolar correlations, offer opportunities to explore
materials properties based on the ability of individual dipoles to interact with
each other in manners that depend on the way they are organized. While some
ordered dipolar arrays have symmetries where all the dipoles point in the same
direction, others form structures where all the dipoles cancel each other. The
first alignment mode generates macroscopically polar crystals, and the second
one leads to the formation of macroscopically non-polar materials. With support
from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in NSF’s Division of
Materials Research, researchers at the University of California Los Angeles
explore dipolar correlations in amphidynamic crystalline rotor arrays that can
be used for the preparation of addressable polar and non-polar materials. They
investigate whether dipolar correlations, spontaneous polarization and the
collective reorientation of a set of interacting dipoles have the potential for
controlling a number of thermal, optical, and dielectric properties while
providing a promising platform for the development of smart materials, for
example for clean energy or semiconductor applications, and artificial molecular
machines. The effective use of large arrays of macroscopic toy compasses to
illustrate the behavior of molecular dipole arrays is developed into a classroom
demonstration for high school students that can help chemistry instructors
introduce concepts related to molecular structure, intermolecular forces, and
emergent phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research, researchers at the University
of California Los Angeles synthesize crystalline dipolar arrays based on metal
organic frameworks with tetragonal, hexagonal and Kagome lattice architectures
to explore the onset of emergent order. While tetragonal electric dipole arrays
are expected to adopt antiferroelectric order, electric dipoles on hexagonal and
Kagome lattices are expected to adopt ferroelectric alignment and macroscopic
polarization. The structural challenges to surmount go beyond the creation of
the proper lattice symmetry: It is well known that collective dipole
reorientation and efficient polarization require rotational energy barriers to
be smaller than the orientation-dependent dipole-dipole interaction energies,
which need to be greater than thermal energy to avoid individual Brownian
motion. Designing materials that meet these characteristics at ambient
temperature (e.g., 300 K) require amphidynamic crystals with rotary dipoles that
(1) have no intrinsic electronic barriers for rotation, (2) exist in voids that
are greater than their volumes of revolution to avoid steric barriers, and (3)
possess large electric dipole moments that are close enough to interact with
each other without interfering with their rotational motion. The synthesized
structures include metal organic frameworks with Zn and Zr nodes, dense
carboxylate layers to avoid interpenetration, and linkers with large electric
dipole moments plus a set of structures with TEMPO base free radical rotary
arrays. The new materials with “freely” rotating dipoles are investigated to
determine if they have large dielectric constants over a broad range of applied
AC field frequencies as a result of the ability of their dipoles to align with
an external field. Different relaxation properties, however, are observed for
samples where the alignment is ferroelectric or antiferroelectric. While
ferroelectric samples have large susceptibilities and large macroscopic
polarization, samples with antiferroelectric alignment require fields that
overcome their tendency to maintain their antiferroelectric ground state. The
researchers also study the temperature dependence of the dielectric constant,
which is expected to be weak for barrierless dipolar arrays. Research on
amphidynamic crystals based on inertial dipolar arrays provides a unique
opportunity to educate and train talented materials chemists from a wide range
of backgrounds. Through this project, the PI supports women and students from
underprivileged backgrounds in his research group. By maintaining a supportive
and creative environment he thereby fosters careers in materials science and in
science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.