* 2203815
* The Making of Scheduling Standards in the USA
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Janice Fine, Fugiel, Peter J
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF’s Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE)Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Sociology program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Professor Janice Fine at the Rutgers’ School of
Management and Labor Relations, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating the development of labor scheduling
standards in the United States. This research advances scholarly understanding
of the politics of scheduling and the making of labor standards at the state and
local level. It has the potential to benefit policymakers, workers, employers,
and the broader economy by informing future efforts to regulate scheduling and
other labor practices. More effective scheduling standards can improve the
welfare and performance of workers in hourly jobs, promoting social equity as
well as economic competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A growing body of
research in the social, behavioral, and economic sciences documents the
detrimental effects of unstable work schedules on the well-being and economic
security of workers and their families. Labor advocates and policymakers have
sought to remedy this problem by advancing scheduling standards, often called
"Fair Workweek" laws, that establish new worker rights and employer obligations
with respect to how work is allocated and workers compensated for their time.
Yet little prior research has examined how scheduling standards develop—where
they come from, why they take the forms they do, and what accounts for their
success or failure—in the various cities and states to take up the issue. The PI
proposes a comparative study of eight jurisdictions where fair workweek
campaigns occurred between 2014 and 2021, including cases where legislation was
enacted (San Francisco, Seattle, New York City, Oregon, Chicago, and
Philadelphia) and where it was rejected (DC and Minneapolis). This study seeks
to explain the different outcomes of these campaigns in relation to their
institutional context, political coalitions, discursive frames, and mobilizing
tactics. It will draw on 80 in-depth interviews (68 newly conducted plus 12
pilot interviews) with policymakers and stakeholders in each jurisdiction. These
original data will be supplemented with evidence from legislative proceedings,
news reports, social media, and other forms of public discourse related to
scheduling standards. The PI plans to archive and share these data on the
Qualitative Data Repository hosted at Syracuse
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project allows for new insight into
fundamental issues of economic governance. It presents a rare opportunity to
study how private labor practices come to be framed as a social problem in need
of public regulation and how this regulation emerges through a series of state
and local initiatives. The PI develops the concept of “progressive labor
standards” to theorize the targeted coverage yet expansive framing of fair
workweek laws, clarifying the political appeal as well as practical limitations
of this approach to regulation. Through this research, the PI will evaluate the
hypothesis that narrow targeting of specific industries is a necessary condition
for successful scheduling standards. A better understanding of the relation
between the scope and efficacy fair workweek campaigns could inform regulatory
efforts in other policy domains where sectoral differences are important, such
as workplace health and safety and gender
discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.