* 2203625
* CDS&amp;E: Machine-Learning-Driven Methods for Multiobjective and Inverse Design of van-der-Waals-Material-Based Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Jing Guo, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 343,000.00

Advanced semiconductor device technologies play a critical role in computing,
data storage, artificial intelligence (AI), and quantum technologies. Two-
dimensional materials and their heterojunctions form a promising material and
structure platform to develop future semiconductor devices. Despite promising
technological potentials, their technological adoption has been hindered by
several major challenges including predicting device properties accurately and
assessing device performance systematically. In this project, computer-aided
simulation and design capabilities will be developed to address these challenges
by combining AI methods with advanced device simulation. The development of AI-
guided computer simulation methods will facilitate fast and accurate prediction
of device properties, and enable automatic and efficient design of these
nanoscale devices. This project will result in an integrated testbed for
research and education on applications of AI methods in nanoelectronics. The
project will engage and train high school, undergraduate, and graduate students
in the fields of semiconductor and AI technologies. The modeling tools developed
in this project will be disseminated as an open-source online
resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to develop physics-
informed machine-learning (ML) models and device design methods for efficient
and automatic simulation and design of van der Waals (wdW) semiconductor
devices. The proposed research activities include: (1) develop physics-informed
ML models in an embedded or hybrid manner for quantum transport device
simulations, with consideration of improving efficiency, respecting device
physics, and reducing the amount of training data required; (2) develop a multi-
objective optimization method to systematically assess and comprehensively
optimize vdW-material and vdW-heterojunction devices, by simultaneously
considering multiple technologically important device performance metrics; (3)
develop an efficient gradient-based inverse design method that is integrated
with quantum transport device simulations, by applying auto-differentiation
methods over the quantum transport equation and its solution algorithms; (4)
test and apply the methods proposed to simulate and design a set of vdW-material
and vdW-heterojunction devices, which have shown promising logic and memory
device performance. The project develops an essential knowledge base for
harnessing rapidly developing machine learning methods and theory to advance the
modeling, simulation, and design capabilities of nanoelectronic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.