* 2203835
* Pattern-Directed Growth of Metal Chalcogenide Nanostructures on Surfaces: Composition and Structure Control
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Amy Walker, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2025
* USD 480,072.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
(MSN) in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Amy Walker of the University of
Texas at Dallas is developing solution-based chemical synthesis methods to
prepare semiconductor nanowires and other structures on surfaces. Nanowires have
widths measured in nanometers, or millionths of a millimeter. The nanowires in
this study are composed either of a single semiconductor material or two
different semiconductors one inside the other, commonly called a core-shell
structure. Creating electronics and other devices using solution-based synthesis
is more environmentally friendly and cheaper than other methods, but it is
difficult to precisely place solution-grown nanowires on surfaces to form
circuits. Professor Walker and her students are growing semiconductor nanowires
in-place with high precision using a new approach: SEmiconductor Nanowire
Deposition On Micropatterned Substrates, or SENDOM. In this project fundamental
studies will be used to improve and extend SENDOM, and the creation of complex
electronic devices using SENDOM will be demonstrated. These advances could lead
to improvements and cost reductions in technologies ranging from nanoelectronics
to sensing. This, in turn, will have broad and positive societal impact by
improving access to information technology, safety, and environmental
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work simple, robust, and scalable
strategies for the surface-directed in-place growth of complex metal
chalcogenide nanowires and heterostructures are developed. These address key
challenges in the integration of complex nanoassemblies in practical devices. In
SEmiconductor Nanowire Deposition On Micropatterned Substrates (SENDOM), the
controlled growth of nanowires occurs at the interfaces between dissimilar areas
of a multifunctional micropatterned substrate immersed in a suitable solution.
The resulting nanowires can be centimeters long and can follow complex paths. To
date SENDOM has been demonstrated for single semiconductor nanowires. Extensions
of SENDOM will be developed and used to grow in situ metal chalcogenide core-
shell, mixed-metal and mixed-chalcogenide nanowires. To fully exploit and
optimize SENDOM a clear mechanistic understanding is required of how nanowire
growth rate and composition are affected by the chemistry of the chalcogenide
precursor, metal precursor and complexing agent, as well as their interactions
with the patterned surface. This will be addressed by real-time monitoring of
the bath chemistry and multi-technique characterization of the deposited
materials. Finally, fabrication of nanowire-based field-effect transistors and
memories will be demonstrated using SENDOM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.