* 2203613
* Structure and Function of Animal Polyketide Synthases: Bridging Lipid and Polyketide Biology
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Christopher Hill, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2025
* USD 722,998.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program in the
Division of Chemistry, Dr. Eric Schmidt and collaborator Dr. Chris Hill from the
University of Utah investigate molecular principles of how lipids are
biosynthesized in animals and in humans. While the biochemical basis of fatty
acid biosynthesis has long been studied, recently, new families of enzymes that
create chemically diverse lipids have been uncovered in mammalian genomes. These
enzymes address a biosynthetic challenge that bridges the gap between
polyketides, structurally elaborate compounds that are used as pharmaceuticals,
and the structurally simpler major fats found in humans and animals. The
proposed experiments represent a new direction synthetic biology and are
expected to provide a molecular-level understanding these interesting mammalian
polyketide synthase and provide new tools for lipid and polyketide engineering
and discovery. These studies will contribute to high level postdoctoral fellow
training at the interface of chemistry and biology, with specialized training in
the science of cryo-electron microscopy and advanced structural techniques. A
summer training program will introduce high school students to structural
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to understand the
structure and function of novel polyketide synthases found in mammalian biology,
including human biology. The enzymes will be characterized in vitro using
biochemical methods, such as kinetic analysis with different substrates and
cofactors and determination of the structures of the novel products of these
enzymes. Cryo-electron microscopy studies will be applied to determine the
enzyme structures, which will be followed up by hypothesis-guided mutational
analyses. Taken together, these studies will determine the structural principles
underlying mammalian polyketide synthase substrate and product selectivity.
Further, the Schmidt and Hill team will compare the results obtained in the
study of mammalian systems with those from human fatty acid synthase, using the
results to build new lipid derivatives by designed
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.