* 2203860
* Four-Manifolds and Categorification
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Adam Levine, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

This project investigates a variety of questions in low-dimensional topology,
the study of the global shapes of 3- and 4-dimensional spaces and of knots and
surfaces contained within them. This subject lies at the crossroads of many
disparate areas of mathematics, and it has a wide variety of applications
ranging from cosmology (the shape of the universe) to biochemistry (the knotting
of DNA molecules) to mathematical physics. Surprisingly, many problems in low
dimensions are more difficult than their analogues in higher dimensions and
require the use of invariants that go beyond traditional algebraic topology. The
PIâ€™s primary tools come from Heegaard Floer homology and Khovanov homology, two
important packages of invariants developed in the early 2000s. These tools bring
together several different fields of mathematics, including representation
theory, differential geometry, and analysis, and the PI hopes to elucidate the
connections between these different areas and expand the discourse among
researchers in these fields. In addition, the PI is deeply committed to
integrating his research with a passion for education at a variety of levels and
mathematical outreach. He has numerous projects in mind for both undergraduate
and graduate students in the coming years, and he is deeply invested in
expanding the pipeline of women and underrepresented minorities in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research goals of the
project are organized around two main areas. (1) The PI has made numerous
contributions regarding knot concordance, the study of which knots in
3-dimensional space bound smoothly embedded disks in 4 dimensions, along with
various other problems concerning smoothly embedded surfaces in 4-dimensional
manifolds. These questions are deeply tied to the fundamental strangeness of
4-dimensional topology, as compared with higher dimensions. The PI plans to
investigate a number of open questions in this area, including homology slice
knots, piecewise-linear concordance of knots in homology 3-spheres, ribbon
concordance, new constructions of exotic 4-manifolds, and invariants for knotted
2-spheres in 4-dimensional space. (2) The PI also works on questions that are
more internal to the structures of Heegaard Floer homology and Khovanov homology
and the relationship between them. While rather technical, these problems may
have more topological applications down the road. In particular, the PI plans to
investigate some technical issues that arise in the behavior of Heegaard Floer
homology under surgery and to continue a long-standing effort to construct a
spectral sequence between Khovanov homology and knot Floer homology in
characteristic 2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.