* 2203723
* Building a neurolinguistic corpus of naturalistic conversation to investigate second language grammar
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* David Abugaber, Abugaber, David
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Linguistics program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Jonathan Brennan at the University of
Michigan, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist
studying grammar processing mechanisms in native and second (L2) English. Given
the increasing interconnectedness of the world as well as the demonstrated
benefits to individuals of speaking more than one language, improving the way
that second languages are taught is an area of growing importance. A critical
part of this involves understanding the brain mechanisms that are involved when
learners comprehend grammatical structures. However, previous brain research on
language processing has typically involved artificial experimental tasks and
stimuli in isolated laboratory settings that are different from what a typical
language user encounters in the real world. To address this obstacle, our
project harnesses advances in wireless portable brain-scanning and computerized
speech recognition to investigate the grammar processing mechanisms that
underlie naturalistic conversation in native and second language (L2)
English.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electroencephalograms (EEG) will be recorded
during unscripted conversation between native and L2 speaker pairs and
synchronized with transcriptions. The observed data will be compared against
predictions from computer models based on different possible mechanisms of
grammar. Specifically, we test hierarchical models involving nesting of abstract
grammatical structures (e.g., such that a phrase like “in the house” involves
processing “the house” as an internal subunit) versus sequential models based on
how often words co-occur (e.g., “in” is often followed by “the,” “the” is often
followed by “house,” etc.). Objective 1 asks whether previous findings of
hierarchical processing in native speaker audiobook listening also hold for
social interaction. Objective 2 asks whether native and L2 speakers differ in
the hierarchical vs. sequential nature of their processing. Objective 3 turns to
the mechanisms of social context to ask whether neural signatures of grammar
processing are affected by brain-to-brain synchrony. This work informs language
teaching praxis by revealing how the statistics of L2 input affect grammar
learning. It also broadens participation in neuroscience by using a
“crowdsource-able” experiment design with affordable portable brain-scanning
devices. Finally, by building an open-access corpus of natural unscripted
conversation, the audio, neural signals, and transcriptions are available to
future researchers to address other language-related research
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.