* 2203325
* Homological Growth of Groups and Aspherical Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Kevin Schreve, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2025
* USD 178,599.00

Topology is often described as doing geometry on a rubber sheet; spaces are
considered equivalent if one can be transformed into the other without cutting
or gluing. Homology is a fundamental algebraic invariant which can distinguish
spaces up to this equivalence. For instance, the homology of the surface of a
donut is different than that of the surface of a donut hole, and this implies
that turning one of these surfaces into the other requires some cutting or
gluing. Homological invariants are generally difficult to compute, especially in
higher dimensions. Instead of computing them exactly, this project addresses
questions about the growth rate of these invariants for naturally occurring
sequences of spaces. The proposed research concentrates on several long-standing
conjectures on the topology of aspherical manifolds. This project will also
promote graduate and undergraduate education through mentoring and outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the primary goal of the research
program is to study the growth of homological invariants in a residual tower of
finite regular covers of an aspherical complex. The underlying motivation is a
conjecture that linear growth of rational Betti numbers in such a tower should
obstruct these complexes being homotopy equivalent to manifolds of a certain
dimension. The project will explore this conjecture and variants of it with
rational homology replaced with mod p or integral homology. For instance, the PI
plans to construct Gromov hyperbolic groups where the growth rate of Betti
numbers depends on the field of coefficients, and locally CAT(-1), odd-
dimensional manifolds with linear growth of mod p Betti numbers. Such manifolds
will not virtually fiber over a circle, and the PI will further explore the
connection between vanishing homological growth and the Bieri-Neumann-Strebel
invariants (which encode algebraic analogues of such fibering). The PI will also
study manifold thickenings of aspherical complexes where this homological growth
vanishes and other obstructions from coarse geometry arise. This project is
jointly funded by Topology and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.