* 2203718
* GERMINATION EXPANSION: Center for Urban Transformations at Georgia State University
* ENG,EFMA
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Christina Fuller, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 06/30/2025
* USD 499,976.00

This project is funded through the NSF Directorate for Engineering Germination
program, which seeks to foster the development of pedagogical approaches to
increase the ability of academic researchers to formulate research questions and
ideas with potentially transformative outcomes. The goal of this Germination
Expansion project is to develop a Center for Urban Transformations at Georgia
State University expanding on an educational model piloted at Arizona State
University for graduate research and training in urban sustainability (funded
through NSF award 1444755). The pilot successfully equipped graduate students to
collaborate across disciplinary lines (for example, ecology, engineering, and
social science) and with decision-makers, practitioners, and civic groups to
produce novel research agendas, datasets, and questions to solve complex urban
problems. Under the aegis of this Expansion award, the Center for Urban
Transformations at Georgia State University aims to scale the pilot model to the
Greater Atlanta region through strategic partnerships with diverse research-
practice networks. Likely broader impacts of the proposed center are inherent in
its focus on sustainable cities, with a centering on equity and resilience for
under-resourced communities. As a minority-serving institution, Georgia State
University is well-positioned to provide a valuable experience to students from
underrepresented minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
foster the transformative capacities needed to co-produce innovative research
agendas that advance urban sustainability transformations. The central research
question of the project is: What capacities are needed for students,
researchers, practitioners, and community partners to co-produce innovative
research agendas that advance sustainability transformations? In addressing this
research question the project seeks to: increase the motivation and capacity of
the next generation of urban systems scientists to conduct, apply, and
communicate transdisciplinary transformations research; promote co-learning and
collaboration among graduate students, scientists, and decision-makers to
advance urban social-ecological-technological systems transformations; and
ensure the participation of diverse groups of people in the knowledge-
implementation cycle. These goals will be approached through a diverse set of
activities, including: (1) an Urban Transformations Studio interdisciplinary
core course for graduate students in a range of fields related to urban
sustainability; (2) an Urban Transformations Summer School designed to enhance
science communication and interdisciplinary research skills; (3) an Atlanta
Transformative Leader Series to foster relationships with community stakeholders
and thought leaders; (4) mentorship and support through involvement in research-
practitioner networks; and (5) Knowledge Mobilization Showcase events.
Evaluation of progress on the goals, objectives, activities, and student
capacities will be guided by the Value-Engaged, Educative evaluation
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.