* 2203660
* Collaborative Research: Tuning Graphene Nanoribbon Properties with Non-hexagonal Rings
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Colin Nuckolls, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professors Michael F. Crommie of the
University of California at Berkeley and Colin Nuckolls of Columbia University
are developing methods for the fabrication and characterization of new molecular
structures that have the potential to enable faster, smaller, and more energy
efficient electronic devices. Current high technology applications involve
taking relatively large semiconductor crystals and embedding them with
impurities as well as laboriously cutting them into very small shapes to control
how they respond to electrical signals. In contrast, this collaborative research
team will develop synthetic methods to create molecular analogs of wires and
sheets having shapes and sizes that naturally facilitate the flow of electrons
and enable their use as functional components in electronic devices. If
successful, the new molecular materials that result from this project could
eventually provide a cheaper, cleaner, and easier-to-mass-produce alternative to
bulk semiconductors, and could also provide smaller and more efficient
electrical devices (such as transistors, diodes, and solar cells) than is
currently possible. During the course of conducting this project, students and
postdoctoral researchers will gain valuable experience in the synthesis and
characterization of new nanomaterials using cutting edge instrumental
techniques. Several outreach activities targeting K12 students, underrepresented
minorities, and the general public are planned. These include hosting laboratory
open-house days, nanoscience poster sessions, and nanotechnology workshops;
developing TikTok videos that highlight the blend of chemistry and physics that
underpins the proposed research; and participating in several community-service
programs, such as the Transfer to Excellence (TTE) REU, the Bay Area Scientists
Inspiring Students (BASIS), and the Summer Math and Science Honors Academy
(SMASH). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to explore new
graphene nanoribbon (GNR)-based systems whose electronic and magnetic properties
can be tuned by embedding non-hexagonal carbon rings into the GNR backbone.
Chemical synthesis and atomic-scale characterization will be combined to
evaluate the utility of this new technique for controlling the electronic
properties of bottom-up-fabricated GNRs. Chemical synthesis will be performed to
develop new molecular precursors and polymers that enable the growth of GNRs
with engineered ring structures on clean metal substrates via surface self-
assembly and matrix-assisted-deposition (MAD). GNR local electronic and magnetic
properties will be characterized using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and
will be compared to theoretical predictions. Fundamental questions will be
addressed such as the degree to which GNR radical states can be controlled by
inserting simple non-hexagonal ring structures into molecular precursor building
blocks. Competition between hybridization of adjacent radical states and on-site
Coulomb repulsion within GNRs will be tuned with the aim of controlling GNR
magnetic order, something never before accomplished. Other fundamental
properties of new GNR systems will be evaluated, such as energy gaps,
wavefunction distributions, electron hopping amplitudes, and spin-spin
interaction strengths. If successful, this work could help build a foundation
for the use of bottom-up fabricated GNRs as a new nanoelectronics platform. This
could be transformative since GNRs have excellent electronic properties and can
be synthesized in bulk quantities with high-fidelity and atomic precision from
molecular starting materials. This could, in principle, allow quantum device
densities much higher than other material platforms at very low cost, opening
new possibilities for quantum device applications that would be beneficial to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.