* 2203431
* Braids, Surfaces, and Polynomials
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Dan Margalit, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2025
* USD 395,998.00

Polynomials arise in mathematics and science whenever we model a physical,
biological, or chemical system. Surfaces often appear when we study the geometry
of a system; for instance, the set of configurations of a mechanical system or
the underlying template for a large dimensional data set. Braids occur whenever
we have a collection of points moving in a surface, for instance stars and
planets moving within our field of vision, or the roots of polynomials changing
with respect to a parameter. In order to understand these phenomena, it is
essential to study the set of symmetries of a surface, which is also known as
the mapping class group of the surface. This is a beautiful and rich theory that
has been the focus of intense study over the past century. The goal of this
research is to study surfaces, braids, and polynomials, and the interactions of
these objects with each other. One project is to give fast algorithms for
deciding basic properties of elements of the mapping class group. One of the
properties that the algorithm computes is the entropy, which determines the
amount of mixing happening on the surface. In addition to these research goals,
the PI plans to continue work on several projects that have direct impact on
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students. The first is the highly
successful Topology Students Workshop, a conference that serves both as a
research conference in topology for graduate students as well as a professional
development workshop. The second is a free, online, interactive textbook for
basic linear algebra, called Interactive Linear Algebra. The PI also plans to
expand outreach activities to local K-12 classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
will study Thurston maps, braid groups, and mapping class groups. A Thurston map
is a branched cover of the complex plane (or Riemann sphere) over itself, with
finite post-critical set. Many polynomials are Thurston maps. A basic
recognition problem in complex dynamics is: given a Thurston map, is it
equivalent to a polynomial, and if so, which one? In prior work, the PI and his
collaborators gave a new, geometric algorithm to solve this recognition problem.
The PI plans to investigate new, structural descriptions of the universe of such
recognition problems. Specifically, the project will establish a version of the
Bestvina-Handel algorithm from the theory of mapping class groups that is
adapted to the setting of Thurston maps. The project will also provide a version
of the Birman exact sequence (again from the theory of mapping class groups).
One project in the theory of mapping class groups is to give a quadratic time
algorithm that takes as input a product of generators of the mapping class group
and determines the Nielsen-Thurston type of that product. This algorithm also
produces finer information about the product of generators, such as reducing
curves and entropy. A third project is to classify homomorphisms between braid
groups. The main new tool is the theory of totally symmetric sets, developed by
the PI and his collaborators. By classifying these homomorphisms we gain insight
into the relationships between polynomials of different
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.