* 2203937
* Self-Assembly of Collagen-like Octadecamers Based on the Stem Region of C1q and Related Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jeffrey Hartgerink, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2025
* USD 455,159.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jeffrey D. Hartgerink of William Marsh
Rice University is studying self-assembly of small popypeptides that
structurally mimic collagen. Collagen is the most abundant protein in the human
body and plays major roles in wound healing, tissue regeneration, cancer
metastasis and the overall integrity of both soft and hard tissues. This protein
is composed of three polypeptide chains that are wrapped together in a tight
triple helix. Each polypeptide chain consists of sequences of amino acids that
are linked by a particular kind of chemical bond called a peptide bond or link.
When counting all amino acids, collagen is a very large macromolecule with
molecular weight approaching 300,000 g/mol. This size limits the access to
atomic level information about how the triple helix in collagen is assembled and
formed in solution. To circumvent this problem, the research team will focus on
smaller fragments from two different regions in collagen, namely “stem” where
the six triple helices bundle together and the “branches” where the triple
helices splay outward from one another making independent triple helices.
Polypeptides chains from these two regions will be synthesized and thoroughly
characterized using a suite of sophisticated chemical techniques. A
computational algorithm SCEPTTr will be utilized to aid in the experimental
design and identify the minimal sequences of amino acids needed for self-
assembly. Diverse sequences of the branch region have the potential to provide
well folded triple helical systems that will expand understanding of triple
helix stabilization. The stem region, on the other hand, could offer opportunity
to determine the atomic level structure of parallel packed triple helices. The
research will provide an outstanding basis for undergraduate and graduate
educational programs because it is multi-disciplinary in nature and combines
chemical design and synthesis with traditional structural biology and medical
application. Outreach programs will recruit high school students and their
teachers in underserved communities to participate in research over the summer
and develop exciting curriculum that integrates this work. SCEPTTr will be
enhanced and continued to be distributed to the community with the aim to assist
in the design of larger peptide mimics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
focus on the self-assembly of collagen-like octadecamers based on the stem
region of C1q and related Defense Collagens. In the first objective, Collagen
Mimetic Peptides (CMPs) with sequences taken from the branch region of Defense
Collagens will be prepared. These chemically diverse sequences will be selected
for self-assembly studies because they show a tendency to fold. Peptides will be
prepared by solid phase peptide synthesis using standard Fmoc chemistry and
characterized for their thermal stability. Key pairwise interactions will also
be independently examined. This stability data will be used to improve the range
of sequences accurately modeled by SCEPTTr. Biologically derived sequences will
be stabilized through covalent capture and tested for their ability to bind
known ligands of Defense Collagens. In the last objective, CMPs with sequences
taken from the stem region of Defense Collagens will be synthesized and
oligomerized to form octadecamers. A sequence study will be performed to assess
the minimal regions required for octadecamer self-assembly. Well folded
octadecamers will be further characterized by NMR and X-ray crystallography.
Helical bundles will be stabilized by covalent capture and tested for their
ability to bind relevant ligands. This project, if successful, will improve
general understanding of the multi-step, hierarchical self-assembly of collagen
and provide an assessment of CMPs for potential biomedical applications. In
addition to the fundamental biophysical knowledge gained from this structural
investigation, the critical role that Defense Collagens play in the innate
immune response and the overall orchestration of inflammation and immunity will
create many opportunities for preparing novel peptide-based drugs and
biopolymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.