* 2203589
* CAS-Climate: Atomically Resolved Single-Molecule Microscopy of Catalytic Intermediates in CO2 Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Eric Altman, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 473,889.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, a research team led by Professors Udo Schwarz and Eric
Altman at Yale University is using a combination of scanning probe microscopy
(SPM) methods and theory to obtain a detailed picture of the interaction between
carbon monoxide (CO) and the single-molecule catalyst cobalt phthalocyanine
(CoPc). The project will examine how new imaging capabilities can be used to
probe the roles of surface interactions and of substituent groups on the CoPc
catalysts in order to adjust the adsorption strength of CO, a key intermediate
in the reduction and conversion of CO2 to methanol. This research is designed to
address issues related to climate change by contributing to the creation of a
reliable, carbon-neutral energy supply based on the catalytic conversion of CO2
into methanol. Methanol is a commodity chemical that can readily be stored and
transported and either used as fuel directly or converted into other liquid
fuels such as diesel, gasoline, or aviation kerosene. Recent work at Yale has
identified immobilized CoPc molecules as a promising platform for promoting
selective CO2 conversion to methanol, but little is known about how to optimize
the activity, selectivity, and stability of this potential catalyst. Therefore,
the research team is developing a chemical imaging approach to show how
individual CoPc molecules interact with the supporting surface and with key
intermediate species in the CO2 reduction process, including CO. The work has
the potential to provide new methods for optimizing these interactions by tuning
substituent groups on the CoPc catalyst. The detailed molecular-level
understanding that emerges from this effort could lead to improvements in
electrocatalytic performance. In addition to broader impacts related to the
mitigation of climate change, the project will provide advanced student training
opportunities in state-of-the-art imaging methods and supports outreach
activities for the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reduction of CO2
involves generating CO as an intermediate, therefore efficient methanol
production requires that CO binding to the cobalt atom in CoPc is neither too
strong nor too weak. Although CO binding can likely be fine-tuned by changing
the catalyst structure, current spectroscopic methods are inadequate for
understanding CO binding strength on a single-molecule basis. To alleviate this
shortcoming, the research team uses advanced scanning probe microscopy methods
to locally measure the CO adsorption strength as a function of catalyst
structure and support, with the goal of enabling rational catalyst optimization.
Key to the project are recent advances in SPM that provide the ability to image
molecular structures, distinguish bond orders, and measure small distortions in
molecular structures as electrons are injected into molecules using non-contact
atomic force microscopy (NC-AFM) with CO-functionalized tips. For complementary
information, results from NC-AFM imaging are combined with the measurement of
local work function variations obtained by Kelvin probe microscopy and the
electronic structure obtained through tunneling spectroscopy, which allow
mapping of the positions of the highest occupied and lowest unoccupied molecular
orbitals, total charge densities, and electron transfer to and from the support.
As the third major element of this effort, scanning tunneling microscopy-based
action spectroscopy should enable quantification on an individual molecule basis
of how supports, adsorption sites and geometries, and substituent groups
influence the adsorption of reactive intermediates in the conversion of CO2 to
liquid fuels&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.