* 2203830
* Functional nanotubes from self-assembling bis-urea macrocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Linda Shimizu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2025
* USD 470,150.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Linda Shimizu of the University of South
Carolina will make precise nanoscale assemblies of donut shaped building blocks
known as bis-urea macrocycles, which stack to make straw like structures or
nanotubes. Different strategies will be tested to control the formation of
nanotubular structures of between 3 and 150 macrocyclic monomers. Precise
control of assemblies in this size has the potential to open new opportunities
to understand chemical, light driven and electron transfer processes that occur
over these length scales. The advanced knowledge acquired may have important
implications in photochemistry, molecular electronics, photooxidations, and
photodynamic therapy. The educational activities include engaging graduate
students, undergraduates, and high school students in interdisciplinary research
to prepare them to answer challenging scientific questions encountered in the
twenty-first century workforce. The program will also continue an outreach
program to local K-12 schools to highlight careers in science and to showcase
the scientific method by engaging students in chemistry
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Linda Shimizu’s team will focus
on self-limiting growth of urea macrocycles to afford a series of nano
assemblies with low length dispersity. Specifically, different strategies,
include frustrating their growth by attaching large groups on the exterior of
the macrocycles, using chain stopping monomers to halt the growth of the
nanotubes, and adding templates to stabilize stacks of specific size, will be
employed to precisely guide the formation of nanotubular structures of between
three and 150 macrocyclic monomers. The goal is to create a series of ‘molecular
rulers’ between 1 to 50 nanometers in length to bridge the gap between single
molecules and supramolecular polymers. The new nanometer molecular ‘rulers’ will
be applied to probe how nano assembly length, morphology, and dynamics impact
photoinduced electron transfer and the formation of reactive oxygen species. In
addition, prior experimental results in crystals will be compiled as an initial
data set to derive physical models using machine learning. The goal is to
identify key parameters that lead to radical cation/anion formation upon
irradiation of organized triphenylamine macrocycles and related
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.