* 2203513
* Advancing Native Mass Spectrometry for Probing Protein Equilibria and Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Matthew Bush, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 05/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and partial co-funding from the Molecular Biophysics Program in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Professor Bush and his group at
the University of Washington are developing new methods to characterize the
equilibria and dynamics of proteins and their complexes. State-of-the-art
techniques developed in the Bush lab enable new measurements of the interactions
and structures of biological molecules in solution. These measurements address
unmet needs for the rapid characterization of biological molecules and
biological materials, including their assembly, heterogeneity, quality, and
similarity. These measurements will help answer important questions about the
structure and function of proteins and protein complexes, important for
understanding the molecular basis for human diseases and developing
therapeutics. Undergraduate and graduate students working in the Bush lab are
trained in measurement science, data science, and technical communication, which
prepares them for success in a wide variety of careers that increase the
economic competitiveness of the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
unmet needs for measurements that probe protein equilibria and dynamics in
solution, especially methods that are fast, sensitive, and tolerant of sample
heterogeneity. Native ion mobility (IM) mass spectrometry (MS) has many
attributes that make it well positioned to fulfill these unmet needs. However,
concerns about differences between equilibrium properties determined using
solution- and gas-phase measurements reduces the confidence in native IM-MS data
and inhibits the broader adoption of these technologies. This research addresses
these unmet needs by (1) using, characterizing, and controlling the
electrochemically-induced changes to samples concomitant with electrospray
ionization; (2) facilitating the broader adoption of negative ion electrospray
ionization for native IM-MS; and (3) using variable-temperature electrospray
ionization to rapidly characterize thermal profiles and the extent to which
protein folding is reversible. This in turn will enable native IM-MS to play a
greater role in biophysics and structural biology, which will contribute to new
knowledge of biological processes and cures for human disease. Undergraduate
student researchers are developing and fabricating low-cost instruments to
expand access to chemical measurements and broaden participation in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.