* 2203767
* Socioecological System Dynamics and the Emergence of Inequality
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Kurt Wilson, Wilson, Kurt M
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSFâ€™s Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF program
is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific
careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards
involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists
and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to
promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific
community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its research
programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Simon Brewer
at the University of Utah, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist investigating the environmental and social interactions that
drive material inequality in the inter-mountain west of North America. This
project will help develop a joint geographical and anthropological research
program evaluating how environmental change and human economic decisions
influence each other to impact resource inequality among humans. Two key
longstanding social science questions are investigated here: 1) what drivers of
material inequality are most influential and 2) given that inequality is a
complex system, how can we effectively evaluate the importance of drivers over
space and time. Answering these questions helps inform us about how severe
inequality came to be and predict how it may change in the future. By applying
new techniques, informed by existing theory, linking archaeological and paleo-
environmental data this research will provide new, replicable, approaches to
understanding the relative importance of causes for inequality that may be
applied around the world and used for future prediction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While inequality is multi-causal, much research has linked
economic intensification, expending greater effort to obtain more returns from
the same spatial area, and privatization with increasing inequality. However,
intensification and privatization themselves are multi-causal, influenced by the
interactions between the environment and human population size. Via
implementation of a series of novel sub-models within an Approximate Bayesian
Computation (ABC) simulation approach, this research addresses these
complexities by generating quantitative, empirical evaluations of how the
interactions of environmental change and productivity, population density,
subsistence economy intensification (SEI), and privatization influence the
emergence of material inequality within a dynamic system. Crucially, this work
will estimate which causes have the greatest impact on inequality, providing
guidance for future research. Employing four case studies, this project also
generates new cross-comparative data on inequality, SEI, and the scope of
privatization within the inter-mountain west of North America. This new data
will be freely available to future researchers and capable of contributing to
research on not only the emergence of inequality but also on territoriality,
settlement, conflict, dietary change, the impacts of environmental change, and
more. Further, this project will a) provision new, replicable, methods for
understanding environmental and social factor influences on SEI, privatization,
and inequality, and b) advance methods to push the study of inequality beyond
current limitations. This research will also train one postdoctoral fellow in
advanced quantitative analysis and paleoenvironmental modeling, furthering his
pursuit of a tenure-track position. This work will also recruit students who are
underrepresented in STEM to provide data collection and analysis training,
introduction to the archaeology and paleoclimate of the project area, and
opportunities for student research projects. To reach a broader public, project
results will be shared through the Natural History Museum of Utah (NHMU) via
presentations and interactive Scientist in the Spotlight programs as well as
turned into a teaching toolkit for the NHMU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.