* 2203667
* Acquisition of Low Background High-Resolution Gamma Spectrometers for Research and Undergraduate Student Training
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* James Kaste, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 248,592.00

This grant will support the acquisition of two high-resolution gamma
spectrometers for faculty research and undergraduate student training in the
Geology Department and Environmental Science Program at William &amp; Mary. The
spectrometers will enable precise measurements of naturally occurring gamma-
emitting radionuclides from isotopes of uranium, thorium, potassium, and radium
present in rocks and sediments worldwide, along with artificial isotopes of
cesium and plutonium in air, soil, and sediment generated by the nuclear fuel
and weapons processes. Importantly, these instruments will give us the
capability to date sedimentary layers and thus be used to help reconstruct
regional pollution histories and better understand Arctic climate change.
Because sample preparation is simple for gamma spectrometry and the instruments
have long-term stability, the spectrometers will be used to support
undergraduate research training, augment undergraduate courses and laboratory
exercises, and will provide educational outreach opportunities to faculty and
students at Thomas Nelson Community College, a local two-year community
college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The gamma spectrometers acquired will support a
wide range of ongoing research projects at William &amp; Mary and the Virginia
Institute of Marine Sciences by providing precise ultra-trace measurements of
radionuclide concentrations in environmental samples. The design of the
instrumentation allows for optionally analyzing a single sample from opposing
sides using both detectors and timed measurements to record coincident and anti-
coincident pulses, a configuration that that will enable greatly improved
detection limits for cosmogenic 22Na and for radionuclide measurements on small
sample masses required by sediment core research. A major goal of existing
research at William &amp; Mary is to generate high-resolution reconstructions of
past climate changes in the Pleistocene and Holocene at sites in Greenland,
Norway, Svalbard, and the Faroe Islands from lake sediment cores. A second
project that will be supported by this equipment acquisition aims to better
understand radon sources in the Atlantic Coastal Plain, an area previously
believed to have low uranium and radon potential. This instrumentation will
support these two projects, and broadly equip researchers at William &amp; Mary
and the Virginia Institute of Marine Sciences studying salt marsh development
and sedimentation in continental margin environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.