* 2203485
* Workshop/Collaborative Research: The Frontiers of Artificial Intelligence-Empowered Methods and Solutions to Urban Transportation Challenges
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Yinhai Wang, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 11/30/2023
* USD 45,091.00

This grant provides funds for a workshop that will gather researchers from
transportation, computer science, and other relevant disciplines to explore the
frontiers of artificial intelligence (AI)-empowered methods and solutions and
future research directions to address urban transportation challenges. With the
quickly growing quantity and variety of transportation data, AI technologies
combined with other analytical methods have demonstrated a great potential to
improve scientific understandings, transformative informed decisions, and
innovative, proactive management solutions for urban transportation
infrastructure systems, although significant challenges are also recognized.
This workshop will attract distinguished experts from academia, industry, and
government agencies to work together to identify the tremendous research and
educational needs and challenges in developing AI-empowered methods and
solutions to urban transportation challenges, and further stimulate
transformative research and education activities in both transportation and AI
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop includes two phases. Phase I has
four podium sessions, one round-table discussion session, and one work session
to investigate and document the potential and challenges of leveraging AI-
empowered methods for fundamental urban transportation management research.
Topics to discuss include traffic sensing and monitoring, congestion mitigation,
shared mobility, user behavior, and associated equity and environmental issues.
Phase II dedicates three podium sessions and one round-table discussion session
to explore new education and training needs and directions for developing future
workforce and responding to this big technology revolution in transportation.
Overall, this two-phase workshop will produce a highly desired strategic
research and education agenda for transportation and AI research communities to
jointly develop AI-empowered methods and solutions to address urban
transportation challenges and their workforce development
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.