* 2203165
* EAGER: Coronas, Hydrogen Oxides, and Ozone Produced in the Atmosphere by Trees under Thunderstorms and by High Voltage Electrical Power Transmission Lines
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* William Brune, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 294,554.00

This EAGER project is focused on an investigation of the potential for
atmospheric corona to generate atmospheric oxidants, such as hydroxyl (OH),
hydroperoxyl (HO2), and ozone (O3). Coronas occur frequently in the atmosphere
near sources of enhanced electric fields, such as high voltage electrical power
transmission lines (HVTLs) and thunderstorms. Trees under nearby thunderstorms
are a potentially important source of coronas and thus atmospheric oxidants.
Atmospheric oxidants can affect the lifetime of air pollutants and greenhouse
gases, thereby influencing air quality and climate change. This research could
lead to a new understanding of global atmospheric oxidation and its past and
future trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main questions that this research will
address are: (1) How many coronas (producing OH, HO2, and O3) are generated as a
thunderstorm passes over a forest? (2) How many branches on a tree and what
fraction of trees in a forest under a thunderstorm produce coronas? (3) How do
coronas vary on each branch with time and environmental conditions? (4) How many
coronas (producing OH, HO2, and O3) are generated on high voltage transmission
lines (HVTLs) of different voltages (50 kV to 500 kV typical) for different
environmental conditions? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project meets the
qualification for an EAGER award due to its nature as a high-risk, high-reward
project. These will be the first measurements that define the amounts and the
distributions of coronas and corona-generated OH and HO2 by HVTLs and on trees
during thunderstorms. It is possible that there may be no or very little
detectable coronas on trees during thunderstorms. In addition, there are several
optical, mechanical, electronic, and operational design issues that must be
resolved before successful measurements can be made. However, preliminary data
suggest a significant probability that this research will be successful in
providing key information about corona emissions related to thunderstorms and
HVTLs that may lead to important new knowledge about the oxidative capacity of
the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.