* 2203134
* Static and dynamic spin properties in antiferromagnetic thin films and heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Jing Shi, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 05/31/2025
* USD 336,728.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Spintronics is an active field of research
which looks at utilizing the spin of electrons for use in information processing
and storage technology. Antiferromagnetic materials are important for speeding
up development of spintronics because they have unique advantages over
ferromagnetic materials due to their much faster spin precession dynamics and
absence of spontaneous magnetic moment. However, research on antiferromagnetic
thin films has been scarce. In this project, the research team comprising world
leading experts elucidates important and challenging fundamental issues in thin
film antiferromagnetic materials using high-quality materials synthesis,
detection of antiferromagnetic spin currents using terahertz sources,
antiferromagnetic domain imaging, and terahertz time-domain spectroscopy. The
experimental work is complemented with theory calculations. Graduate and
undergraduate students including those from including underrepresented
minorities are trained with the knowledge and skills needed for future
employment in the information technology industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Due to the orders of
magnitude faster spin dynamics and absence of spontaneous magnetic moment, thin
film antiferromagnets present tremendous challenges in obtaining basic static
and dynamic spin properties such as the antiferromagnetic ordering temperature,
magnetic anisotropy, magnon dispersion, and damping parameter. In this research,
a number of challenging issues are tackled using a suite of powerful
capabilities developed in-house or available through collaborations with the
world leading experts. These include epitaxial thin film and heterostructure
growth by pulsed laser deposition and molecular beam epitaxy, detection of
antiferromagnetic spin currents via spin Seebeck effect and terahertz spin
pumping using both solid state terahertz source and free-electron laser,
antiferromagnetic domain imaging with scanning diamond Nitrogen Vacancy-center
microscope, and terahertz time-domain spectroscopy. The antiferromagnetic
material properties are analyzed in conjunction with density functional theory.
Specifically, the project follows the following plan: (1) grow high-quality
epitaxial antiferromagnetic thin films and heterostructures for accurately
determining and efficiently manipulating the antiferromagnetic order parameter;
(2) generate, transport, and electrically detect spin currents in
antiferromagnetic thin films both thermally and resonantly to obtain anisotropy,
exchange strength, and damping parameters; and (3) control antiferromagnetic
static and dynamic properties via growth and external
stimuli.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.