* 2203284
* Development of Absolute Quantitative Protein Footprinting Mass Spectrometry (aqPFMS) for Probing Protein 3D Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Hao Chen, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2025
* USD 390,000.00

With support from Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Hao Chen at the New Jersey Institute of Technology and
collaborator Xiaolin Cheng from Ohio State University are working to develop and
refine a novel approach called absolute quantitative protein footprinting mass
spectrometry (aqPFMS) to probe protein 3D structures. Proteins play key roles as
selective catalysts, receptors, antibodies and transporters in living systems,
among other roles. Elucidation of dynamic protein three-dimensional (3D)
structure in solution is highly challenging but critical for characterizing
protein structure-function relationships at the molecular level. If successful,
the quantitative protein footprinting MS tool under development here, in
combination with protein modeling and simulation, can have high impact on
structural biology and drug discovery. The team is engaging undergraduates in
the research and reaching out to even younger students to acquaint them with
this important interdisciplinary STEM (science, technology, engineering and
mathematics) area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aqPFMS technique is based on
coupling a protein footprinting method with absolute peptide quantitation using
coulometric mass spectrometry (CMS). Specifically, a footprinter reagent
carrying an electrochemical tag reacts with proteins or protein complexes so
that electrochemical oxidation can provide absolute quantitation of footprinted
peptides resulting from enzymatic digestion of footprinted proteins without
using normal standards. Combined with MS, the approach can provide quantitative
analysis of solvent-accessible surface areas (SASAs) of different protein
residues in any given conformation, thus providing greatly increased information
for protein 3D structures. Structural modeling via all-atom molecular dynamics
(MD) simulation can then be used to determine protein 3D conformations and
conformational changes in solution with high confidence. If successful, this
work has potential for broad scientific impact given the importance of protein
dynamics and the challenge of experimentally capturing the three dimensional
structures of multiple conformations of a single protein
experimentally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.