* 2203581
* CDS&amp;E: Physics Guided Super-Resolution for Turbulent Transport
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Peyman Givi, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 07/31/2025
* USD 499,624.00

Understanding turbulence phenomenon is the key to our comprehension of many
natural and technological processes in diverse fields including aerodynamics,
hydraulics, astrophysics, propulsion, atmospherics, oceanics, medicine, and many
others. Direct numerical simulation (DNS) of the Navier-Stokes equations is
widely recognized as the prime computational methodology with the highest
fidelity in capturing the intricacies of turbulent transport. However, the wide
range of flow's time and length scales makes DNS prohibitively expensive and
time consuming even on the most advanced high-performance supercomputers. Large
eddy simulation (LES), which filters out the very small-scale transport,
provides an alternative with a much lower computational cost. However, the data
generated by LES are of lower accuracy due to the associated filtering, and it
is desirable to reconstruct the original true DNS results from the filtered LES
data. This proposal describes a novel physics-guided machine learning
methodology to perform this reconstruction with a systematic assessment for a
variety of turbulent flows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance
the restoration of high-fidelity turbulent flows via three innovations. First, a
new physics-guided deep learning model will be developed to reconstruct fine-
resolution turbulent flow data from low-resolution coarse LES data. Additional
physical learning objectives and relationships will be incorporated to ensure
that the proposed model meets specific physical constraints associated with the
flow, and it is also generalizable for large scale simulations. Second, a novel
deep learning scheme will be developed and utilized to construct high fidelity
super-resolution fields from the most reliable LES that can be currently
conducted. Finally, a wide variety of turbulent flows will be considered,
ranging from passive incompressible, to chemically reactive compressible for
comprehensive model assessments. This project has the potential to improve our
capability to efficiently simulate high-resolution turbulent flows in many
scientific and engineering domains. The research results will be used to develop
materials for both undergraduate and graduate education, and for K-12
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.