* 2203612
* CAS: Single-Molecule Specific Voltammetry: Quantifying Reaction Products of Electrocatalysis at Single Particle Level
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Wei-Shun Chang, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2025
* USD 416,682.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement &amp; Imaging program, and partial
co-funding from programs in Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry;
Chemical Catalysis; and Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms – A,
Professor Chang and his research team at the University of Massachusetts -
Dartmouth are developing a new chemical analysis tool to enable detailed studies
of electrochemical reaction mechanisms associated with conversion of carbon
dioxide (CO2) to less harmful materials, a promising route to mitigating climate
change. Specifically, the team is developing a novel technique, named single-
molecule specific (SMS) voltammetry, to probe the performance of single
nanoparticles as catalysts for CO2 reduction reactions. The research may advance
our ability to design electrocatalysts that efficiently convert CO2 into fuels.
A broad educational program introduces this research to undergraduate and
graduate students, and includes outreach activities to inspire underrepresented
K-12 students in South Massachusetts to pursue careers in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a platform to quantify
the products of electrochemical CO2 reduction on single nanoparticles, and to
reveal the morphology-dependent performance and stability of
nanoelectrocatalysts. Carbon monoxide (CO) formation on Au nanoparticles is used
as a model reaction. Specifically, the research is addressing the following
objectives: (1) Demonstration of the ability of single-molecule specific (SMS)
voltammetry to quantify CO formation on single nanoparticles. (2) Assessment of
the effects of interparticle and intraparticle heterogeneity on CO formation on
single electrocatalysts. (3) Identification of the mechanism(s) of nanoparticle
instability during CO2 reduction reactions. By combining SMS voltammetry, super-
resolution fluorescence, and electron microscopies, the research team is
striving to elucidate the morphology-dependent activity for CO formation and
super-resolve the facet-dependent active sites on single nanoelectrocatalysts.
Improved understanding of the correlation between the activity and stability of
electrocatalysts and the origin of nanoparticle instability in CO2 reduction are
parallel aims. These research efforts are envisioned to provide the knowledge
needed for rational design of nanoelectrocatalysts for CO2 reduction
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.