* 2203242
* Spintronic Spectrum Analyzer and Limiter based on Tunable Magnetic Tunnel Junction Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Pedram Khalili Amiri, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 05/31/2025
* USD 359,879.00

Radio-frequency interference is a key challenge in civilian and military
communication networks, and is exacerbated by the fast-growing number of
interconnected devices in the Internet of Things. This project will address this
challenge by developing a spintronic spectrum analyzer, based on arrays of
electrically tunable magnetic microwave detectors (i.e., spin diodes) with high
sensitivity, to achieve fast and programmable frequency analysis and filtering
of high-power radio-frequency signals. The proposed circuit combines the speed
of existing hardware-based frequency-selective limiters with the
reconfigurability of software approaches, since detection frequencies and their
corresponding threshold levels can be reconfigured electrically. In addition to
its potential economic impact, this project will also achieve broader impact
through the incorporation of significant outreach and education activities.
Research results will be integrated into a newly developed course that is taught
by the PI at Northwestern University, focusing on Magnetism and
Spintronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed
spectrum analyzer and limiter derives from a novel spintronic device structure
with very high detection sensitivity and electrically tunable characteristics.
The magnetic sensing layer is engineered to exhibit large voltage-controlled
magnetic anisotropy due to interfacial spin-orbit interaction, which boosts its
sensitivity to radio-frequency signals. The device will be biased by a direct
electric current creating auto-oscillations of the magnetization, the frequency
of which is determined by the current value. A large rectified voltage is then
achieved due to locking of the auto-oscillations to the input radio-frequency
signal. Thus, the detection frequency of the diode can be tuned by an electric
current. This project will develop arrays of spin diode detectors, each
electrically tuned to a particular frequency, to perform real-time spectral
analysis of incoming signals. Output voltages of the diodes will be compared
with a reference voltage (which itself can be reconfigured in the field),
thereby detecting signals exceeding the power limit. The result is a compact,
electrically tunable and fast frequency-selective limiter that overcomes the
limitations of existing solutions. The proposed devices can be monolithically
integrated into back-end-of-line silicon manufacturing, using volume
manufacturing equipment and processes that have already been developed for
magnetic memory and sensor products, and are available from major
foundries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.