* 2203633
* Chemical Control of Spin and Carrier Dynamics in 2D Hybrid Metal Halide Double Perovskites
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jin Zhang, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2025
* USD 526,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Jin Zhang and Yuan Ping of
University of California-Santa Cruz are using a combination of advanced laser
techniques and computational methods to investigate the behavior of electron
spin in two-dimensional (2D) perovskites. Electron spin is a fundamental quantum
mechanical property that is used in many emerging quantum-based technologies.
Most of these applications require long spin state lifetimes and precise
control. However, the spin lifetime is usually short, just a millionth of a
millionth of a second, and it is challenging to manipulate. Professors Zhang and
Ping and their students will create 2D perovskites with long spin lifetimes and
use ultrafast lasers to control their electron spin. Their discoveries could
impact technologies from nanoelectronics to quantum information technologies.
The project also provides training opportunities for future scientists in
advanced instrumentation and computation, and through their "The Sun,
Spectroscopy, and Santa Cruz" open lab events, they will introduce their
research findings to local high school students and teachers to enhance public
awareness about science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will combine
experimental and theoretical efforts to study spin and carrier relaxation in
novel 2D lead-free metal halide double perovskites. The project will
systematically study the impact of fundamental factors, such as structure,
composition, surface, and chiral component, on the electron spin lifetime, as
well as associated processes such as electron-electron and electron-phonon
scattering. The materials will be synthesized with rational structural and
compositional control, and carefully characterized using a combination of time-
resolved photoluminescence, transmission electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction
and spectroscopy, Raman and infrared spectroscopy, as well ultrafast pump-probe
methods. Computational studies based on a state-of-the-art first principles open
quantum dynamics method will explore the scattering processes affecting electron
spin lifetime to guide and corroborate experimental
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.