* 2203361
* Redox-active biopyrrin pigments in supramolecular radical assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Elisa Tomat, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 481,428.00

With the joint support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program and the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry, Elisa
Tomat and coworkers at the University of Arizona will employ biologically
inspired pigments to synthesize novel supramolecular assemblies with highly
tunable magnetic and photophysical properties. This project aims to gain a
fundamental understanding of the resulting electronic structures and properties
to inform future design of supramolecular materials for potential applications
such as in light-harvesting devices, photocatalytic systems, and molecular
magnets. This project will offer multidisciplinary training to undergraduate and
graduate students as well as opportunities for professional growth through
university-wide mentoring programs and outreach activities. Dr. Tomat leads the
Chemistry Discovery program at the University of Arizona, that provides a
framework for college students to discuss scientific concepts with middle-school
students, promoting the pursuit science while highlighting the importance of
science communication at all levels. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research
project will incorporate redox-active biopyrrin ligands in a versatile new class
of supramolecular radical assemblies. Biopyrrins, such as tripyrrindiones and
dipyrrindiones, feature the scaffolds of biologically occurring heme metabolites
as stable platforms for delocalized ligand-based radicals in transition metal
complexes. These oligopyrrolic frameworks also present tunable spectroscopic and
electrochemical profiles and engage in non-covalent interactions, such as pi-
stacking and hydrogen bonding, in solution and in the solid state. Synthetic
manipulations of these multi-functional building blocks are expected to allow
control of the spin-spin interactions in multi-centered radical and redox-
responsive assemblies. Investigations by spectroscopic, electrochemical,
crystallographic, and computational methods will provide for a detailed
multifaceted characterization of these tunable molecular assemblies and likely
enhance fundamental understanding of how to design, build and manipulate
supramolecular radical assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.