* 2203148
* Enhancing the Use of Institutional Data in Projects to Support Low-Income, High-Achieving Students in STEM: Capacity-Building Workshops
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Amy Chan Hilton, University of Southern Indiana
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2023
* USD 49,928.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by empowering STEM faculty members to
strengthen their efforts to support low-income STEM students with academic
ability and potential to degree completion. The significance of this project is
its approach to enhancing the ability and confidence of STEM faculty members in
developing data-informed projects through virtual workshops. A total of 50-70
participants from diverse backgrounds and institution types, including faculty
members with limited or no S-STEM project experience, will be recruited to two
workshop cohorts using intentional strategies. The workshop sessions will
incorporate inquiry, reflection, hands-on activities, and practical strategies
from experts to help participants meet S-STEM proposal requirements and
strengthen their proposal development process. The workshop may serve as a
framework for capacity building for faculty in analyzing institutional data
related to activities that support low-income STEM students with academic
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. In particular, the project goal is to increase
faculty investigators’ knowledge of and confidence in using data to better
understand their institution’s STEM enrollment, retention, and graduation
landscape for low-income students with academic potential and ability. The
project scope will support participants in both project development and
practical perspectives. The approach intentionally scaffolds participants’
knowledge and skills development through Transparency in Learning and Teaching
strategies and practices that foster an inclusive and equity-focused learning
environment. The objectives are to: 1) develop and implement a virtual workshop
series focused on the data components of an S-STEM proposal; 2) recruit diverse
S-STEM teams to one of two offerings of the workshop series; 3) increase
participants’ knowledge of and confidence in using institutional data to inform
their project; and 4) evaluate the project to identify the needs of faculty PIs
in using institutional data and inform improvements in faculty development
workshops. For the workshop participants, the anticipated outcomes will include:
a) articulating awareness of how institutional data can be used to inform their
project plans and goals; b) developing a plan for using student data in project
development, including identifying relevant questions that the student data can
help answer in alignment with the NSF S-STEM program; and c) drafting a plan for
requesting student data from their Institutional Research and Financial Aid
offices including IRB considerations. The formative and summative evaluation
will identify challenges and promising strategies for gathering, analyzing, and
using student data in different institutional contexts. The workshop materials,
approach, and results will be disseminated through STEM education conferences
and networks and shared with NSF S-STEM leadership. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.