* 2203541
* AF: Small: New Tools to Analyze Random Walks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Shayan Gharan, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Random walks and Markov chains are one of the most practical algorithmic
primitives with applications all over the science. They are primarily used in
many modern technological industries, such as search engines or social networks.
At the same time, they serve as the first method of choice in simulating and
testing almost any scientific theory in nearly all areas of science. Despite
significant research over the last few decades, there are still many unresolved
questions on the behavior of random walks. The primary goal of this proposal is
to better understand these stochastic processes; in particular, the aim is to
understand how long it takes for the distribution of the random walker to be
almost independent of the starting position.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last
five years, the analysis of Markov chains has been revolutionized based on the
close connections built with the theory of high dimensional expanders. As a
consequence, many problems that have been left open for decades got resolved. In
this project, the investigator aims to exploit this new machinery in other
(theoretical) computer science areas where random walks appear. In particular,
the investigator plans to use them in designing approximation algorithms for
foundational optimization problems, study generalizations of spanning trees in
high dimensional combinatorics, etc. The goal of the project is to shed new
light on our understanding of random walks, which can benefit a wide range of
scientific communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.