* 2203512
* CAS: Using Narrow Bands and Competing Exchange Interactions as Design Principles for Magnetocaloric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Fazel Fallah Tafti, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 250,526.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Magnetism is a fascinating physical phenomenon
that enables modern sensing, logic, and memory devices. A less-known application
for magnetism is in refrigeration technology through a mechanism called the
magnetocaloric effect (MCE). A magnetic refrigerator is similar to regular
refrigerators, except instead of compressing and decompressing a gas, it
magnetizes and demagnetizes a solid-state material to create the low
temperatures. Materials used for this application typically contain rare-earth
elements, for example gadolinium and erbium. These elements are expansive and
not readily available, especially not in the U.S.. With this project, supported
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program and the Condensed Mater
Physics program in the Division of Materials Research, the researchers at Boston
College synthesize new materials that exhibit a giant MCE and contain only
minimal amounts of rare-earth elements. In this way the project addresses
critical aspects of sustainability by eliminating ozone-depleting refrigeration
gases and by minimizing the rare-earth content of the magnetocaloric materials.
This interdisciplinary project provides a platform for training the next
generation of materials scientists with a deep understanding of quantum
chemistry and the ability to implement fundamental science to solve the societal
problems. Additionally, this project provides career workshops for pre-college
students from underrepresented minorities in the Boston area and research
opportunities for students from Jackson State University, a
HBCU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Materials that exhibit
a magnetocaloric effect (MCE), the reversible change of temperature as a
function of magnetic field, provides a sustainable platform for refrigeration
technology. Magnetic refrigerators are considerably less energy consuming than
regular refrigerators and do not rely on ozone-depleting gases. The main
challenge for commercializing magnetic refrigerators is the lack of materials
with a large refrigeration capacity (RC) made from earth-abundant elements.
Giant magnetocaloric materials are either made from toxic elements such as P and
As, or have a large rare-earth content. As such, the synthesis of giant
magnetocaloric materials that are non-toxic and have little to no rare-earth
content is a critical aspect of sustainability. With this support researchers
from Boston College synthesize such materials by following two chemical design
principles, namely narrow bandwidths and competing exchange interactions. The
narrow bandwidth leads to a magnetic transition near room temperature via the
Stoner mechanism. The critical temperature can be adjusted by doping, which
enables the design of multi-stage magnetic refrigerators. Competing exchange
interactions broaden the magnetic transition and lead to entropy release over a
wide temperature range, thereby enhancing RC. The investigated materials have
less than ten per cent rare-earth content. The researchers elucidate novel
mechanisms for achieving giant MCE in these materials with minimal rare-earth
content. The educational impacts include the engagement of underrepresented
students in a multidisciplinary research project between chemistry and physics
as well as training students at the national high-magnetic field and synchrotron
radiation facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.