* 2203858
* Collaborative Research: Designing Functional Bioligand Interfaces for Multifunctional Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Anatoly Frenkel, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2025
* USD 299,616.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Marc Knecht of the University
of Miami and Anatoly Frenkel of Stony Brook University are combining chemical
synthesis techniques and advanced analysis tools such as x-ray absorption
spectroscopy to characterize the structure and function of specially designed
peptides that are bonded to the surfaces of nanoparticles. Nanoparticles are
typically produced with a focus on the activity of the metals, but peptides on
the surface could provide new functions. This is a challenging problem as these
molecules must bind to the nanoparticle surface which can cause both the metal
atoms and peptides to lose their activity. Professors Knecht, Frenkel, and their
students are using bio-inspired design to tackle this challenge and use peptides
that can bind nanoparticles and still present unique chemical activities. Their
discoveries could lead to new methods to prepare multifunctional materials where
the properties of the molecules on the particle surface can work in concert with
those of the metal. In addition, this research is the basis of educational
modules using nanotechnology and catalysis to engage with Miami-Dade County
School students in a multi-generational model from middle to high
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transformational properties of inorganic
nanomaterials focus almost exclusively on the inorganic core where the ligand
shell is typically limited to controlling stability and solubility. While these
are two key factors in nanoparticle structure-property relationships, a great
expansion of properties could be achieved by engendering the ligand shell with
additional functionalities that work synergistically with the inorganic
component to achieve a multifunctional platform. Professors Knecht and Frenkel
hypothesize that multidomain peptides can be designed to generate functional
nanoparticle ligand interfaces that operate synergistically with the inorganic
core. Such peptides are being designed with materials binding domains and a
second functional domain presented to solution. In this arrangement, the
properties of the functional domain of the peptide are being tuned to operate in
tandem with the properties of the nanoparticle inorganic core, resulting in a
multifunctional platform. Catalytic processes and advanced spectroscopic methods
are being used to monitor these properties and functions of the newly developed
materials. Particular attention is being paid to the composition of both the
nanoparticle inorganic core and the bio-ligand surface layer to increase the
multifunctional nature of the materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.