* 2203580
* DMREF: Physics-Informed Meta-Learning for Design of Complex Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2026
* Stephen Baek, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 02/28/2026
* USD 1,739,367.00

A wide class of high-performance materials, including solid-solid composites,
porous solids, foams, biological materials, and additively manufactured
materials, have complex microstructures, which play a dominant role in
determining their properties and performance. This multidisciplinary project
will harness recent innovations in artificial intelligence (AI) to establish a
novel design and discovery cycle for complex materials that will dramatically
accelerate material innovations. This project will create new methodologies
through which human materials scientists and AI will collaborate to discover
optimal microstructural designs of such complex materials for targeted
properties and performance. There are enormous opportunities and needs for
innovating next-generation materials through performance-driven design and
optimization of microstructures. The AI-driven design framework in this
Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) project
will pioneer these opportunities through fundamental breakthroughs in AI for the
design and machine learning of complex physical processes and will have a high
impact on the materials research community. The success of this project will
lead to an AI-driven material microstructure design framework, resulting in
significant speedup in the discovery process of complex materials, as well as
reducing the cost and labor required for material innovation by saving
unnecessary “cut-and-try” experiments. The AI-driven design framework will be
easily scalable and applicable to a broad range of complex materials, which will
benefit the design and manufacturing of functional materials, polymers,
composites, biomaterials, etc. By providing an accelerated discovery cycle and
reduced costs, the design framework will benefit the US industry and, thereby,
contribute to the safety, national security, and technological advancement of
society. As such, this project will significantly accelerate and advance the
discovery and development of materials with desirable properties and
functionality, which aligns with the vision of the DMREF program. This project
will benefit from collaboration with the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL)
with respect to the manufacturing process of energetic materials and the testing
and validation of design outputs of the AI framework against experimental
results. Student training and workforce development will be enhanced through
opportunities provided through AFRL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the archetype of a
complex material with strong microstructural influence on performance, this
project will focus on energetic materials (EM), which cover the wide swathe of
propellants, pyrotechnics, and explosives—key components in a variety of
propulsion and munition systems critical to the US Military, as well as to
civilian applications (construction, transportation, mining, etc.). This project
will build new methods and tools to close the loop for AI-driven design of EMs,
guiding the overall process of characterization, design/optimization,
fabrication, experimentation, and validation through advanced machine cognition
and game-theoretical decision making. To accomplish this goal, the investigators
will first construct the space of a wide range of CHNO EMs and assemble machine
learning datasets. The investigators will then develop a novel physics-informed
meta-learning (PIML) framework for complex materials such as EMs, which will
then be validated with experimental data and real uses cases. While achieving
these, this project will make fundamental, use-inspired breakthroughs in AI-
related to topics such as small data learning, weakly-supervised learning, and
explainable AI, serving both the materials and AI communities. This project will
benefit from collaboration with the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) with
respect to the manufacturing process of energetic materials and the testing and
validation of design outputs of the AI framework against experimental results.
Student training and workforce development will be enhanced through
opportunities provided through AFRL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by NSF’s the Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) Division of
Materials Research (DMR) Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our
Future (DMREF) program, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR), the Engineering (ENG) division of Civil, Mechanical, and
Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI), and the Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE) division of Information and Intelligent Systems
(IIS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.