* 2203236
* FET: III: Small: Innovative Approaches for Bias Correction and Systems-level Analysis in Integrated Multi-omics Data
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Juli Petereit, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Identifying impacted pathways and changes in biological processes is important
because it provides insights into the biology underlying conditions beyond the
detection of differentially expressed genes. Because of the importance of such
analysis, more than 100 pathway-analysis methods have been developed thus far.
However, as all these methods are biased toward well-studied conditions, such as
cancer diseases, the accuracy of pathway-analysis methods is severely
compromised, especially when investigating non-cancer diseases and phenotypes.
More importantly, existing methods are limited to the analysis of a single
cohort or data type, making them sensitive to biological heterogeneity and
unable to analyze complex diseases that involve multiple molecular levels. This
project aims to bridge these gaps by designing an analysis pipeline that will
tackle bias correction and data integration in one computational framework. This
will have a great impact in many research and public health areas by
facilitating the identification of putative molecular causes of disease, as well
as the identification of potential therapeutic interventions and their possible
side effects. This project also includes a systematic outreach program involving
Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUI) across Nevada, especially minority-
and Hispanic-serving institutions: College of Southern Nevada and Nevada State
College. The applications presented here will enable students to conduct
exciting scientific research without the need to perform wet-lab experiments.
Other planned outreach activities involve summer workshops for K-12 local
schools from Washoe County School District. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most pathway-
annotation databases have important limitations. Some of these limitations are
related to the domain (e.g., focused on cancer alone), others to the types of
data included (e.g., only expression data), and still others to the level of
detail chosen to describe the phenomenon. Further, pathway-analysis methods are
subject to systematic bias due to unrealistic assumptions and overfitting.
Another pain point is the inability to easily include multiple cohorts and
multiple types of -omics data in the same analysis. This project will provide a
framework that allows researchers to retain their preferred pathway methods
while correcting for method bias and integrating multiple data types and
datasets. The goal of this project will be achieved by two thrusts: 1) design a
methodology for bias correction and consensus analysis of pathway methods, and
2) develop a novel approach for the flexible integration of multi-cohort and
multi-omics data. The framework will be designed so that it can be applied in
conjunction with any existing pathway-analysis method to correct for bias,
incorporate knowledge from different databases and integrate data of different
types. The project also includes a systematic evaluation plan of the proposed
methodologies using more than 100 datasets with known mechanisms. The research
team will deliver an implementation that supports several widely used methods
for many model organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.