* 2203680
* Collaborative Research: Development of an exosome based lipoproteoplex (E-LPP) for siRNA delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Jin Montclare, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 05/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;The development of safe and effective means to
deliver nucleic acids has become increasingly important, especially in light of
the COVID pandemic. mRNA vaccines that can provide our immune system the tools
to fight COVID-19 are crucial in helping us fight this devastative virus. This
project supports fundamental research focused on creating better delivery agents
that can better protect and carry the important nucleic acids like mRNA so it
can do its job. We explore the use of exosomes as potential delivery vehicles.
Exosomes are essentially little compartments that are derived from our own
cells. Because of this, they have key components that allow them to enter other
cells and deliver cargo. While exosomes have this unique advantage, loading them
with the target therapeutic is challenging. To address this, the research team
will develop small, charged proteins that can gently hold onto the negatively
charged nucleic acids, which then helps improve the loading of exosomes. This
project will not only train the next generation graduate student and researcher
in these new approaches, but also help inspire high school students as they will
be able to carry out meaningful research experience both virtually and in
person. Both the PI and co-PI have a strong record of training women and
underrepresented minorities and plan to continue to recruit and train them as
part of this work with the goal of developing and diversifying the future
scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;Nucleic
acids possess critical instructions for controlling biological processes with
tangible implications in fundamental cell and organismal studies, biotechnology
and medicine especially in light of delivery of vaccines for Covid-19. There is
a need to develop a modular platform for the widespread delivery of nucleic
acids, and exosomes have recently been identified as promising delivery agents.
The mechanisms of assembly between membrane-derived lipids and recombinant
proteins is poorly understood but provides an opportunity to optimize and
explore the fundamental material properties of exosome-based delivery vehicles.
The research team proposes to develop an engineered protein-exosome system or
lipoproteoplex capable of: 1) encapsulating siRNA at a high efficiency into the
exosome; 2) increasing siRNA release once inside the cell through increased
endosomal escape; 3) performing efficient siRNA delivery with a favorable safety
profile. For education and outreach, the team aims to focus on verified virtual
platforms to provide students safe, meaningful research experiences. Courses
will focus on hybrid in-person and virtual lessons with an emphasis on group-
based projects to facilitate active learning. For outreach, Dr. Montclare will
participate in the Applied Research Innovations in Science and Engineering
(ARISE) program and engage local NYC 10th and 11th grade students in
computational design of supercharged proteins. Dr. Rabbani will implement as
part of the Wyss Sumer Research Fellowship, a biochemistry training that
involves exosome preparation, characterization and use for transfection as well
as recording protocol video and journal club discussion online. This will
democratize research experience for students during the pandemic and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.