* 2203080
* Collaborative Research: A Hierarchical Multidimensional Network-based Approach for Multi-Competitor Product Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Zhenghui Sha, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 05/31/2024
* USD 216,171.00

The objective of this research is to investigate what product customers consider
and what they eventually purchase using a hierarchical, multidimensional
network-based design approach. Motivated by the need to model socio-technical
interactions in engineering design, this research combines design theory with
network science to explore three interrelated topics: 1) two-stage
multidimensional network models for customer preference modeling that consider
product associations and social influence; 2) dynamic network models for
predicting the impact of multi-competitor strategic decisions, and 3) knowledge
transfer to demonstrate generalizability and creation of shared data resources
to benefit research community. This project will advance design theories of
complex systems and develop quantitative methods for modeling socio-technical
interactions in engineering design. Integrated with enterprise-driven design,
the methods developed will enhance US industry’s competitiveness within changing
markets. The test cases include a primary case study on the design of electric
vehicles and small SUVs and a secondary case study on the design of household
products. The project will also foster student training in data science, network
science and Artificial Intelligence, with particular emphasis on the
participation of underrepresented groups, females, and
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research is
manifested in four aspects. First, the hierarchical network model studies
customers’ consideration and choice as distinct, but integrated, behaviors. It
identifies distinctive driving factors underlying the consideration and choice
stages. Second, this research overcomes the practical challenges of missing data
on customers' social networks. The solution relies on an innovative approach to
assess how individuals’ preferences are influenced by their own egocentric
social contacts through a synergistic integration of autologistic actor
attribute model (ALAAM) with the Multidimensional Customer-Product Network
(MCPN) framework. Third, using temporal Exponential Random Graph Model (t-ERGM),
the dynamic network modeling approach will allow the prediction of future market
competition considering the present competition structure and multi-competitor
design decisions. Finally, a crowdsourcing-based data collection platform
integrating online product data and reviews will be developed for eliciting
customer preferences in multi-stage decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.