* 2203752
* Reliable Calibration-Free Long-Term Ion Monitoring
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Philippe Buhlmann, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 05/31/2025
* USD 435,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Philippe Buhlmann and coworkers at the
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities will seek to address a major failure mode of
current ion sensors, which is the delamination of ionophore-doped polymeric
sensing membranes from underlying platform substrates when exposed to repeated
mechanical stress. In macro-sized devices, delamination can be avoided by
mechanical means such as screw lids and O-rings, but that is not possible in
miniaturized devices. Miniaturized devices are better suited for on-line
monitoring and are more affordable for broader impact applications. The
attachment of ionophore-doped sensing membranes with chemical bonds to the
sensor platform material and the transducer layer that separates the sensing
membranes from the underlying electron conductors is crucial to the development
of electroanalytical sensors that (i) do not fail catastrophically by membrane
delamination and (ii) exhibit minimal signal drift in long-term in-situ
monitoring. Covalent attachment of the sensing membrane opens a venue to
calibration-free sensors with long lifetimes, as they are needed for long-term
measurements in the environment, in industrial processes, and for health
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project, the Buhlmann team at
the University of Minnesota aims to achieve the covalent attachment of
ionophore-doped polymeric sensing membranes to inert plastics and conductive
carbon materials. This will be achieved using chemically resistant, plasticizer-
free and biocompatible polymeric membrane materials, nanoporous carbon solid
contacts, and redox buffers for the fabrication of robust potentiometric solid-
state sensors for calibration-free long-term monitoring. The covalent attachment
of the sensing membrane using chemical grafting and photo- or plasma-initiated
in-situ polymerization as used in this project is a very general approach that
does not suffer from the disadvantages of silyl chemistry, which has been used
for this purpose in the past. In particular, it is suitable for a range of
substrates from polyesters, polyurethanes, and polyolefins to fluoropolymers. If
successful, this approach will eliminate the need for frequent recalibration of
potentiometric ion sensors, which requires a constant supply of calibration
solutions and either complex fluid handling systems or trained personnel. Thus,
the project has the potential for broad scientific impact across a wide range of
ion sensor applications from academia, to industry to government
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.