* 2203469
* Exploiting Selective Surface Activation for Surface Enhanced Spectroscopy Measurements
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Mark Arnold, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 06/30/2025
* USD 373,395.00

This research at the University of Iowa is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the Division of
Chemistry to exploit non-covalent intermolecular and molecule-surface
interactions to expand the utility of surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS)
of molecules that directly adsorb to gold nanostars. SERS is a powerful
detection method that depends on the optical properties of metal nanoparticles
and chemical effects arising from molecule-surface interactions. The Iowa team
will pursue methods to understand how zwitterionic surface ligand charge
differences influence their affinity to gold. By partially weakening the surface
stabilizing agents, small pockets are generated on the metal for subsequent
molecular binding, including molecules that do not traditionally bind readily to
gold thus increasing the analytical utility of this sensitive and specific
detection method. The research team will focus on the professional development
and training of students who pursue this research. To aid in generating an
equitable environment, the group will maintain a living document that summarizes
expectations for communication, ethics, experiment planning and documentation,
respect, and safety. The group also plans to perform outreach activities with
K-12 students in person and virtually that focus on chemistry as well as on
nanoscale objects and properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This University of Iowa
team will address challenges associated with the reproducible and quantitative
capabilities of SERS by exploiting the roles of intermolecular interactions,
solvation, and chemical effects arising from molecule-substrate interactions.
Tuning the binding affinity of surface-stabilizing zwitterions on gold nanostars
using cations, protons, and solvent facilitates the formation of hydrophobic
binding pockets on gold nanostar surfaces. By locally modulating the electron
density in the surface ligands, the hydrophobicity and dimensions of these
active sites are probed using SERS and other surface sensitive detection
methods. The group subsequently tunes molecular solubility and SERS excitation
conditions to quantify and understand the chemical interactions between
molecules and the gold interface. By developing a mechanistic understanding of
how electron distribution in surface stabilizing agents impact molecule-metal
chemical interactions, the utility of SERS and other spectroscopic techniques
will be achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.