* 2203629
* Protein biophysics for pH-regulated transcription factor-DNA binding selectivity
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Diane Barber, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2026
* USD 400,000.00

How transcription factors recognize specific DNA sequences to regulate gene
expression remains a significant question in biology. This question is
particularly perplexing when considering members of large families of
transcription factors that share highly similar DNA- binding domains but bind
selectively to different DNA sequences. Another significant question that
remains understudied is how intracellular pH (pHi) dynamics regulate myriad cell
behaviors, including proliferation, migration, differentiation and cell fate
transitions. This project builds on prior studies of how pHi dynamics regulate
cell behaviors via proteins whose activities are sensitive to changes in pHi.
The research will explore the idea that pHi affects the DNA binding selectivity
of transcription factors and thereby their function in regulating gene
expression. The project also offers cross-disciplinary training opportunities
from biophysics to cell biology for students and postdoctoral
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests a new idea that pHi dynamics
regulate transcription factor-DNA binding affinity and selectivity. At least 65
transcription factors in different families contain a conserved histidine in the
DNA binding domain that forms hydrogen bonds with nucleotide bases. The
hypothesis to be tested is that protonation and deprotonation of the histidine
with changing pH regulates promoter binding selectivity of transcription
factors, which is supported by molecular dynamics simulations and biochemical
assays indicating pH modulates DNA binding by recombinant FOXM1 and FOXC2. The
objectives include computational predictions of pH-dependent transcription
factor binding to DNA (Aim 1), biochemical analysis of pH-dependent DNA binding
affinities and motif preferences (Aim 2), and investigating the effects of pHi
dynamics in transcription factor target gene selectivity in cells (Aim 3). The
outcomes could reveal a new mechanism for pH-mediated regulation of
transcription factor function, and offer new insights on how transcription
factors with similar DNA-binding domains are used reiteratively to regulate a
variety of genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.