* 2203898
* Spatial Distribution and Drivers of Forest Restoration Reversals and Successes
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Megan Mills-Novoa, Benzeev, Rayna
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 09/30/2024
* USD 148,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Meg Mills-
Novoa, at University of California Berkeley, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist to investigate spatial distribution and
drivers of forest restoration. Forest restoration is one of the most effective
strategies to capture carbon and counteract the emissions causing global
environmental change. Despite their great promise and opportunity, many forest
restoration projects to date have failed to achieve their stated objectives,
particularly for the long term. This project determines the drivers of short-
term versus long-term restoration. By providing feedback on the monitoring of
forest restoration goals, this research will provide recommendations to improve
the longevity of forest restoration efforts, with implications for forest-based
environmental solutions in the US and across the globe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focusing on restoration reversals—restored forests that
were later deforested (within 5-10 years)—and restoration successes—restored
forests that remained forested for the long term (a minimum of 10 years), this
research examines the long-term outcomes of forest restoration efforts at the
local scale. By conducting biome- and property-scale geospatial analyses, this
research determines the spatial hotspots of forest restoration reversals and
successes. Drawing upon spatial, political, and socio-environmental literature
of forest change, this project evaluates the drivers of restoration reversals
and successes across the biome, community, and property scales. This project
advances scholarly knowledge in three key ways. First, the substantial
literature on forest restoration has remained focused on where or why forest
restoration occurs with less attention to the long-term outcomes of such
initiatives. This research project will generate much needed knowledge on the
drivers of restoration reversals and successes. Second, by integrating data
across multiple scales, this project analyzes how the drivers of forest
restoration vary across local to regional scales in a socio-environmental
system. The property-scale analysis has been particularly neglected in the
geospatial understanding of forest restoration and local dynamics have been
neglected in understanding restoration reversals and successes. Third, this
project will integrate quantitative and qualitative approaches by combining
geospatial science, political ecology, and integrated socio-environmental
systems theory. A geospatial analysis will enable the identification of forest
restoration hotspots to focus on for qualitative data collection. The
interpretation of the patterns of geospatial analysis will be enriched by a
better understanding of the underlying processes (i.e., socio-political and
economic drivers) of forest restoration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.