* 2203357
* Workshop: Towards Carbon-neutral Electricity and Mobility: The Infrastructure Challenges and Opportunities; Houston, Texas; 28 February - 1 March 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Le Xie, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

This award will support a workshop that brings together a group of leading
experts with complementary backgrounds (in the area of power and energy,
transportation, artificial intelligence/machine learning etc.) to build bridges
between various research areas and thereby shape the research paradigm for a
carbon-neutral transition in the electricity and mobility sectors. Specifically,
this workshop aims to bridge the gap by identifying a research agenda for the
common underlying cyber infrastructure needs to support the ambitious carbon-
neutral transition. Many of the key research questions, such as how to plan for
electric vehicle charging infrastructure along the highways and electric
transmission grids, would tremendously benefit from shared data/models across
power and transportation networks. The discussions and convergent research ideas
engendered by this workshop will have significant impacts on the research and
education of data-driven engineering systems towards sustainability. The project
is jointly funded by the Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI)
Division and the Office of the Assistant Director (OAD) in the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will address key questions in
cyber infrastructure needs to facilitate the carbon-neutral transition of
electricity and transportation sectors. Topics of interest include (1) joint
modeling of power and transportation systems coupled by electric vehicles; (2)
data sets and algorithms for artificial intelligence/machine learning-based
approaches to accelerate the carbon-neutral transition in electricity and
mobility; (3) modeling and data sets for equity and justice research during the
carbon-neutral transition; and (4) experience and insights from building cross-
domain cyber infrastructure in synergistic NSF activities. These topics will
address two of NSF's 10 big ideas: "Harnessing the Data Revolution" and "Growing
Convergence Research". The workshop will also generate opportunities for
collaborative research between academia and industry through discussing
potential ideas for technology transfer and
entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.