* 2203821
* CDS&amp;E: Sustained risk mitigation of carbon storage with seismic monitoring through simulation and Bayesian inference
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Edmond Chow, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 07/31/2025
* USD 650,869.00

Carbon capture and storage (CCS) is agreed upon by climate panels to be an
essential part of any comprehensive plan for reducing greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere and combating climate change. Broader acceptance of CCS is hindered
by the perceived risk of carbon dioxide leakage from the underground reservoir
being used for storage. To help manage risk, any CCS endeavor must use a system
of monitoring to detect leaks, such as seismic monitoring. This project
addresses several challenges in the development of a seismic monitoring system
that is sustainable into the indeterminate future. These challenges include
noisy data from permanent and low-cost sensors, high-dimensional data needed to
describe the carbon dioxide plume underground, the need for uncertainty
quantification to assure stakeholders, and automated detection of leaks for
continuous monitoring systems. This project includes activities to broaden
participation in computational science, including the development and deployment
of a short course on machine learning for scientific applications geared to
students with diverse backgrounds, interests, and career
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aim of this project is to develop a
methodology for monitoring critical carbon dioxide plumes in underground storage
reservoirs that combines time-lapse seismic imaging, physical simulation, and
uncertainty quantification. The work extends current practice by using Bayesian
data assimilation with a fluid flow simulation for the carbon dioxide plume. For
this to be tractable, conditional invertible neural networks are used to
represent complex probability distributions. The data assimilation is also
coupled with joint recovery methods. The posterior distribution of the carbon
dioxide plume is input into a generative classifier to automatically detect
leakages while also estimating uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.