* 2203881
* Oil Photooxidation by Sunlight: Role of Reactive Species in the Transformation of Saturated and Aromatic Hydrocarbons
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Christoph Aeppli, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 437,163.00

With support from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the Division of
Chemistry at NSF, Christoph Aeppli at the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
will investigate the mechanism of sunlight-mediated transformation of oil
hydrocarbons. This is relevant since photooxidation affects the fate of oil
after marine spills, thereby fundamentally altering the properties, composition,
and environmental fate of oil residues. This project will improve the
mechanistic understanding of oil photochemistry by conducting a series of
laboratory irradiation experiments. The knowledge and data expected from this
project will improve oil spill risk and damage assessment. This project will
also train a postdoctoral researcher and undergraduate students. Furthermore,
results and methods from this project will be implemented in undergraduate
coursework, and outcomes of this project will be communicated to the broader
community through outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To elucidate the
relevant pathway for the degradation of saturated compounds is challenging in
the complex mixture of oil with multiple co-occurring competing pathways. This
project will use a step-wise approach with systems that have three levels of
complexity. First, basic mechanist questions will first be addressed using a
model oil consisting of a well-defined mixture of hydrocarbons. Second, various
photochemical pathways will be systematically tested on these model compounds
using sensitizers and quenchers naturally occurring in petroleum. Lastly, the
gained knowledge will then be applied to the complex processes occurring in the
complex mixture of petroleum, with the aim to construct a general conceptual
mechanism of relevant oil photodegradation processes of the various saturated
and aromatic hydrocarbons in oil. This project will employ an innovative method
based on two-dimensional gas chromatography for the comprehensive quantification
of oil degradation and will develop quantitative methods to measure the
formation of oil photoproducts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.