* 2203808
* Climatic adaptation and the human nose: An experimental investigation in living humans
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Cara Ocobock, Cho, Elizabeth C
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 05/31/2023
* USD 69,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and the
Biological Anthropology program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare
promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in
academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Scott Maddux at the University
of North Texas Health Science Center, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist studying nasal morphology. Humans inhabit
diverse environments, ranging from tropical rainforests to Arctic tundra. The
varying climatic conditions of these environments place different levels of
stress on the upper respiratory tract, which must ensure that inspired air is
sufficiently warmed and humidified to avoid damaging the lungs. As the nose is
where most heat and moisture is transferred to air during each breath,
differences in nasal size and shape around the globe have been argued to reflect
climatic pressures on nasal function. However, such relationships between nasal
anatomy and climatic pressures have not been rigorously tested. Accordingly,
this project will investigate associations between nasal form and climate in a
large sample of living humans using anatomical data collected from computed
tomography (CT) scans, computer modeling of nasal airflow patterns, and internal
nasal air temperature/humidity values collected in a climate chamber. This will
thus be the first to directly test whether variation in nasal anatomy and
function follow climatic expectations, shedding light on both our evolutionary
past and future adaptive scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Variation in nasal form
is believed to be adaptive based on a strong statistical association between
nasal morphology and particular climates. However, no studies have empirically
linked differences in anatomical structure to different physiological outcomes.
Further, a recent analytical shift to Computational Fluid Dynamic (CFD)
analysis, used to assess moisture and heat transfer within the nasal passage in
silico, has not been validated using in vivo measurements. This project will
test key nasal ecogeographic hypotheses of nasal form and function using a large
diverse sample of living participants ranging in age from 18-35 years old.
Variation in nasal anatomy will be assessed using cranial CT scans and paired in
vivo intranasal air temperature/humidity values collected with a nasal probe in
a climate chamber under four different climatic conditions (at room-temperature,
cold/dry, hot/dry, and hot/humid). CT scan data will then be used to perform CFD
modeling of nasal physiology which will then be compared to in vivo data to
validate CFD results. This project will advance our understanding of human
variation, evolutionary adaptations to environment, provide insight into nasal
morphologies more susceptible to respiratory issues in particular climate
conditions, and potential insight into how nasal form may change in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.