* 2203465
* Electrochemistry as a Design Tool for Colloidal Syntheses of Polyhedral Metal Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Michelle Personick, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2025
* USD 458,958.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Michelle L. Personick of Wesleyan University
will use real-time electrochemical measurements to probe the growth of nano-
sized metal particles. Metal nanoparticles have useful applications in sensing,
biomedical imaging, and catalysis for chemical manufacturing and generation of
sustainable fuels. Their optical properties and catalytic performance can be
tailored not only by controlling their composition and size, but also their
shape. This research aims to understand nanoparticle growth mechanisms and
establish core chemical principles to inform the deliberate, predictive design
of metal nanomaterials to meet the increasingly complex needs of emerging
applications. Graduate, undergraduate, and high school students who are involved
in this research will be prepared for future careers at the interface of
chemistry, materials science, and chemical engineering. The project will also
contribute to enhancing participation in science and research by developing
publicly available resources to increase the accessibility of undergraduate
science for students who are the first in their family to pursue this course of
study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on an important, but largely
unexplored, area of fundamental research in using electrochemical nanoparticle
synthesis as a tool to understand nanoparticle growth mechanisms and to
predictively design colloidal synthetic strategies. Dr. Personick’s research
team pioneers an innovative, integrated electrochemical approach for elucidating
the underlying chemical factors that control the reduction of metal ions at
surfaces during the growth of metal nanoparticles. This approach will involve
dynamic feedback between electrochemical measurements of metal ion reduction
under complex conditions, electrochemically driven nanoparticle growth on
electrode surfaces under well-defined conditions, and colloidal nanoparticle
growth using chemical reducing agents. This research aims to overcome key
challenges in nanomaterials synthesis by (1) enabling real-time monitoring of
the chemical reactions and mechanisms of metal nanoparticle growth; (2)
introducing added flexibility in the composition of nanoparticle growth
solutions to separately define the mechanistic influences of chemical parameters
that are not distinguishable in standard colloidal synthesis; and (3) providing
a route to the directed design of noble metal nanoparticles with currently
unachievable architectures and compositions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.