* 2203704
* EAGER GERMINATION: Chemistry Graduate Education - Sustainability and the Circular Economy
* ENG,EFMA
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Maurie Cohen, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 06/30/2024
* USD 298,224.00

This project is funded through the NSF Directorate for Engineering Germination
program, which seeks to foster the development of pedagogical approaches to
increase the ability of academic researchers to formulate research questions and
ideas with potentially transformative outcomes. Based on the premise that
graduate Chemistry education is traditionally highly disciplinary and often
disconnected from societyâ€™s critical challenges, this project aims to enhance
the ability of Chemistry doctoral students to develop research questions with
societal relevance by incorporating societal, economic, environmental, and
governance (SEEG) perspectives into the PhD Chemistry curriculum. A multi-
faceted approach will be used encompassing a new team-taught course that
involves SEEG dimensions, a new green chemistry elective course, and an overhaul
of requirements for the doctoral qualifying research proposal and dissertation
research to include substantial SEEG components. Increased consideration of, and
appreciation for, institutional contexts, policy processes, and innovation
opportunities should enable students to position themselves to use their
chemical knowledge more effectively for change in service of societal needs,
particularly with respect to sustainability and the circular economy. Success in
this exploratory study could lay the foundations for expansion to disciplines
and institutions beyond the pilot base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate a systematic approach to equip graduates with the knowledge, skills,
experience, and perspectives to meaningfully propose research aimed to better
address important societal problems through the chemical sciences in a highly
interdisciplinary manner. A new pedagogical framework for chemistry doctoral
education will be developed and piloted that integrates important societal,
economic, environmental, and governance issues with chemistry disciplinary
education. This framework will involve multiple components, including: 1) a
graduate-level team-taught interdisciplinary chemistry core course that
integrates SEEG aspects to provide a foundation for understanding environmental
sustainability and the circular economy; 2) a team-taught graduate course in
Green Chemistry involving multidisciplinary instruction encompassing chemistry,
economics, and social science; 3) a seminar program presented by a range of
experts from academia, non-governmental organizations, and the private sector,
who will also serve as mentors; 4) a requirement for the Ph.D. qualifying
research proposal to include substantial SEEG components; and 5) a requirement
that the doctoral dissertation include a chapter on posing SEEG-informed
research questions. This project will challenge the traditional, disciplinary-
focused, pedagogical paradigm through piloting a more holistic approach to
education and professional development that is purposefully aligned with the
heavily integrated and interdependent world in which we
live.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.