* 2203131
* Collaborative Research: Experimental Quantification of Tsunami-driven Debris Damming on Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Hyoungsu Park, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2026
* USD 356,642.00

This project will investigate how the accumulation of debris in front of
buildings, i.e., debris damming, during tsunami events leads to an increase in
the forces imposed by tsunami flow on structures. To better understand the
magnitude of increase in tsunami forces due to damming, the mechanisms that
cause increased forces, and the variability in damming loads, experiments will
be conducted on elevated buildings in the large wave flume at the National
Science Foundation (NSF)-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) facility at Oregon State University. A better
understanding of tsunami-driven debris damming loads can be used to (1) improve
existing design guidelines to construct safer buildings, (2) identify factors
that affect debris damming to determine measures that help reduce or mitigate
the damming loads, and (3) improve tsunami vulnerability assessment of existing
buildings for characterizing risk and resilience. The project will also include
outreach activities to engage high school students in the experiments, research
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to participate in the
experiments and computational modeling, and webinars for researchers and
practicing engineers to promote the adoption of the research findings. This
research will contribute to the NSF role in the National Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Program (NEHRP). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments in the large
wave flume will focus on identifying the mechanisms that cause tsunami-driven
debris damming and associated loads on the first floor columns of an elevated
structure, such as a vertical evacuation structure. These mechanisms include,
but are not limited to, debris-structure, debris-flow, debris-debris
interactions, changes in flow and velocity fields, and changes in effective
building projected area. The experiments will use homogeneous debris as well as
non-homogeneous debris mixtures with varying shapes, sizes, densities, and
quantities. A novel iterative experimental design strategy will be used to
address the exponentially large number of potential experimental conditions and
to quantify the aleatory uncertainty in the loads. Additionally, new
dimensionless parameters will be used to quantify the likelihood of damming and
the probability of exceeding design damming loads. The results from the analysis
of experimental data and supplementary computational fluid dynamics simulations
will provide new knowledge on how debris interacts with other debris and the
structure, and how tsunami flow fields (speed and depth) change because of
debris damming. The resulting data set will be shared with the research
community via the NHERI Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-
ci.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.