* 2203841
* CDS&amp;E: Thin Film Analysis by XPS: Quantitative Modeling of Sputtering and Depth Profile Data, Machine Learning Classifiers, and Novel Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Lev Gelb, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2025
* USD 420,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the Chemistry
Division, Lev Gelb and Amy Walker of the University of Texas at Dallas will
improve methods for interpreting x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) sputter
depth profiling data sets and spectra. In XPS, x-rays eject electrons from a
sample, which identify the elements present near the sample surface. In depth-
profiling, the sample is simultaneously eroded away by blasting (“sputtering”)
the sample with a beam of ions, so that the composition at varying depths is
also determined. Unfortunately, the x-rays and sputter beam cause unwanted
chemical reactions, roughening, interlayer mixing, and other effects which
distort the measured composition profiles. By accounting for these effects, this
Project improves the quality and reliability of such measurements. Software
developed in this project will be freely distributed and promoted as a community
resource. XPS is widely used in materials science, nanoscience, semiconductor
research, biotechnology and other fields, so improving the performance of this
technique will be of significant long-term benefit to society at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Project will focus on model-based data analysis.
A realistic simulation of the sputter process is used to describe how the sample
changes during the experiment, from which XPS spectra are calculated and
compared with the collected data. The simulation parameters are then adjusted to
give optimal agreement and thus the best estimates of sample properties and
sputter rates. These simulations also be leveraged to develop machine-learning
data analysis tools. Real XPS data are time-consuming to measure, so assembling
a training set of thousands (or more) of such experiments is not practical.
Instead, simulations will create training sets of millions of spectra from
hypothetical samples. Deep neural network classifiers will then be trained to
provide very rapid assignments of sample structure and composition. Finally,
these techniques will be used in the analysis of a series of complex samples of
both technological and historical interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.