* 2203796
* The lineup construction process and eyewitness identifications
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Melisa Akan, Akan, Melisa
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's Law
and Science program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Jeffrey Starns at the University of
Massachusetts Amherst, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist investigating the lineup construction process. Lineups are
frequently used to gather evidence from eyewitnesses. A lineup typically
consists of a photo of the suspect, who may or may not be guilty, presented
alongside photos of innocent individuals, referred to as fillers. The fillers
are usually selected by police officers, often based on similarity to the
suspect. Eyewitness identifications from lineups constitute an important source
of evidence in criminal investigations, and in many cases, eyewitnesses provide
the only available evidence. Unfortunately, eyewitness misidentifications of
innocent suspects are significant contributors to wrongful convictions, and are
known to be plagued with disparities, with potentially devastating consequences
for individuals and communities. This project will investigate the process of
lineup construction and the effects of the compositional structure of lineups on
the accuracy of eyewitness identifications, with a focus on a particularly
error-prone identification scenario. By taking a novel approach to the analysis
of lineup composition, this project will elucidate factors contributing to
lineup construction and identify the characteristics of a lineup that support
more accurate identifications. The project will address a significant gap in the
field by addressing an under-researched task (lineup construction) using
multidimensional scaling (MDS), an advanced statistical tool that has had
limited use in the field. The analytical approach and findings will inform
policy on lineup construction and contribute to theory
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three main components: (1)
similarity judgments; (2) construction of lineups by perceivers; and (3)
eyewitness identification using the lineups from (2). Multidimensional scaling
(MDS) analyses will be applied to the similarity judgments from (1), generating
two multidimensional face spaces that map out how faces are represented by
perceivers. The psychological face spaces will be used to reveal the similarity
structure of lineups constructed by perceivers. These lineups will then be
tested in an eyewitness identification study, using a separate, large sample of
participants. This research effort will provide the grounds for theory
development and computational modeling of lineup memory and decision-making
processes. These precise measurements of lineup properties will deepen our
understanding of the relevant issues and shed light on inconsistent findings in
the literature. The data, as well as the stimuli set and the analysis code, will
be made available for other researchers via public repositories, which will
support research infrastructure and spur further
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.