* 2203487
* Thermal and Compositional Structure of Antarctica from Probabilistic Joint Inversion of Seismic, Gravity, and Topography Data and Petrological Modelling
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Douglas Wiens, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 191,601.00

Non-Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;The physical state of the mantle beneath the
Antarctic Ice Sheet plays a key role in the interaction between the Antarctic
ice cover and the solid earth, strongly influencing the glacial system's
evolution. Generally, mantle temperature profiles are determined by analyzing
rock samples from the mantle to determine pressure-temperature conditions,
and/or by conversion of seismic velocity anomalies to temperature anomalies.
However, mantle rocks have been found only in a very few places in Antarctica,
and seismic anomalies reflect not only thermal anomalies but also compositional
variations. In this project, the investigators will (1) use the most recent
geophysical datasets sensitive to temperature and composition (high-resolution
seismic velocity model, topography, satellite gravity), (2) Combine the
sensitivity of these datasets in a to retrieve the most reliable model of
thermal and compositional structure, (3) translate the results into
2-dimensional maps of temperature slices and the composition of iron in the
mantle,(4) compare the results with results from other continents to better
understand Antarctic geological history, and (5) use the new thermal model along
with established rock relationships to estimate mantle viscosity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract &lt;br/&gt;The
thermochemical structure of the lithosphere beneath Antarctica is fundamental
for understanding the geological evolution of the continent and its relationship
to surrounding Gondwana continents. In addition, the thermal structure controls
the solid earth response to glacial unloading, with important implications for
ice sheet models and the future of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. However, it is
challenging to get an accurate picture of temperature and composition from only
sparse petrological/geochemical analysis, and most previous attempts to solve
this problem geophysically have relied on seismic or gravity data alone. Here,
we propose to use a probabilistic joint inversion (high resolution regional
seismic data, satellite gravity data, topography) and petrological modelling
approach to determine the 3D thermochemical structure of the mantle. The
inversion will be carried out using a Markov-chain Bayesian Monte Carlo
methodology, providing quantitative estimates of uncertainties. Mapping the
3-dimensional thermochemical structure (thermal and composition) will provide a
comprehensive view of the horizontal (50-100 km resolution) and vertical (from
the surface down to 380 km) variations. This new model will give us the
temperature variation from the surface down to 380 km and the degree of
depletion of the lithospheric mantle and the sub-lithospheric mantle. This new
model will also be compared to recent models of Gondwana terranes 200 Myrs to
build a new model of the thermochemical evolution of the cratonic mantle. The
new thermal and chemical structures can be used to better understand the
geothermal heat flux beneath the ice sheet as well as improve glacial isostatic
adjustment and ice sheet models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.