* 2203224
* Leveraging Cyclopropanols in Natural Product Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Charles Winter, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 03/31/2025
* USD 517,487.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program of the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Jin Cha of Wayne State University is developing efficient routes to
important molecules which are utilized in organic or medicinal chemistry.
Starting with readily available three-membered ring compounds, the research plan
builds complex molecules in a modular approach to construct naturally occurring
molecules endowed with desirable properties. The proposed work builds on a key
modification in the initial three-membered ring formation to pave the way for
new chemical syntheses. These studies will have potential for broader societal
benefits, as convergent, environmentally benign and sustainable syntheses offer
enabling tools in pharmaceutical, chemical, agricultural industry, and materials
science. This project will provide excellent training for coworkers, from
undergraduate research participants to post-doctoral fellows, including those
from groups historically underrepresented in STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of
the Chemical Synthesis program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Cha of
Wayne State University is studying an efficient synthesis of natural products
with particular emphasis on efficiency and selectivity. Coupling (union) of two
polyfunctional fragments lends itself to practical syntheses of complex
molecules. The proposed study will focus on the development and application of
cross-coupling reactions of cyclopropanols or the related titanacyclopropanes to
develop concise synthetic routes. The Cha group will continue to utilize
cyclopropanols as a unique family of nonracemic and attractively functionalized
homologous enol equivalents in the C–C bond formation. Transition metal-
catalyzed cross-coupling reactions of two segments include C-acylation, SN2’
alkylation, alkenylation, and alkynylation of cyclopropanols. The preparative
power of the key synthetic methods are to be highlighted in projected concise
total syntheses of an array of structurally novel and biologically important
natural products. Among these targets are included gephyrotoxin, alkaloid 261C,
scholarisine A, artemisinin, and mitomycin C.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.