* 2203990
* CDS&amp;E: Health-Aware Optimization of Battery Charging for Proactive Prevention of Lithium Plating
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Pranav Shrotriya, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mahesh Krishnamurthy
* 07/31/2025
* USD 396,312.00

The research objective is to advance the state of the art in battery health
management by furthering our understanding of lithium plating and creating an
online charging optimization approach to prevent plating. Lithium-ion (Li-ion)
batteries have been increasingly adopted as energy storage devices in electric
vehicles, renewable energy storage, implantable medical devices, and many other
applications. Lithium plating is a critical failure mode in Li-ion cells that
prevents fast charging and causes safety concerns. The success of this project
will result in major advances in enhancing the safety and extending the lifetime
of Li-ion batteries. Advances in battery reliability and safety will promote the
electrification of transportation and penetration of renewables on the grid,
accelerating our nation’s transition towards a more environmentally friendly
economy. The education and outreach plan aims to integrate the newly generated
knowledge into education and outreach activities, emphasizing broadening the
participation of women in battery safety science. This plan will focus on three
activities: (1) developing an open online repository of educational materials;
(2) engaging community college, undergraduate, and graduate students in research
on battery safety; and (3) giving Lunch &amp; Learn Talks and laboratory tours
to female middle- and high-school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will create a physics-informed active safety platform that enables prediction
and proactive prevention of lithium plating. It will lay the foundation for a
paradigm shift away from a focus on reactive SOH monitoring toward one that
actively assesses and mitigates the risk of lithium plating. The research plan
consists of four thrusts: (1) validation of multiphysics plating models; (2)
prediction of lithium plating probability; (3) optimization of charging
protocols; and (4) platform validation using two real-world applications. A
novelty of the proposed active safety platform lies in the integration of
multiphysics modeling, degradation diagnostics, and plating prognostics within a
charging optimization process. In other words, this platform combines physics-
based modeling and machine learning to achieve control-enabled active safety. As
a result, this project will produce important insights into the fundamental
mechanisms by which a charging optimization platform harnesses physics and data
to reduce the likelihood of lithium plating, thus providing the scientific
knowledge necessary for exploring novel strategies for physics-informed learning
and optimization and promoting wider adoption of this new class of fast charging
enablers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.