* 2203900
* Microwave-Enhanced Ionization Techniques for Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Steven Ray, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2025
* USD 438,800.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Steven Ray and his research group at the State University of New
York at Buffalo are working to improve the capabilities of mass spectrometry
(MS) – an important tool for chemical analysis. In particular, the Ray group is
developing a new strategy that uses highly-focused microwave radiation to
enhance and control the initial step in MS analysis – formation of charged
particles (ions) from samples of interest. If successful, this research could
have broad scientific impact, on the most important modern methods utilized in
mass spectrometry, including electrospray ionization (ESI) and matrix-assisted
laser desorption ionization (MALDI) MS methods. Dr. Ray is also creating
undergraduate analytical chemistry laboratory experiments that use simple
microwave-assisted techniques to demonstrate green analytical chemistry and
bioanalytical methodologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Steven Ray
and his research team will work to exploit finely tuned microwave radiation to
refine ionization methods in mass spectrometry. Microwave radiation at the 2.45
GHz frequency, say, can influence charge-carrying molecules by direct dielectric
heating, which achieves energy transfer in ways different from conventional
conductive heat transfer. In MS applications, microwave dipole polarization and
ionic conduction can facilitate droplet desolvation processes associated with
ESI-MS, as well as formation of free gas-phase ions in MALDI-MS. Microwave
radiation also can accelerate charge separation and volatilization by impacting
the rates of ionization reactions, and can accelerate enzyme-mediated
proteolytic reactions used in bioanalytical mass spectrometry. Specialized
waveguide structures are being modeled by computer simulation and constructed to
focus microwaves into well-defined ionization volumes, where energy transfer can
be measured, controlled, and modulated. Insight into how microwaves influence
the mechanism of ion formation is being exploited to improve extant ionization
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.