* 2203248
* EAGER: Impacts of Fundamental Understanding of Atmospheric Energetics and Non-local Eddies on Frontier Atmospheric Research
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Jielun Sun, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 04/30/2024
* USD 323,944.00

This project is supported under the auspices of the EArly Concept Grant For
Exploratory Research (EAGER) program. The project generally seeks to investigate
two outstanding fundamental issues at the frontier of atmospheric science: 1)
understanding atmospheric energetics; and 2) understanding the dominant role of
non-local eddies in energy and momentum transfers across scales of atmospheric
motions. The research strategy combines theoretical investigation, observational
analyses, and modeling in an effort to better inform theoretical aspects of
atmospheric processes that are validated by observations and confirmed by
numerical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will pursue two specific
objectives for the project. The first objective aims to constrain atmospheric
energetics under the influence of diabatic heating and cooling by analyzing
existing field observations with a focus on non-hydrostatic energy transfer. The
second objective seeks to develop a one-dimensional model based on energy
conservation laws and physically-based surface conditions for capturing non-
local eddies in energy and momentum transfers. It is suggested to achieve this
objective without parameterizing turbulent mixing and investigating impacts of
non-hydrostatic energy transfer on atmospheric dynamics and thermodynamics with
validation using boundary-layer field observations over a range of atmospheric
instabilities through the diurnal cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential
Broader Impacts include challenging scientific orthodoxy and seeking to better
understand fundamental atmospheric physics that governs atmospheric dynamics and
thermodynamics. This is critical to addressing a range of atmospheric phenomena
strongly influenced by diabatic heating and cooling such as convective systems
(hurricanes, tropical cycles, tornado genesis) and stable boundary layers when
non-hydrostatic energy transfer is potentially strong.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.