* 2203228
* Patterns of community assembly and evolution of body size variation in the Accipiter-complex, a cosmopolitan hawk clade
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Jason Weckstein, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2025
* USD 409,689.00

Although hawks are among the most charismatic bird groups, we know surprisingly
little about how species of hawks are related to each other, how their
communities have assembled over earths history, and even how many species there
are on our planet. In particular, hawks that live on remote islands are poorly
known and many are considered members of single widespread species, yet several
of the island dwelling hawk populations are sufficiently distinct that they
should be considered separate species unique to these islands. Using next
generation DNA sequencing, this research is determining how many species of
hawks coexist with one another and how the species are related. The researchers
are using these data to determine whether the hawk communities on islands
assembled over earth’s history via a single colonization followed by
diversification or whether multiple hawk lineages independently colonized the
same islands. By comparing the observed patterns across oceanic islands to the
patterns of community assembly of hawks on mainland regions, this project will
identify differences between how communities are created in these two types of
landforms. This project is among the first to reconstruct community assembly
patterns of a globally distributed bird group. Lastly, the team is examining
over 10,000 hawk specimens from around the world to place hawks into functional
ecological groups and identify natural history characteristics (such as typical
prey types), which are unknown for many of the rarer hawk species. The
researchers are partnering with The Women in Natural Sciences (WINS) program at
the Academy of Natural Sciences of Drexel University to expose female high
school students from disadvantaged backgrounds to STEM fields. The team is
coleading hawk-watching field trips for all participants, and each summer a WINS
student is working on the project as a research assistant on the project. This
project is also supporting the early career development of the lead PI, a
Hispanic American. Both PIs are researchers at a large public museum and are
disseminating project results at public outreach events. Lastly, by identifying
islands and regions harboring unique species, conservation resources can be
better directed towards the areas or species in greatest need.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reconstructing the patterns and processes of community
assembly are critical for understanding the ecology and evolution of biotas.
Communities can be formed in several ways and one prediction is that communities
on oceanic islands are assembled via clustering (a single dispersal followed by
speciation), whereas continental communities are assembled via multiple
dispersal events. The Accipiter hawk complex includes approximately 180
currently valid, named taxa (species and subspecies) that occur on both
continental and island land masses. Even on remote islands, multiple
behaviorally and ecologically similar, but variably sized Accipiter-complex hawk
taxa are found in the same ecological communities making this hawk complex an
ideal group for testing community assembly patterns on a globally distributed
group. This project includes four objectives: 1) reconstruction of a subspecies
level phylogeny of the Accipiter-complex, 2) identification of geographic
regions with multiple Accipiter-complex members overlapping in geographic
distribution, 3) characterization of size and natural history classes of these
hawks based on morphological examination, 4) identification of community
assembly patterns in the Accipiter-complex. To accomplish these objectives, the
researchers are sequencing genomes to reconstruct a phylogeny for all currently
recognized subspecies within the complex using existing specimens, creating
detailed range maps for each Accipiter-complex member, and reconstructing
community assembly patterns for this complex across the
globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.