* 2203522
* Computational and neural mechanisms of human safety decisions
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2022,07/31/2023
* John O'Doherty, Tashjian, Sarah M
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 136,375.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program with support
from SBE's Decision, Risk, and Management Sciences (DRMS) and Cognitive
Neurosciences (CogNeuro) programs. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare
promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in
academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Dean Mobbs at California
Institute of Technology, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist investigating the mechanisms of human safety decisions. Every
day humans engage in complex decision processes that promote survival by
acquiring protection. Protection acquisition varies from simple decisions such
as taking vitamins to ward off illness, to more complex behaviors such as
building and training armies to defend against future threats. Despite observing
numerous and diverse examples of safety decisions across individuals, scientists
have not identified the cognitive and neural systems that promote protection
acquisition. It is important to understand how humans achieve the goal of
protecting ourselves because acquiring protection allows us to maintain safety
and spend resources to engage in other important pursuits like creativity and
cooperation. The purpose of this research is to contribute to a unified model of
how the brain supports adaptive safety decisions. Additionally, a better
understanding of how humans achieve safety has the potential to improve
treatments for psychological disorders, including anxiety, which is
characterized by an inability to recognize safety. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal will make important basic science contributions to theories of decision
making and will inform future efforts to promote healthy decision making in the
face of threat. This proposal will examine the computational decision control
systems that support adaptive safety acquisition, reward acquisition, and threat
avoidance. This work will achieve three main aims (1) define computational
mechanisms underpinning safety decision, (2) identify neural circuitry
supporting safety acquisition, (3) compare neural substrates to safety
acquisition to classical conditioning. In part (1), this proposal will identify
the extent to which safety decisions are associated with reflexive model-free
learning and more effortful goal-directed model-based learning. By comparing
decisions across the valence spectrum from positive reward to negative threat,
this research will test how motivation shapes use of decision control systems.
In part (2), computational models of learning will be paired with neuroimaging
to advance understanding of how the brain supports adaptive safety decisions.
Identifying neurocircuitry involved in safety decisions is a necessary precursor
to treating anxiety disorders characterized by maladaptive safety decisions. In
part (3), safety acquisition decisions will be compared with safety learning in
the absence of decision making via classical condition to lay the groundwork for
a comprehensive model of safety processing. By combining these methods, this
research has the potential to identify overlapping and distinct neural systems
involved in recognizing safety and making proactive decisions to acquire
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.