* 2203384
* Understanding the Role of Residual Stress Gradients on Plastic Strain Recovery in Nanocrystalline Thin Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Leslie Mushongera, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 11/30/2025
* USD 482,511.00

This award supports research to identify the microscopic mechanisms governing
plastic strain recovery in pure nanocrystalline metal thin films. This project
will implement an integrated experimental and modeling strategy to address this
objective. The identification of the mechanisms governing plastic strain
recovery will raise the possibility of designing metal components that may
recover after being deformed or dented. This fundamental knowledge will be used
to develop predictive tools, which will facilitate the accurate prognosis of
life to mitigate premature failures. There is a wide range of applications such
as gas turbines and tribological coatings among others that can benefit from
these developments. In addition, the project will provide an integrated training
platform for the future and diverse workforce via the education of graduate and
undergraduate students in the areas of computational mechanics and microscopy. A
particularly interesting ativity in this regard is the partnership with a local
community college, whose students will be able to apply for 8-week long research
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deformation behavior of nanocrystalline
metals substantially differs from that of coarse-grained metals. One such unique
behavior is the ability of nanocrystalline metals to recover plastic strain.
This phenomenon is quite unusual since plastic deformation in metals is
considered permanent after unloading. The critical micromechanical driving
forces are not clear however and remain a subject of conjecture. As a result, a
microstructure-sensitive predictive modeling framework also remains elusive.
Specific objectives of this work are to: (1) identify the influence of mismatch
in elastic response of nano-sized grains on plastic strain recovery; (2)
elucidate the influence of texture on the residual stresses; (3) identify the
connection between grain boundary sliding and strain compatibility; and (4)
identify the influence of grain boundary sliding on the residual stress
gradients. An integrated experimental-modeling plan is put in place to achieve
these objectives that includes extensive in-situ testing and characterization
using advanced microscopy techniques, such as the scanning transmission electron
microscopy, and sophisticated elastoplastic phase field modeling
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.