* 2203746
* Collaborative Research: Robust General Methods for Determination of Polyelectrolyte Molecular Weight and Polydispersity
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Ralph Colby, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2025
* USD 320,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Ralph H. Colby from
Pennsylvania State University and Louis A. Madsen from Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University are developing methods for measuring the
molecular weight of polyelectrolytes. Polyelectrolytes are long chain
macromolecules whose repeating units contain an electrolyte group. This group
dissociates in water, making the polymer charged. Similar to salts,
polyelectrolyte solutions are electrically conductive. Many biological and
artificial macromolecules are polyelectrolytes and find application in
biomedical, technological and industrial science. Some notable examples include
implant coatings, controlled drug delivery, water-purification systems, food
coatings and cosmetics. While there are many developed techniques used to
accurately determine the molecular weight of neutral polymers, methodologies for
ionic or charged polymers are comparatively scarce. The principal reason is the
lack of adequate theoretical approaches to describe polyelectrolyte properties
and very complex behavior in solution. This research aims to provide a basis for
molecular weight determination for ionic polymers having a single type of charge
(polyanions or polycations), including both natural and synthetic systems. The
methods being developed here, if successful, could significantly accelerate the
design and synthesis of polyelectrolytes. Additionally, the development and
validation of the proposed theoretical and experimental methods is expected to
further impact the physical underpinnings of polymer science and enable new
understanding of ionic polymers. This work also promises to facilitate the
characterization of molecular weight for many biopolymers such as hyaluronic
acid, heparin, DNA and RNA. Training opportunities and exposure to polymer
chemistry concepts and techniques will be provided to graduate and undergraduate
students at both institutions. Research activities will also be utilized to
recruit students into macromolecular programs and prepare them for careers in
polymer science. Outreach activities at Virginia Tech will include presentations
that highlight concepts in ionic polymer gels, macromolecular chain motions and
energy storage. This hands-on K-12 outreach program seeks to broaden thinking
and encourage elementary and high school students to consider pursuing science
and technology careers. The ongoing REU (research experiences for
undergraduates) program at Pennsylvania State University will be leveraged to
include recruitment of students from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyelectrolytes are increasingly used in alternative
energy technologies, engineered human tissues, drug delivery, and a host of
other applications. A critical barrier to wider development and application of
polyelectrolytes lies in the extreme effort required to characterize their
absolute molecular weight. Furthermore, the balance between strong electrostatic
repulsions along each chain with the entropic penalty for stretching the chain
is delicate and not yet understood in detail, making simple models only work
under specific circumstances. This project will focus on a detailed scaling
theory for polyelectrolyte behaviors in solution that underlies four distinct
methods (using measured terminal modulus, relaxation time, chain diffusion,
correlation length, and viscosity) for measuring number-average molecular weight
(Mn). These four methods will employ measurements by solution rheology, X-ray
scattering, and NMR diffusometry. A strong emphasis will be placed on developing
a toolbox that establishes well-defined operating strategies and parameter
spaces for practical applications of these methods in the semi-dilute
unentangled regime. The scope of measurements will include a wide array of
polyelectrolyte chemistries. Furthermore, a technique to reliably quantify
polydispersity for polyelectrolytes using the diffusion-based molecular weight
determination method by NMR spectroscopy is under development. Lastly, the
utility of the methods for analyzing neutral polymers will also be explored. If
successful, this research will not only provide a toolbox of experimental
techniques that others can use, but also a theoretical framework for scaling
relationships to describe data that translate into molecular weight and
polydispersity, parameters of critical importance in characterizing charged
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.