* 2203441
* Measuring and Manipulating how Proteins Control their Net Charge: Redox Enzymes, Crowded Enzymes, and Aggregated Proteins.
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Bryan Shaw, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 440,000.00

With the support from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Bryan F. Shaw from Baylor University will investigate new
ways to measure and manipulate the electrostatic properties of proteins. In
contrast to other properties of proteins, the net electrostatic charge (denoted
“Z”) is not typically measured or studied. Consequently, it is not known how or
by what magnitude the net charge of a protein changes when electrons are
transferred to or from a protein and how molecular crowding within a cell may
affect this change. This knowledge gap may limit the understanding of how living
cells work. Dr. Shaw’s research group is using capillary electrophoresis to
measure how the net charges of different proteins change during protein crowding
and electron transfer. The Shaw research team will evaluate how the
electrostatic properties of proteins may be controlled or altered by small
molecules or mutations, to ultimately affect catalysis and protein self-
assembly. In parallel with these research activities, new tools will be
developed, tested, and implemented, to make chemical imagery and data accessible
to college students with blindness. Dr. Shaw’s research team converts 2D data
and imagery into “lithophane” format. Lithophanes are tactile graphics that glow
with video-like resolution when held up to ambient light. Persons with blindness
can visualize the lithophane data by touch (tactile sensing), whereas sighted
persons can visualize the exact same lithophane data using eyesight. This
Lithophane Data Format (LDF) promotes diversity and inclusion by enabling data
sharing between sighted and blind scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research focuses on the magnitude of the change in net charge of a protein upon
proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET), as opposed to electron transfer that is
not coupled to proton transfer. Experiments will be performed to identify which
amino acid residues in certain metalloproteins affect the change in net charge
during these redox processes. The proposed research will also measure how the
activity of an enzyme (e.g., RNase) is affected by the net charge of a crowded
protein neighbor at distances up to 8 Å. Investigating how the catalytic
activity of enzymes can be altered by the net charge of its nearest crowded
neighbor has the potential to improve our understanding of cellular protein
localization and function. The research also involves the design and synthesis
of small molecules that electrostatically disrupt coulombic interactions between
proteins and biological surfaces. The research has potential impact in
biochemistry, including enzymology, bioinorganic chemistry, and protein
biophysics because it examines fundamental electrostatic effects upon protein-
based electron transfer, protein crowding and self-assembly, and upon
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.