* 2203611
* New Multifunctional Bioorthogonal Probes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jennifer Schomaker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2025
* USD 279,413.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Jennifer Schomaker in the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin-Madison aims to develop new
biocompatible chemical tools to study diverse and interdependent processes
associated with both normal and dysfunctional biology. The ease of synthesis of
the proposed tools, coupled with the ability to employ computational studies to
tune their complementary (bioorthogonal) reactivity, are attractive features of
this new class of compounds. The utility of these tools will be harnessed to
develop selective, targeted molecular delivery methods and to tag single-chain
antibody fragments capable of permeating the blood-brain barrier. All findings
will be made widely available to the broader scientific community to stimulate
collaborations that advance and increase the impact of the proposed work.
Elements of this research program will be incorporated into multi-course
laboratory modules that span analytical, organic and computational chemistry and
chemical biology to increase student understanding and appreciation for tackling
scientific problems that require multidisciplinary approaches. The Schomaker Lab
will partner with UW-Madison Chemistry Opportunities (CHOPs), a program
committed to enhancing graduate student diversity. CHOPs participants will tour
research facilities, meet with faculty/students and learn about opportunities
for interdisciplinary research at UW.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of
elucidating details of the function, dynamics, and interdependence of complex
biological processes drives the design of innovative new tools to study the
behavior of cellular systems. Designed reagents used to probe biological systems
must be highly stable, biocompatible, chemoselective, and non-promiscuous, i.e.
devoid of the propensity for non-specific labeling. Due to these constraints,
studying processes occurring inside cells is challenging, especially when
interrogating multiple biomolecules simultaneously in real time. Despite the
breadth of current bioorthogonal probes, most are designed to examine a single
biological event and often suffer from slow rates, poor chemoselectivity/off-
target reactivities, instability or ineffective uptake that limits labeling to a
cell surface. This work introduces a new class of heterocyclic alkynes, termed
‘SNO-OCTs’, where the polarizability of the alkyne is predictably tuned for
mutually exclusive bioorthogonality with diverse ‘click’ partners. These
powerful tools have the potential to allow for the observation of multiple
simultaneous or sequential signaling events in vitro and in vivo. Their
kinetics, bioorthogonality and physical properties should be molecularly
tunable, allowing them to be potentially tailored for specific applications.
Moreover, the versatility and modularity of SNO-OCT scaffolds is to be exploited
to develop ‘click-and-release’ strategies to deliver small molecules,
fluorescent probes and biomolecules to specific sites. Potential applications
for these new tools include controlled protein activation, fluorophore
activation to detect RNA and other biomolecules via imaging and release of
gasotransmitters or drugs to targeted locations. SNO-OCT-based tools for the
preparation, bioorthogonal labeling and observation of single-chain antibody
fragments (scFv) that are able to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB) are to be
developed. The lack of competing reactivity of SNO-OCTs with sulfur nucleophiles
in the biological milieu enables efficient simultaneous functionalization of
scFv from yeast surfaces and avoids the traditional need for soluble protein
expression and purification. The SNO-OCT ring can be opened with nucleophiles
subsequent to the labeling/imaging event to ‘rewrite’ the scFv for further
functionalization and analysis. The Wisconsin research team plans to make these
probes available to the broader scientific community to broaden their scientific
reach and impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.