* 2203292
* A Physics-Based Artificial Intelligence General Framework for Optimal Control of Sewer Systems to Minimize Sewer Overflows
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Arturo Leon, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 09/30/2025
* USD 400,000.00

A combined sewer system collects rainwater runoff, domestic sewage, and
industrial wastewater in the same pipe. Under normal conditions, a combined
sewer system transports the collected wastewater to a plant where it is treated
and discharged to surface water systems including rivers, lakes, estuaries, and
oceans. During heavy rainfall events or snowmelts, the volume of wastewater
transported by a combined sewer system can sometimes exceed the treatment
plant's capacity resulting in overflows into nearby streams and surface water
bodies. Approximately 850 billion gallons of untreated combined sewer overflows
are discharged every year in the United States. These sewer overflows have an
adverse impact on the environment and communities including the contamination of
drinking water sources and the closures of recreational beaches. The overarching
goal of this project is to develop and validate machine learning tools to
forecast the location and volume of potential sewer overflows. To advance this
goal, the Principal Investigators (PIs) propose to integrate data science (big
data algorithms), lab-scale experiments, and physics-based numerical models to
accelerate the availability of machine learning models to guide and optimize the
operation of sewer systems with the aim of managing and reducing the
environmental impact of sewer overflows. The successful completion of this
project will benefit society through the development of fundamental knowledge
and new modeling tools to support the management and reduction of sewer
overflows. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through outreach and
educational activities including the mentoring of two graduate students and six
undergraduate students at Florida International
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the frequency and intensity of extreme
weather events such as heavy rainfalls and flooding increase due to climate
change, sewer overflows will become more frequent and severe. To manage sewer
overflows, a new generation of ultrafast models are needed to predict when and
where they are likely to occur, and the sequence of decisions needed to minimize
overflows before heavy rainfall occurs. The overarching goal of this project is
to integrate artificial intelligence (AI), big data, and physics-based numerical
models to accelerate the availability of machine learning (ML) models that could
be used to predict, manage, and reduce sewer overflows. The specific objectives
of the research are to: 1) Implement and validate a sewer overflow model for an
existing open-source sewer flow dynamics model that currently cannot simulate
sewer overflows; 2) Develop a general physics-based AI open-source framework for
predicting the location and volume of combined sewer overflows for a given fixed
set of operational scenarios (e.g., gate positions are fixed); and 3) Develop an
AI open-source framework for determining an optimal sequence of decision
variables/scenarios at control gates for minimizing combined sewer overflows. In
addition to the specific objectives listed above, the Principal Investigators
(PI) propose to combine and integrate their proposed new ML model with various
open-source physical-based models to build a new modeling framework named
IMPACTO (Integrated Modeling for Prediction of sewer overflows and Analytics for
optimal control of gates in Closed-conduits and Tunnels to minimize Overflows).
Finally, the PIs propose to validate IMPACTO by training it to (1) predict the
location and volume of combined sewer overflows in two existing sewer systems
and (2) determine the optimal sequence of decision variables at control gates
(e.g., flow discharges) to minimize sewer overflows. The successful completion
of this project has the potential for transformative impact through the
development and validation of an integrated, and open-source model that could be
used to predict, manage, and reduce the occurrence of combined sewer overflows.
To implement the education and outreach activities of the project, the PIs plan
to develop an educational module with hands-on activities on sewer overflows for
middle schools from underrepresented groups in collaboration with the Florida
International University (FIU) Engineers on Wheel program. In addition, the PIs
propose to leverage the FIU Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation
program to recruit six undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to
work on the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.