* 2203418
* Urbanization and Inequality: The Geography of Wage Disparities
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Michael Storper, Buchholz, Maximilian
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Michael
Storper at the University of California, Los Angeles, this postdoctoral
fellowship award supports an early career scientist investigating the impact of
urbanization on income inequality across U.S. cities. In larger and denser urban
areas workers on average have higher wage and salary incomes, a phenomenon known
as the “urban wage premium.” Yet the urban wage premium appears to vary
substantially for workers in different groups. Recent research suggests there
are demographic dimensions to the urban wage premium, generating a positive
cross-sectional relationship between levels of urbanization across U.S. cities
and wage gaps. This research will probe these disparities in the urban wage
premium further, with methods and data sources that are new to the related
scholarly literature. This work will inform our understanding of how urban
planners and policymakers can promote equity and inclusion in urban
economies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the proposed research will
ask 1) do increases in density and population within city-regions over time
cause wage inequality to increase and 2) what mechanisms underlie these
disparate impacts of urbanization? The first question will be explored with
panel regression models using data on individual workers across a broad number
of city-regions from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth. The second
question will be examined with semi-structured interviews and annotated mapping
exercises with workers who have lived in one large and one much smaller
California city-region (specifically people who have lived in either greater Los
Angeles or San Francisco and either greater Fresno or Sacramento). A core
hypothesis that will be tested is whether more urbanized city-regions increase
the challenges people face in navigating employment opportunities,
housing/neighborhood quality, commute times, and daily activities in ways that
have disproportionately adverse wage effects for workers. This research will
contribute to our understanding of why the most prosperous U.S. city-regions
also tend to be among the most unequal with a novel framework that integrates
spatial and labor market considerations as drivers of
inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.