* 2203499
* Carbodiimide Ring-opening Metathesis Polymerization: Precision Synthesis of Nitrogen-Rich Polymer Backbones
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Aleksandr Zhukhovitskiy, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2025
* USD 465,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Aleksandr Zhukhovitskiy of the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill is developing ring-opening polymerization reactions for
the synthesis of nitrogen-rich polymer backbones. Polymers—macromolecular
constituents of plastics and rubber materials— are essential and ubiquitous in
our daily lives: from food packaging to clothing to vehicle parts. The vast
majority of plastics that are currently being produced contain predominantly
carbon atoms along the main polymer backbone. Meanwhile, further developing the
chemistry associated with systems containing nitrogen-rich polymer backbones is
critically needed. This improved control over their assembly, folding,
thermodynamic and dielectric properties, as well as catalytic activity. These
concepts are illustrated well in proteins, which are naturally occurring
polymers. However, incorporation of nitrogen into the polymer backbone is
difficult to achieve synthetically, and the majority of current methodologies
are non-selective and generally lack structural precision. In this research,
highly active catalysts based on iridium metal will be used in ring-opening
polymerization of a variety of carbodiimides to prepare polymers with abundant
and precisely positioned nitrogen atoms along the polymer backbone. Strong
emphasis will be placed on detailed kinetic and mechanistic understanding of the
catalytic cycle, monomer design, and control over the length of polymer chains.
Complementary computational methods will also be utilized to guide experimental
design and understand how these reactions work and how to improve them. This
research provides unique opportunities to educate students in mechanistic
analysis, physical organic chemistry, organometallic chemistry and polymer
chemistry. The research will also transform the design and synthesis of
academically and industrially relevant nitrogen-rich polymer backbones, opening
the door to a deeper understanding of the structure-property relationships in
these polymers. In addition, the team will continue to expand its educational
polymer-chemistry focused program that targets K-12 students and science
teachers with a focus on talent pools that remain under-resourced and
underrepresented in the STEM fields. This program includes virtual and in-person
science demonstrations at K-12 schools in Chapel Hill and will expand to include
Durham, NC. These efforts will be instrumental to nurturing within future
generations of students an appreciation for and identification with polymer
science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on carbodiimide
ring-opening metathesis polymerization (CDI ROMP) catalyzed by iridium
guanidinate complexes for the precise synthesis of nitrogen-rich polymer
backbones. The first objective will focus on the investigation of the reaction
mechanism through a combination of experimental and theoretical tools. The
following aspects will be explored: verification of chain growth, the type of
metathesis process, energetics of the carbodiimide-iridium coordination, the
nature of energy barrier of turnover limiting step, and the geometry of the
corresponding transition state. Controlled and living CDI ROMP will be developed
in the second objective and utilized to prepare block copolymers. Computational
and experimental studies will shed light on the effect of ancillary
cyclopentadienyl ligand structure in the iridium catalyst on the
backbiting/chain transfer process. The last objective will focus on the
derivatization of precise main-chain polycarbodiimides to form libraries of
other classes of nitrogen-rich polymer backbones, including polyureas,
polythioureas, polyguanidines, polyamidines and polyamidinates. The mechanism of
insertion/elimination in this research is fundamentally different from
traditional metathesis of C-C bonds that proceeds via cyclo-
addition/elimination. As such, the gained mechanistic insights will be
instructive in the future development of other types of metathesis
transformations, such as diazene metathesis and ring-closing carbodiimide
metathesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.