* 2203493
* Dynamics and the Classification of Geometries on Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* William Goldman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2027
* USD 350,000.00

This project will conduct research into the classification of locally
homogeneous geometric structures on manifolds. This is a subject on the
interface of geometry and topology and has been particularly important in the
study of topology in 2 and 3 dimensions. A simple example is that there is no
metrically accurate world atlas: the topology of the sphere (the earth) is not
compatible with Euclidean geometry, although the topology of a torus (an inner
tube) is. The project is closely related to other fields of mathematics,
including group theory, algebraic geometry, and dynamical systems. The research
has an experimental component and involves visualization techniques. The project
will include software development for these questions and graduate students will
receive training through involvement in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research includes four main threads: (1) the classification of affine and
projective structures with solvable holonomy; (2) relations between the certain
geometries and symplectic/contact geometry; (3) dynamical systems arising from
mapping class group actions on deformation spaces and character varieties; and
(4) explicit constructions of topological automorphisms and the computation of
finer dynamical invariants. The latter involves natural Poisson/symplectic
geometry on the deformation spaces. The project also includes mentoring and
training of students as well as outreach activities via the Experimental
Geometry Lab at the PI's home institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.