* 2203535
* CAS: Harvesting Carbon Resources Locked in PVC and Polybutadiene Waste
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Rebecca Braslau, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 465,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Rebecca Braslau of the
University of California â€“ Santa Cruz (UCSC) will work to develop a chemical
upcycling strategy for the commercial polymer, polyvinyl chloride (PVC). A
series of chemical reactions will be used to transform this material from its
non-recyclable form into value-added products using mild temperatures and
ambient pressure. These transformations are aimed at producing 1,5-hexadiene,
which can be collected or further transformed into other valuable alkane
products. Use of waste plastic consisting of all-carbon backbones as a rich
feedstock would provide a non-petrochemical source for useful organic chemicals,
while mitigating part of the ecological catastrophe of persistent plastic waste
in our environment and landfills. The impact of chemical upcycling of waste PVC
would provide a significant environmental benefit. Utilizing PVC as a valued
carbon-rich resource would give the carbon atoms in the polymer backbone new
uses, and result in its diversion from landfills and reduce environmental
contamination. The research experience will provide interdisciplinary training
to graduate and undergraduate students in synthetic organic chemistry and
materials science. UCSC is a Hispanic-Serving Institution; underrepresented
undergraduates will experience meaningful, exciting research. Active outreach by
presenting talks on plastics with hands-on experiments to local middle and high
schools serving large, underrepresented populations will engage students from
diverse backgrounds in science and provide role models for pursuing higher
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) is a commodity polymer
that is notoriously difficult to reuse or recycle, hence the polymer often ends
up in a landfill after use. This work will address this problem by developing an
upcycling strategy for this commercial polymer. Elimination of HCl from the
(CH2-CHCl) units of PVC to form polyenes followed by olefin metathesis with
added small alkenes will form a variety of specific dienes as value-added
products. Likewise, olefin metathesis to upcycle polybutadiene (and related
polymers with olefin-containing repeat units) will allow the breakdown of
synthetic rubbers and provide access to 1,5-hexadienes derived from
polybutadiene fragments. These dienes, or their direct reduction products
(devoid of E/Z isomers) have the long term potential of serving as feedstocks
for the chemical industry with low supply chain energy investments and minimal
greenhouse gas emissions. Development of reaction conditions that allow olefin
formation in tandem with olefin metathesis will provide a powerful synthetic
tool for targeted alkene harvesting from used/discarded polymer sources, but
also for applications beyond plastics upcycling. Use of plastic waste as an
untapped carbon resource provides an earth-friendly route to continued chemical
innovation, without relying on petrochemical sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.