* 2203577
* Collaborative Research: Combining Theory and Experiment to Understand the First Photophysical Events in the Photoactivation of the Orange Carotenoid Protein
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Warren Beck, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 308,978.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division, Professor José Gascón from University of Connecticut (UConn) and
Professor Warren F. Beck from Michigan State University will investigate the
mechanisms that cyanobacteria employ to protect themselves from damage due to
excessive exposure to sunlight. This project will determine how a ketocarotenoid
bound to the orange carotenoid protein (OCP) serves as a sensor for the light
intensity and color. The main goal is to determine the photophysical mechanism
that converts the OCP from a resting, orange form (OCPO) to an active, red form
(OCPR); this conversion protects the organism during high intensity solar
illumination by slowing the rate of photosynthetic energy storage. The work will
provide insight in how the components in the photosynthetic apparatus of
cyanobacteria and green plants work together to store solar energy in molecular
form and to avoid light-driven side reactions that cause damage. The new
knowledge could impact the design and engineering of materials that can be used
in solar energy applications. The research will afford an excellent opportunity
for graduate students involved to learn advanced computer modeling and
spectroscopy techniques and their application to advanced studies of molecular
structure and function. In addition, the project will create research
opportunities for high school students from the School of Exploratory Chemical
Research and Training (SECRET) and undergraduate students who participate in the
NSF-funded Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site in Chemistry at
UConn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned research involves a combination of
state-of-the-art femtosecond multidimensional electronic spectroscopy and
ultrasensitive fluorescence methods to sense the conformational changes that the
ketocarotenoid undergoes in OCPO when it absorbs blue-green light. Electronic
structure calculations and molecular dynamics simulations will then be used to
develop a molecular model for the first structural events that follow
photoexcitation of the ketocarotenoid. The research plan will test the
hypothesis that light-driven conformational changes of the ketocarotenoid
initiate the structural reorganization of the protein. These studies are
expected to provide molecular details of how the ketocarotenoid senses ambient
solar illumination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.