* 2203543
* Identifying Climate Model Biases in the Pattern of Ocean Warming and their Influence on Regional Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Kyle Armour, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 479,132.00

Surface temperature observations in the tropical Pacific Ocean show a higher
rate of warming over the last 50 years in the West Pacific than in the East
Pacific. However, most state-of-the-art climate models show the opposite. It is
uncertain if the observed trend will continue or if the ocean warming pattern
will eventually revert to something more like climate model projections. The
difference between these scenarios is a primary source of uncertainty in
projected future changes in regional climate because unusual temperature
patterns in the tropical oceans generate large-scale atmospheric wave
disturbances that influence regional climate throughout the globe. This project
will use climate modeling and analysis of climate model data to understand the
causes of the discrepancy between climate models and observations in the recent
pattern of ocean warming, to understand the processes that lead different
climate models to project different future changes in the ocean temperature
pattern, to identify regions worldwide where atmospheric circulation and
precipitation projections could be affected by climate model biases in the
tropical Pacific, and to understand the processes linking changes in these
regions to the tropical Pacific. By combining an understanding of how the
tropical Pacific Ocean changes in the future in different climate models with an
understanding of how and why individual climate models are biased compared to
the observational record, this research has the potential to constrain future
projections of ocean warming patterns. Improved constraints on future climate
change in the tropical Pacific will in turn improve constraints on future
changes in atmospheric circulation and regional climate in regions such as North
America that are strongly influenced by wave disturbances emanating from the
tropical Pacific. The work will support the career development of an early-
career researcher and a graduate student as well as include public outreach
activities through the University of Washington Program on Climate Change and
the Pacific Science Center in Seattle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project bridges
the gap between fundamental science questions on how and why the tropical
Pacific responds to anthropogenic forcing on different timescales with the
practical need for better projections of how water resources will change in the
coming decades in the U.S. Southwest and other regions that are strongly
influenced by El Ni√±o. This research will also identify and investigate the
causes of climate model biases, in their simulation of the current climate and
their simulation of climate trends. This work will provide valuable information
for climate model developers, who are working to address these biases and
improve climate models, and for the large community of scientists using climate
models to understand and plan for the regional impacts of climate change. This
project will help train the next generation of climate scientists. The results
of this project will be disseminated widely through publications, conference
presentations, press releases, and outreach to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.