* 2203951
* Analysis and Optimization of Polymer Networks for Emerging Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jeremiah Johnson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jeremiah A. Johnson and
Professor Bradley D. Olsen of MIT will endeavor to develop new ways to
understand the fundamental structure and properties of polymer networks, which
are the major components of many materials used in everyday life from tires to
soft contact lenses to five-minute epoxy adhesives. Due to the incredible
complexity of polymer networks, several fundamental features of their structure
remain a mystery despite over 100 years of academic and industrial
investigation. Without knowledge of structure, one cannot fully understand
function. This project seeks to fill these knowledge gaps in the context of
industrially important, high-performance polymers called “thermosets” through
the creation of new experimental ways to break down polymers into pieces that
can be characterized and used to reconstruct the original material’s structure.
Simultaneously, new ways to compute the structures of polymers will be developed
and tested against experimental findings. The results will guide the design of
next-generation polymer materials with useful properties for a wide range of
applications including sustainable materials, membranes for removal of toxic
agents from wastewater, and matrices for cellular and tissue engineering.
Additionally, this project will drive education and outreach efforts at MIT
designed to increase awareness of the importance of polymers in everyday life as
well as the critical challenges that society faces in polymer waste management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer networks are materials composed of chemically
and/or physically crosslinked macromolecules. The compositions and topologies of
polymer networks are extremely diverse and complex, driving numerous
applications as plastics, composites, rubbers, and hydrogels. Due to their
relatively disordered structures, polymer networks have traditionally been
difficult to quantitatively design from the molecular level. In this project,
ProfessorsJeremiah A. Johnson and Bradley D. Olsen of the Departments of
Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at MIT, respectively, will work to invent new
chemical strategies, theories, and simulations to provide a deeper understanding
of the topology of high-performance thermoset materials. First, methods to
enable the degradation and measurement of primary loops in industrial thermosets
including polydicyclopentadiene and polyurethanes will be created. These methods
will be applied to measure and control the topology of covalent adaptable
networks, enabling “topological recycling” of thermoset-like materials. Finally,
new methods for quantification of high-order loop structures in polymer networks
will be developed. If successful, these studies have the potential to
significantly add to the tools available to design, understand and construct
polymer networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.