* 2203122
* Neuronal plasticity and the evolvability of behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2026
* Bruce Carlson, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 08/31/2026
* USD 980,000.00

Behavior in all animals, including humans, requires four components in nervous
systems to successfully interact: sensory organs that receive external stimuli,
central pathways that process the sensory stimuli, pathways that coordinate and
plan behavioral actions, and muscles that execute those actions. Our team will
examine how these four components are sustained as behavior changes during
development and evolutionary timescales. The central hypothesis of this project
is that changes in behavior alter the sensory feedback an animal receives about
that behavior, and this, in turn, modifies the brain in such a way that it
drives coordinated changes between each of these four components. The
researchers will test this hypothesis by capitalizing on unique experimental
advantages of weakly electric fish to reveal fundamental mechanisms underlying
evolutionary and developmental change in behavior. Electric fish are excellent
tools for public outreach in neuroscience and behavior. As exotic animals, they
attract a wide audience. The researchers will expand ongoing outreach and
education activities to teach K-12 students in the St. Louis region about
hypothesis-driven science and the importance of brain plasticity in behavior.
The researchers will also establish a new pipeline to recruit students from
Harris-Stowe State University, a Historically Black College and University, into
biological research. The proposed research will play a central role in the
training and development of undergraduate students, graduate students, and
postdoctoral researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nervous systems are complex,
multifunctional, and highly integrated systems. Evolutionary and developmental
change in behavior requires coordinated modifications to peripheral organs and
multiple central circuits, which would seem to place strong phylogenetic and
developmental constraints on nervous systems. Nevertheless, dramatic differences
in behavior can arise between closely related species over relatively short
evolutionary timespans. How can diverse behaviors evolve from constrained
brains? The central hypothesis of this project is that activity-dependent wiring
in response to altered sensory feedback drives coordinated changes between
peripheral organs and central circuits. The researchers will test this
hypothesis by capitalizing on the experimental advantages of mormyrid weakly
electric fishes. These fishes are uniquely suited to addressing this challenging
question, providing an unparalleled opportunity to gain fundamental insight into
the role of activity-dependent plasticity in the evolution of behavioral
novelty. The researchers will use a combination of hormone treatment and
surgical manipulation to determine whether coordinated changes between
peripheral organs and central circuits result from sensory feedback and
plasticity. Electrophysiology and neuroanatomy will be used to identify the
mechanisms underlying the resulting changes to central circuits, and to
determine whether these same mechanisms are responsible for species differences
in these circuits. The researchers will continue educational, training, and
outreach efforts that are synergistic with the research and that impact K-12
students and educators, undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral
researchers. The researchers will also establish a new pipeline to recruit
students from Harris-Stowe State University, a Historically Black College and
University, into biological research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.