* 2203142
* RUI: Glass Science Research at Coe College
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Steven Feller, Coe College
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports research on glass
science for undergraduates at Coe College in Cedar Rapids, IA. The research plan
is focused on discovering new glass families with novel properties and
structure. Some examples of these glasses are of potential use in batteries.
Students use various ways to rapidly quench liquids to glasses designed and
built in-house. Structure is found using various forms spectroscopies.
Properties include thermal and optical measurements as well as density,
hardness, and electrical and ionic conductivity. Computer simulations and
theoretical models are frequently done. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts
are of vital importance to this project. The foremost broader impact is that
these undergraduates, rapidly increasing in diversity, gain several years of
research experience. This serves the national interest and helps provide the
nation with urgently needed highly trained technical staff as well as provide a
substantial source of well-educated students for graduate school. Another
important broader impact is that Coe College is now a hub of undergraduate
research expertise in glass science. Knowledge about this undergraduate research
program is being systematically shared with faculty at other higher education
institutions, including several minority serving ones. Also, as part of Coe’s
REU program, students from research-poor colleges and high-school teachers join
this research. High-school students also join this research program each summer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports
research on novel oxide glasses by undergraduate students at Coe College. The
research plan is to extend glass formation to new compositions in a variety of
potential binary and ternary glass forming systems that are currently
understudied. Some examples of these systems include alkali tellurites and
vanadates where there are promising results from this lab. For example, invert
tellurite glasses have been formed with up to 65 molar percent sodium oxide. For
this project, twin-roller quenching is used on custom designed and built
instruments made here by students and faculty. Properties and atomic structure
are measured and compared. These techniques include thermal (Tg, Tx, Tm, and
fragility), optical (TOF-MS, laser levitation studies of glass formation and
viscosity, Raman spectroscopy, and XRD) properties as well as density, hardness,
and ionic conductivity. With collaborators NMR, x-ray, and neutron scattering
studies are carried out. Also, molecular dynamics simulations and topological
constraint theory are employed to determine compositionally changing properties
from structural models and knowledge of bond constraints.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts are of vital importance to this project.
The foremost broader impact is that many undergraduates gain multiple years of
publishable research experience. This provides the nation with trained technical
staff as well as provide a source of well-educated graduate students. Another
important broader impact is that Coe College continues to serve as hub of
undergraduate research expertise. This knowledge is being systematically shared
with other higher education institutions, including several minority serving
ones. Workshops, presentations at technical conferences, and mutual visits also
occur. Outreach to elementary schools and high schools happens often. High-
school students join this research program each summer. Students from research-
poor colleges and teachers join this research each summer as part of Coe’s REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.