* 2203290
* Chemical Applications of Floquet State Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* John Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor John Wright and his research group at the
University of Wisconsin are developing a new technique called Floquet state
spectroscopy. Floquet state spectroscopy is the fully coherent optical analogue
of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. NMR spectroscopy, which uses
radio waves to interact with atoms and molecules, is used extensively in science
and technology because of its ability to characterize complex samples. Floquet
state spectroscopy promises similar capabilities using light, rather than radio
waves, to interact with molecules. The goal of this project is to apply Floquet
state spectroscopy to a range of chemical systems that are important in
practical applications of chemistry. For example, Professor Wright and his team
use the technique to determine how the atoms within a molecule must bend, twist,
and stretch in order to change the bonds that hold the molecule together. This
information forms the heart of synthetic chemistry because it identifies the
mechanisms responsible for a reaction. The team also works with collaborators
from academic, industrial, and government laboratories to demonstrate the unique
capabilities of Floquet state spectroscopy for characterizing complex materials
and to show how the technique can be applied in many fields of science and
technology. The broader impacts of the project include wide dissemination of
this new technology, student training opportunities, and a collaboration with
Spelman College that engages minority students in summer research projects on
Floquet state spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Floquet state spectroscopy
measures the response of a system based on simultaneously driven multiple
vibrational and electronic molecular states. The resulting quantum mechanically
entangled superposition state emits light according to the wavevector
combinations of the Floquet states. Scanning the driving frequencies across
resonances of a molecule results in multiplicative enhancements of the output
light beams and thus provides a way to measure multidimensional spectra. A
primary focus of this research project is using Floquet state spectroscopy to
probe the mechanisms of chemical reactions. Creating a Floquet state that
contains the same vibrational and electronic states as those driven by chaotic
thermal motions allows direct observation and control of a reaction. Cobalamin
and a Ru-Ru metal-metal complex are two model compounds that the team is using
to test the ability of Floquet state spectroscopy to probe reaction mechanisms.
In cobalamin, the challenge is to understand the factors responsible for the
12-orders of magnitude change in the scission rate of the C-Co bond upon binding
with a substrate. In the ruthenium complex, the challenge is understanding the
mechanism for the amination of C-H bonds. Dissemination of the technology
includes working with collaborators to apply Floquet state spectroscopy for
complex polymeric materials characterization, disposal of actinide nuclear waste
in glasses, femtosecond stimulated Raman studies of photochemical reactions, and
development of medical diagnostics for pancreatic cancer. Additional broader
impacts include advanced training for graduate students as well as the efforts
to broaden participation through the collaboration with Spelman
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.