* 2203624
* CAS: REGENERABLE POLYMERS FOR PHOSPHATE REMOVAL AND RECOVERY FROM WASTEWATER
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Valerie Pierre, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 11/30/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Valerie Pierre of the University
of Minnesota will be developing polymer-supported receptors that capture and
release phosphate reversibly as needed for remediation and purification of waste
water and for recycling phosphateâ€”a critical resource needed to secure our food
supply. Professor Pierre and her research team aim to synthesize and study
polymers and receptors that function as sponges, capturing the phosphate from
polluted water selectively and then releasing it upon addition of stimuli such
as light or pressure. This controlled reversibility is designed to enable
separation and recovery of phosphate and reagent-less recovery of smart
receptors. This interdisciplinary research project will provide training
opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students across a range of useful
skills, including chemical synthesis, polymer characterization, and analytical
studies of the receptor-phosphate binding. Broader impacts of the project also
include the development and evaluation of new hands-on activities for middle
schools, with the goal of increasing interest in science and the research
enterprise in students early in their education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pierre
research team seeks to develop a general strategy based on allosteric
electrostatic interactions to render receptors for ions responsive to external
stimuli. A unique aspect of these receptors is their ability to release their
guests on demand upon addition of an external physical or chemical stimulus. The
catch-and-release properties of such designed receptors rely on reversible
chemical reactions, such as those governed by light, redox potential,
temperature, and pressure. This controlled reversibility is expected to enable
separation followed by controlled recovery of phosphate and reagent-less
recovery of receptors supported on smart polymers. This approach broadens the
capabilities of supramolecular ion receptors by enabling them to release the
guests up a concentration gradient. The Minnesota research team further seeks to
combine the strength of supramolecular chemistry with that of polymer science to
enable solid support control of the behavior of the supported
receptors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.