* 2203801
* Tenant Immobility and Family Well-Being: Considering the Role of Networks, Neighborhoods, and the Indoor Environment
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Ann Owens, Schmidt, Steven E
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the
SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Ann Owens at
the University of Southern California, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating the relation between tenant
immobility and gentrification. Rising rental costs combined with stagnating
wages have led to an affordable housing crisis in the United States.
Sociologists measuring the impact of housing unaffordability on U.S. families
tend to focus on how rising housing costs displace renters from neighborhoods,
and where renters move after they have been displaced. However, this focus
overlooks how housing unaffordability may negatively impact low-income renters
even before they experience displacement. Because moves are expensive and
uncertain, it is likely that families make significant trade-offs to remain in
their current home. Using in-depth interviews and survey data, this project will
examine the experiences of immobile families living in Los Angeles County,
California—one of the nation’s least affordable rental markets. It will identify
the strategies that renters use to remain in their home and how these strategies
shape their material, physical, and emotional well-being. More specifically, it
will test the prediction that tenants manage poor maintenance at home to remain
in neighborhoods that they value, and that strict tenant screening practices
discourage moves away from low-quality rentals. This project will focus on the
experiences of low-income minority households, who are understudied in
sociological research on residential decision-making. The findings from this
study can direct policy interventions that better protect tenants from apartment
disinvestment and make rental housing more accessible at the tenant screening
stage of housing searches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sociologists have studied the
relationship between gentrification and displacement (e.g., involuntary moves)
for nearly four decades. However, less research has examined the experiences of
disadvantaged renters in gentrifying neighborhoods who are immobile. By
overlooking low-income families who do not move, existing sociological research
on gentrification underestimates the impact of rising housing costs on family
well-being. To address this gap, this project will answer the following research
questions: (1) How do social networks, neighborhood contexts, and building-level
conditions influence renter immobility? And (2), what are the potentially
countervailing pathways through which immobility shapes renters’ material,
emotional, and physical well-being? Based in Los Angeles County, CA, this
project will use interviews and survey data from 80 low-income, immigrant
renters—a population that has received scant scholarly attention in the
residential mobility literature. I will supplement interviews with two
surveys—the Berkman Syme Social Network Index to assess social integration and a
housing adequacy measure from the U.S. Census that captures indoor environmental
quality. I hypothesize that immobile renters manage substandard living
environments to remain near neighborhood resources, job opportunities, and
supportive social networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.