* 2203578
* CAS: Designing Chemically Functionalized Polymers for Nanoscale Structures and Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Todd Emrick, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 10/31/2025
* USD 482,500.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Todd Emrick at the University of
Massachusetts Amherst will work to advance fundamental aspects of polymeric and
sustainable chemistry, with focus on discovering unique combinations of polymers
and semiconductor particles to achieve hybrid structures. The objective will be
to build a diverse team of graduate students, undergraduate researchers, and
high school interns, whose collective efforts uncover how polymers interact with
electronically active surfaces and synergistically enhance the optical,
electronic, and photoactive properties of the hybrid structure as a whole. The
research in this project will in turn educate the participants in vital areas of
chemistry where new discoveries are needed to advance the chemical sciences
beyond what is known today. Direct implications of this project point towards
producing advanced devices, such as solar cells, that are more efficient when
the polymers synthesized in this project are used in conjunction with
semiconductor particles/surfaces. Importantly, this project will enable new
summer research opportunities that promote inclusion of diverse participants who
are entering the formative stages of their STEM education. A seamless merger of
the research with education, diversity, and gender equity objectives will
contribute to our mission of ensuring that the future of U.S. global
competitiveness in science and technology advances the areas of electronic and
solar devices, which are key elements of clean energy and advanced technologies.
Moreover, the project will couple cross-cutting educational activities with
student exposure to industrial interactions, which will maintain awareness of
current needs and opportunities of sustainable technologies at the forefront of
the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical standpoint, this proposal
will design macromolecular/nanoscale hybrid systems that are envisaged to
exploit new discoveries of polymer-based ligands to promote specific surface
interactions with inorganic semiconductor structures. The work will center on
the synthesis of novel, ion-rich, charge-containing polymers, which will be
synthesized by controlled polymerization techniques employing novel monomers.
The functional groups emanating from the polymer backbone are selected
specifically to promote polymer-nanoscale interfacial interactions, including
non-covalent interactions that are dynamic and potentially reversible. Overall,
successfully producing perovskite nanocrystal-containing polymer networks and
well-defined multi-layered nanoscale structures is imperative for boosting the
efficiency of absorption and emission processes needed for generating solar
energy, and likewise for enhancing the brightness and sustainability
(durability) of emissive devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.