* 2203275
* NSF-ANR: The Biophysical Basis of Flat Organ Morphogenesis From Fluctuating Cellular Growth (GrowFlat)
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Adrienne Roeder, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 02/28/2025
* USD 515,092.00

The overarching goal of this project is to understand how leaves maintain their
flat structure while they grow. Leaf flatness is a key agronomic trait because
it affects the extent of light interception and carbon dioxide intake which are
required for photosynthesis. This is an interdisciplinary collaborative project
bringing together a laboratory in France that studies biophysics and a
laboratory in the US that studies plant cell biology to gain new insights into
the mechanical interactions between cells that control of leaf shape. This
project will contribute to the interdisciplinary training of postdoctoral and
undergraduate scientists. The work will be communicated to the public through
outreach activities in France such as The Open University, Universit√© Claude
Bernard Lyon 1; the CNRS forum on What remains to be discovered and in the US
through the Girls for STEM outreach to middle school girls.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thin tissues, such as plant leaves, are typically flat,
whereas the default state of a growing thin sheet is curved. How is flat shape
achieved? This project addresses this question in Arabidopsis leaves, a system
amenable to live-imaging of growth, biophysical experiments, and genetic
manipulation. This project will test the hypothesis that differences between
neighboring cells in their growth (heterogeneity) allows the cells to sense
variations in leaf curvature and correct to maintain flatness as the leaf
expands. Specifically, (i) the relationship between cell-to-cell differences in
growth, cell mechanics, and leaf flatness will be characterized using mutants
with curved, crinkly or wavy leaves. (ii) a theoretical framework to model a
thin active growing sheet in 3D space will be built, and (iii) the combinatorial
regulation of flatness will be characterized through model predictions and
experimental tests. Altogether, the proposed research will advance our
understanding of the biophysical mechanisms that generate reproducible organ
shapes during development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/France
project is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the French Agence
Nationale de la Recherche, where NSF funds the US investigator and ANR funds the
partners in France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.