* 2203396
* Collaborative Research: CAS: Mechanochemistry of Metallocenes
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Stephen Craig, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 274,094.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Chuanbing Tang of the University of
South Carolina (UofSC) and Professor Stephen L. Craig of Duke University will
develop a class of metal-containing polymers that respond with chemical changes
under mechanical stress. Common techniques in the manufacturing of household
plastics can be modified to prepare these polymers. Mechanical stress is a
nearly ubiquitous feature of the environment experience by polymers. The
translation of mechanical stress to responsive chemistry may provide new
pathways to open up applications such as catalysis and advanced materials. This
work has the potential to develop synthetic polymers that are mechanically
responsive and thermally stable, both of which are important for reusability and
recyclability of most commodity polymers. The impact of this work will be
further broadened through its close integration with both new and existing
outreach programs and educational activities at the high school, undergraduate,
and graduate student level. These programs are enriched by partnerships with
American Chemical Society Project SEED summer research program, ACS polymer
student chapter, and local Historically Black Colleges and Universities. Joint
research exchanges will be offered to participating students at UofSC and Duke
to enhance their research experiences and expand future career paths.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on developing synthetic approaches
toward main-chain metallocene-containing polymers and studying their
mechanochemical reactivity. Metallocenes have recently emerged as a new class of
mechanophores. The research aims to consolidate the evolving knowledge of
mechanochemistry and expand it to new frontiers of research through the
collaborative efforts using synthetic metallocene chemistry and polymer
mechanochemistry. Catalytic chemistry will be explored for C-H functionalization
and redox isomerization via the formation half-sandwich metal complexes.
Sensitization of metallocene mechanophores will be further achieved in
metallocenophane macrocycles by combining distal conformational locks and
counterion assistance and quantifying their interplay on reactivity through
single molecule force spectroscopy. Importantly, constructive mechanochemistry
will be pursued by using reconstructive processes to make the activation of
metallocenes reversible and by employing DFT calculations to elucidate
thermodynamic equilibria between dissociated states and sandwich constructs. The
overarching goal of this work is to understand the mechanisms and structure-
activity relationships underlying the highly selective mechanochemical scission
of metal-cyclopentadienyl bond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.