* 2203928
* RUI: Re-engineering Ring-Cleaving Dioxygenases for Activity Towards Novel Substrates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Timothy Machonkin, Whitman College
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2025
* USD 240,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program in the
Division of Chemistry, Timothy Machonkin from Whitman College is studying a
class of deoxygenate enzymes found in soil bacteria that are capable of
oxidatively breaking down certain toxic organic compounds that are common
environmental pollutants. A key step in this process is breaking open the six-
carbon benzene ring in these compounds, which is performed by the ring-cleaving
dioxygenases that are the topic of this proposals. Two of these ring-cleaving
dioxygenases are less studied but are attractive targets for enzyme
reengineering efforts with the aim of finding more active variants with respect
to chlorinated aromatic organic compounds. Since such chlorinated compounds are
among the most intractable pollutants, utilizing enzymes to break down these
compounds could be of use in bioremediation efforts. This project will support
summer research experiences for Whitman undergraduate students, immersing them
in modern bioinorganic chemistry research and providing them with opportunities
to present and publish their research. This work is also expected to contribute
to pedagogical improvement in the chemistry curriculum and enhance community
science outreach efforts at Whitman College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will focus examining both a hydroquinone dioxygenase and an aminophenol
dioxygenase enzyme in order to establish structure/activity profiles of these
enzymes across a range of mutants and a set of targeted substrates. These
enzymes provide an ideal platform for enzyme engineering because they are
structurally characterized, easily expressed, highly active, and already fairly
tolerant of different substrates. Site-directed mutagenesis, particularly
targeting removing specific bulky active site amino acids will be performed to
test whether this serves to broaden substrate specificity, specifically with a
focus on chlorinated aromatic substrates. Steady-state kinetic characterization
will be performed to define how these mutations have affected the enzyme
activity, which should assist in mapping out determinants of substrate
specificity. In addition, computational studies will be used to better
understand the fundamental reasons why chlorinated substrates remain difficult
targets for this class of enzymes. Success at generating mutant enzymes with
improved activity toward substrates with different patterns of chloro-
substitution has the potential to provide insight into how these enzymes bind
chlorinated substrates as well as guide future efforts to engineer ring-cleaving
dioxygenase enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.