* 2203053
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Paleoaridity Shifts in a Regional Climatological Hotspot During Abrupt Global Change Events: An Observation-Model Approach
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Sylvia Dee, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2025
* USD 73,225.00

The general research goal of the research is to evaluate the modern hydroclimate
in central Texas that is currently dominated by moisture delivered from the Gulf
of Mexico (GoM), tropical Atlantic, and continental recycling, with smaller
components from the Pacific. The Great Plains Low-Level Jet generates rainfall
while atmospheric conditions govern how much rainwater evaporates, setting the
geospatial distribution of aridity. This project will specifically test the
hypothesis that this regional distribution of aridity has shifted in terms of
both location and intensity as a function of past abrupt global warming and
cooling events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers aim to reconstruct
speleothem (cave deposits) proxy records from central Texas during episodes of
known rapid global change between the last 16,000 years to 11,000 years–
spanning the Bølling- Allerød (BA) and Younger Dryas (YD) using existing samples
from caves across the Edwards Plateau in central Texas. These caves have been
monitored and assessed relative to modern climate parameters, thereby helping to
maximize the information from the proxy records. The research team will analyze
seven coeval speleothems spanning a 375-kilometer West to East transect,
constructing high-resolution oxygen isotope and growth rate proxy records
constrained by high-precision Uranium-Thorium chronologies. The resulting
speleothem records will be analyzed as a function of longitude to discern
changes in moisture source, as well as the steepness and location of the wet-dry
gradient. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research approach will: 1) employ proxy
system models (PSMs) to assess the influence of cave-specific speleothem growth
parameters such as carbon dioxide transport, temperature, water transport and
drip rates, and source delta Oxygen-18 isotopes; 2) integrate isotopic
variations and growth rates to enhance reconstructions of paleo-aridity; 3)
develop proxy time series to ground-truth isotope-enabled general circulation
models; and 4) use models to test the regional sensitivities to climate forcing
mechanisms, including insolation, greenhouse gases, ice sheet dynamics, and
meltwater input to the GoM. Proxy-model comparison will be employed to inform
regional circulation dynamics during abrupt change
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because the climate of
the eastern United States is becoming wetter while the western United States is
drying. The continental wet-dry line has been shifting eastward over the past
four decades and could ultimately degrade water security for millions of
citizens in Texas residing in the rapidly growing urban corridor stretching from
the Rio Grande Valley to the Dallas-Fort Worth region. This project seeks to
understand the mechanisms by which warming and cooling influence aridity in this
region to refine and inform projections under a range of future climate
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include greater
understanding of water resources in the western United States, support for a
doctoral graduate student, and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.