* 2203982
* Collaborative Research: Surface-specific Aerosol Chemistry: Direct Observations, Kinetics, and Environmental Impact
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* V. Faye McNeill, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 413,144.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences Program of the Division of Chemistry
supports this project by Professors V. Faye McNeill at Columbia University and
Yi Rao at Utah State University. The project addresses how surfaces of
atmospheric particles uniquely affect the chemical reactions taking place there.
A better understanding of atmospheric particle chemistry is needed for
quantifying the impacts of human activities on air quality and climate. Until
recently, this understanding was limited by a lack of analytical techniques
capable of probing surface-specific particle chemistry. The team has developed
unique laboratory methods for studying the chemistry of particles suspended in
gas in a laboratory setting. These are surface-specific sum frequency generation
(SFG) and highly-sensitive HyperRaman Scattering (HRS). These techniques will be
applied together with complementary gas-particle chemical kinetics studies to
characterize processes that are unique to aerosol surfaces. In addition to the
training of graduate and undergraduate students at both institutions, the team
will also engage in outreach activities designed to reach students from
underrepresented groups in science and engineering, and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surface-specific particle chemistry will be
investigated in three scenarios: (1) the acid-catalyzed oligomerization of
acetaldehyde at the gas-aerosol interface, (2) the formation of light-absorbing
products from the reactions of methoxyphenols in aqueous aerosols, and their
subsequent liquid-liquid phase separation, and (3) small particles which are
expected to have a sharp pressure gradient between the surface and bulk, with
implications for aqueous reaction rates (Laplace pressure). The team will also
conduct numerical simulations in order to evaluate the potential environmental
impact of these processes and develop representations for this new chemistry in
large-scale atmospheric models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.