* 2203158
* Phenology of reproduction in bumble bee colonies
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,03/31/2026
* Colin Orians, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 03/31/2026
* USD 300,559.00

In recent years, many plant and animal populations have changed the timing of
life cycle events. Early season events, like flowering of fruit trees and
emergence of butterflies, are occurring earlier than they did in the past, and
late season events, like fall migration of birds and changing leaf colors, are
happening later than they did in the past. These changes in phenology (the
timing of life cycle events) are considered one of the most conspicuous effects
of climate change on plant and animal populations. This research project will
investigate the ways in which the phenology of bumble bee colonies is changing
through time. Although we tend to treat bumble bees as a single species, there
are actually more than 40 species of bumble bees in the United States, and these
species might respond in different ways to climate change. Understanding these
changes is especially important because bumble bees are one of the most
important groups of pollinators of wild and crop plants. If bumble bee life
cycles change, or if bumble bee species decline, there are likely to be negative
consequences for food security, as well as cascading declines in wild plant
communities. The researchers will organize workshops for scientists and
conservation specialists and share the methods they will develop for studying
bumble bees. The project will engage the general public with activities for
pollinator gardening and pollinator conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will compare the phenology of two bumble bee species. Bombus impatiens,
the common eastern bumble bee, has a long-life cycle that lasts from early
spring to late fall. Bombus griseocollis, the brown-belted bumble bee, has a
short life cycle ending in mid-summer. In the 1970’s and 1980’s, theoretical
ecologists developed models about why bumble bees switch to reproduction when
they do. This research will test these models by monitoring the phenology of
both species in relation to among-year variation in temperature and the
availability and timing of flowers that bumble bees can forage on (which is
likely to depend on temperature and drought). The researchers will also use
citizen scientist data to evaluate latitudinal and temporal changes in phenology
of different bumble bee species in geographic regions and time periods with
different growing season lengths. The project will test predictions of the
classical theories of bumble bee colony reproduction, including the prediction
that species with longer life cycles during the year are more sensitive to
variation among years. This project will provide new knowledge about nesting and
hibernation habitat needs of bumble bees as an important contribution to
conservation efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.