* 2203150
* Collaborative Research: LTREB Renewal: Large-scale removal of introduced ants as a test of community reassembly
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* David Holway, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2027
* USD 299,995.00

Ecosystems are commonly disrupted by both natural and human forces. Species
introductions are a costly and pervasive form of environmental change that cause
impacts including degraded ecosystem services, agricultural damage, and species
extinctions. Surprisingly little information exists, however, regarding the
capacity of ecosystems to recover after introduced species are removed from
ecosystems. This project examines the reassembly of native ant assemblages
following the landscape-scale removal of the Argentine ant from Santa Cruz
Island, California. A prominent urban and agricultural pest, the Argentine ant
is also an ecologically disruptive invader. This species displaces other ant
species, and its removal makes it possible to examine how native ants recover
genetic diversity, species diversity, community structure, and ecological
function. The insights gained from this relatively simple model ecosystem will
provide general insights into how other ecosystems might recover from the
impacts of invasive species, and perhaps other types of ecological disruptions.
Multifaceted approaches, such as those employed in this long-term study, are
needed to clarify the rate and extent to which ecosystems recover from different
drivers of environmental change. Broader impacts related to this work include
research support for PhD students from UC San Diego, research support for a
postdoctoral researcher from UC Berkeley, and a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) program for students from local, four-year Hispanic Serving
Institutions (California State University Channel Islands and University of
California, Santa Barbara). We are also engaging in K12 outreach collaborations
that focus on the importance of insects. &lt;br/&gt;The experimental removal of
introduced species can provide unparalleled opportunities to examine community
reassembly. Invader-removal experiments, for example, can clarify how recovery
is influenced by processes acting within a given system or, alternatively,
reflects processes acting at larger spatial scales. The core objectives of this
research are to quantify the structural (genetic diversity, species diversity)
and functional (trophic position, ecological function) components of the
recovery of native ant assemblages following landscape-scale removal of the non-
native Argentine ant from Santa Cruz Island, California. Despite the obvious
value of such studies, surprisingly few examine recovery above the level of
single-species populations. In particular, only a handful of studies on
invasions couple long-term, pre-invasion data with invader-removal experiments
over temporal scales long enough to capture the succesion of native species
assemblages. Even fewer invader-removal experiments measure recovery in terms of
functional components, such as energy flow or trophic position. This research
will provide an unprecedented test of the recovery of native assemblages after
invader removal and will yield novel information about the factors that control
the richness, composition and functional properties of an important terrestrial
animal assemblage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.