* 2203349
* Nanocrystal Conversion Pathways for the Synthesis of Multimetallic Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Sara Skrabalak, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 465,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Sara Skrabalak at Indiana
University – Bloomington will develop new ways of making multimetallic materials
with nanoscale dimensions. Metal particles with nanoscale dimensions have
fascinating properties that differ from bulk materials. For example, bulk gold
appears as a lustrous yellow color while nanoscale gold can appear many
different colors depending on particle size and shape, having given rise to the
brilliant colors of stained glass. The nanoscale properties of metal particles
are now being leveraged in technologies that promote sustainability, security,
health, and more. However, general syntheses for nanoscale particles composed of
two or more metals are far less developed. The Skrabalak group aims to develop
predictable and generalizable syntheses for multimetallic nanoparticles with
defined structural and compositional features. This project will provide robust
training for graduate students in an inclusive environment. In addition, this
research will be coupled with broad educational and outreach initiatives that
promote understanding of nanoscale materials, including exploration of the
importance of scale through the “Powers of Ten” concept with local artists and
non-scientists. Professor Skrabalak and her students will work with the Art
Commission of Bloomington, Indiana to identify a site and artist for the
creation of a public mural that explores size and scale and their importance to
public life. Activities for the public’s exploration of this topic will be
developed for use during the mural’s debut and subsequent outreach
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The synthesis of multimetallic nanoparticles will
start with known nanoparticles, which will then be converted into more complex
nanoparticles by physical and chemical methods. The nanoparticle conversion
pathways will focus on two nanoparticle classes. First, high entropy alloy metal
nanoparticles – multi-element, single-phase materials consisting of five or more
elements in similar atomic ratios – will be synthesized by heating core@shell
nanoparticles to facilitate interdiffusion. The mechanism that accounts for
their formation will be determined by monitoring changes in crystal phase and
elemental distribution. New compositions also will be targeted. Second,
nanoparticle heterostructures with different metal domains will be synthesized
by galvanic replacement between multimetallic nanoparticles and metal
precursors. The mechanism that accounts for the formation of different
nanoparticle heterostructures will be elucidated to achieve particles with
integrated atomic and nanoscale architectures. The compositional and structural
properties of these complex nanoparticles will also be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.