* 2203517
* RAPID: Impacts of high magnitude wildfire on volcanic (lava tube) cave water chemistry, nutrient transport, activity and diversity of cave microbiome
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Diana Northup, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 11/30/2023
* USD 99,394.00

Wildfires of high magnitude are known to cause destruction of surface
vegetation, soil sterilization, and alteration of soil chemical and hydraulic
properties; whereas their effects on subsurface environments are relatively
unknown. Recent Caldwell and Antelope wildfires in northern California burnt
over hundreds of acres of landscape which included 97% of the area in Lava Beds
National Monument (Lava Beds) that protects volcanic (lava) caves. The volcanic
caves provide a unique habitat for bacteria and archaea, and morphologically
diverse secondary mineral features (speleothems) in the presence of water. This
study investigates the impacts of intense wildfires on volcanic cave ecosystems
by sampling cave water and microbial mats, and analyzing them for detailed
inorganic and organic chemistry, microbial diversity and activity. This data
from fire-affected caves will be compared with pre-fire data from earlier
studies, and the control caves from the unburnt areas, to quantify the changes
occurred within the caves due to wildfires. This RAPID project supports one
minority graduate student at the University of Texas at San Antonio, a leading
Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) and several undergraduate students (Hispanic,
minorities, women and first generation). In collaboration with the National Park
Service, the findings of this study will help inform protection of the sensitive
natural heritage at Lava Beds National Monument, and important scientific
findings will be made available to the visitors of the park.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impacts of high magnitude wildfires on surface
environments are well documented such as complete destruction of vegetation,
soil sterilization, and alteration of physical, chemical and hydraulic soil
properties. However, their effects on subsurface environments like vadose zones,
shallow aquifers, and caves are relatively understudied. The Caldwell Fire in
2020 and Antelope Fire in 2021 in northern California have affected 97% of Lava
Beds National Monument (California, USA) landscape that hosts numerous volcanic
(lava) caves. Volcanic (lava) caves are nutrient-poor, aphotic environments, and
yet they host a rich diversity of bacteria and archaea which often utilize
reduced energy sources (e.g., reduced iron, sulfur, manganese, or nitrogen
compounds) available within the host rock and mineral deposits within the caves.
Availability of nutrients in caves greatly depends upon the interactions between
host rock (basalt) and meteoric water that infiltrates through surface soils
into caves through fractured cave walls. This RAPID study will obtain water and
microbial samples from volcanic caves in wildfire affected and unaffected areas
at Lava Beds, during a post-fire hydrologic response time, and correlate it with
chemical and molecular signatures in the samples. Post-fire changes in cave
water chemistry will be quantified by measuring concentrations of cations,
anions, trace metals, and dissolved organic matter, and comparing with pre-fire
data from earlier studies, and from control caves. Analysis of 16S rRNA gene
sequencing and ATP will be used to track changes in microbial diversity and
activity within the caves during the post-fire period. One graduate student and
several undergraduate students from the University of Texas at San Antonio and
University of New Mexico will perform samples collection and subsequent
laboratory analyses. These results will provide a key information regarding
impacts of surface wildfires on subsurface ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.