* 2203929
* A Blockcopolymer Strategy Towards Synthetic Ubiquitin
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Marcus Weck, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 05/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Marcus Weck of New York University is
employing innovative chemical design principles to create, fold and assemble
artificial analogs of the small protein ubiquitin. Ubiquitin is a regulatory
protein that is found in most tissues of organisms whose cells contain a
membrane-bound nucleus. Essentially, this protein is present in many large
single-celled organisms and all known non-microscopic organisms. Replicating the
chemical structure and function of ubiquitin is very complex and tedious task
because the synthetic approach would require connecting 76 amino acids in a very
precise and sequence-controlled manner. In order to mimic the structural
complexity of ubiquitin, this project will utilize folding of synthetic polymers
with sequences and secondary structures resembling those found in the protein.
Block copolymers will be prepared through a combination of covalent and
noncovalent chemistries. The two distinct strategies outlined in the project
will circumvent folding complications while allowing observation of the
interplay of different and well-defined macromolecular elements. The research
associated with this project could move the science of polymer-based foldamers
to the next level and enable systematic studies of larger assemblies of
synthetic analogs of proteins and enzymes. This could in turn lead to the
development of novel and controlled three-dimensional architectures as key
polymeric materials for electrooptical, biological, biomedical, sensing and
computer-based applications. The research team will host monthly K-12 inner city
school children and introduce them to the excitement of materials chemistry
through basic hands-on experiments and demonstrations. An outreach activity
“STEM Job Shadowing Experience” with all-girls Mrs. Porter boarding high school
will expose underrepresented minorities and female students to exciting career
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creating artificial proteins and enzymes
based on synthetic polymers containing carbon-carbon bond-based backbones that
rival nature’s machinery regarding activity and selectivity and to employ these
three-dimensional architectures as materials for important applications has long
been a challenge in macromolecular chemistry. This project will focus on the
synthesis and folding of poly(aryl isocyanide)s and poly(p-phenylene vinylene)s
as structural analogs of the small protein ubiquitin. Two distinct strategies
will be employed. The first one will be used to emulate the main structural
elements of ubiquitin, while the second strategy will focus on the sequences of
the secondary structures of the protein. (Co)polymers will be prepared using a
suite of polymerization techniques including reversible addition-fragmentation
chain-transfer polymerization (RAFT), ring-opening metathesis polymerization
(ROMP), and Pd-alkyne initiated living polymerization of isocyanides. The folded
protein-like architectures will be characterized by a battery of techniques
including NMR, UV-Vis, fluorescence, and CD spectroscopies, X-ray and light
scattering techniques, AFM, and STEM. This project will create a new class of
synthetic analogs of proteins and advance polymer methodology by introducing new
strategies towards block copolymers with well-defined secondary structures,
telechelic and heterotelechelic block copolymers, and functional
poly(p-phenylene vinylene)s. Additionally, the results associated with this work
have the potential to increase the understanding of the interplay of orthogonal
noncovalent interactions to fold synthetic polymers into three-dimensional
architectures and the properties of the resulting
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.