* 2203789
* Long-term effects of socioeconomic activity on ecological stability
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Kristina Douglass, Davis, Dylan S
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2024
* USD 143,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Kristina
Douglass at Columbia University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist studying the impacts of different socioeconomic
livelihood strategies on ecological systems. Around the world, the earliest
periods of human history, which are dominated by small, mobile communities, are
consistently the least well studied. Instead, archaeologists have primarily
focused on large, hierarchical, sedentary societies, which skew our perspectives
and conclusions to one very specific form of human social organization. However,
living strategies employed by other types of human communities can shed light on
successful lifeway strategies which are invaluable for defining “sustainability”
and developing successful conservation policies in the present. By shifting our
attention toward small-scale community environmental impacts, this project will
provide new insights into past land-use strategies and their long-term
resilience during past periods of extreme climatic fluctuation. As environmental
conditions become increasingly erratic due to climate change, the findings of
this research hold significance both to archaeological scholarship and modern
land-use policy initiatives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF postdoctoral
fellowship will work to challenge traditional distinctions of “low-impact” and
“high-impact” land-use and instead highlight the flexible nature of different
economic strategies and their environmental impacts. The project seeks to answer
the following questions: 1. How do long-term habitations of foraging communities
impact local and regional soil and vegetation diversity; 2. How do these impacts
compare with other socioeconomic groups (i.e., herders, agriculturalists)? And
3. How can differences and similarities observed in ecological impact by
different socioeconomic strategies inform our understanding of sustainability in
the present? By shifting attention toward small-scale community environmental
impacts, this project will develop new approaches for identifying human
ecological legacies. In turn, this will help improve our understanding of early
human communities, their socioeconomic organizations, and impacts of different
economic systems on landscape ecologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.