* 2203666
* RUI: Development of Next-Generation Drift-Time Ion Mobility Spectrometry through the Application of Pulsed Ionization and Voltage Sweep Methodologies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Eric Davis, Whitworth University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2025
* USD 310,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Eric Davis and his group at Whitworth University are working to
improve the capabilities of ion mobility spectrometry (IMS), a chemical
measurement technique commonly used in security and military applications for
the detection of explosives, narcotics, and chemical warfare agents. The Davis
group seeks to expand the usefulness of IMS by improving its ability to separate
complex, real-world mixtures rapidly. The research is primarily performed by
Whitworth undergraduate students under the supervision of Professor Davis.
Through collaboration with Brian H. Clowers at Washington State University, Dr.
Davis' students are exposed to the graduate school environment, helping to
better prepare them to pursue graduate studies. Research opportunities also
expand into the local community of analytical chemists within the greater
Spokane, WA area, bringing together industrial and academic chemists for the
mutual benefit of students and the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior efforts
in creating voltage sweep (VS) IMS separations have utilized either stepped-
potential or multiplexed VS methods that do not attain the high-resolution or
high-speed separations required for many IMS applications. Utilization of
printed circuit board-based IMS cells (with minimal circuit tracing to reduce
capacitance) and application of high voltage amplifiers (capable of 500 V/ms
slew rates) enable single-run VSIMS methods which can provide significant
improvements in IMS resolution and peak capacity. Parasitic losses of ions
through the gating process under low-field conditions can be mitigated through
use of pulsed ionization sources and elimination of the ion gate. Primary aims
are to (1) develop a single-run VSIMS method using high voltage amplifiers to
allow high resolution, high peak capacity IMS separations; (2) evaluate the
utility of pulsed ionization sources with both IMS and mass spectrometry (MS)
with respect to ion formation, kinetics, and speciation; and (3) utilize pulsed
sources in IMS separations to avoid gate depletion effects under low-field
voltage sweep conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.