* 2203515
* Collaborative Research: North American Warm-season Extremes in a Changing Climate: Large-scale Drivers and Local Feedbacks
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Walter Robinson, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2025
* USD 586,025.00

Throughout much of the US climate change will be felt largely through its
effects on warm season extreme events like flooding rains, heat waves, fires,
and droughts. Basic thermodynamics suggests that the severity and frequency of
these events should increase, for instance the hottest heat waves are likely to
get hotter in a warming climate and storm intensity is likely to increase
because warmer air holds more moisture. The thermodynamic arguments help but the
full suite of processes that affect extreme events is extensive and involves a
broad range of spatial scales, from the multi-kilometer scale of thunderstorms
to the hemispheric scale of the jet streams that drive weather systems. The
broad scale range complicates efforts to study extreme event change using
weather and climate models, as a brute force effort to simulate all the relevant
processes at all the relevant spatial scales, occurring over the decades-long
progression of global warming, is not practical even on the largest computers.
Climate models can simulate the full global climate system for decades and even
centuries but at resolutions too coarse (perhaps 100km grid spacing) to
represent the scales of intense storms. In particular they do not capture the
mesoscale convective systems (MCSs) which account for much of the severe weather
over the continental US. An alternative approach called pseudo-global warming
(PGW) uses a high-resolution model to simulate an observed extreme event, and
the simulation is repeated with modifications to the ambient conditions to
represent the warmer climate. PGW simulations are quite valuable but they only
allow consideration of how climate change affects the severity of specific
events, thus they do not enable research on changes in the frequency of
occurrence of extreme events. Also, PGW simulations are typically conducted
using regional models and thus do not properly represent the effects of changes
in the hemispheric-scale atmospheric circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops a methodology for looking at extreme event change in a warming
climate which addresses the multi-scale issue and enables examination of extreme
event frequency and other aggregate statistics. First, a high-resolution global
model, the Model for Prediction Across Scales (MPAS) is used to simulate the
weather and climate of the past 30 years (1990 to 2019). With a grid spacing of
15km the model is capable of representing MCSs. Second, extreme events are
identified in this "nature run" and resimulated with modifications to sea
surface temperatures and other surface conditions to represent future warming.
The modifications are generated using climate model simulations from the Coupled
Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP). The resimulations are a form of PGW only
with a global domain, so that changes in intensity can be examined accounting
for the full range of spatial scales. Third, a set of 30 warm season (May to
November) MPAS simulations using CMIP model output is generated to represent
future climate change. The warm season simulations follow the PGW approach but
the full season duration means that the simulations do not follow particular
events but instead show how a typical season of extreme events changes due to
warmer conditions. One issue to be addressed with these simulations is the
effect of changes in the jet streams over North America on floods and heat
waves, as climate models typically show a reduction in jet-level wind speed over
the continental US with increases in speed to the north and
south.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is of societal as well as scientific
interest given the damaging effects of extreme events and the value of better
information on extreme event change to guide decision making. The project also
provides support and training to five graduate students and an undergraduate
research assistant. Simulations generated in the project are made available to
the research community, and reduced versions of the output are hosted on a
JupyterHub to provide access to researchers at the universities participating in
the project through Jupyter Notebooks. Outreach is conducted through the Junior
Curator program North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences (NCMNS), a program for
high school students interested in field biology and conservation. The students
collect field mesaurements of local weather events and their impacts, including
insect outbreaks, mold, flooding, and other after-effects of heavy rain.
Activity guides are created based on these activities and disseminated through
the National Association of Geoscience Teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.