* 2203111
* RAPID: Hurricane-induced Shelf Sediment Transport and Deposition after Hurricane Ida in 2021
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2023
* Kehui Xu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 10/31/2023
* USD 82,404.00

Hurricane Ida was a very destructive Category 4 storm that made landfall at
Elmerâ€™s Island and Caminada Headlands, Louisiana on 29 August 2021, bringing
storm surge and waves of 13 feet, not seen since Hurricane Katrina. The
importance of the role of these large storms on shelf sediment transport and the
effect of these events on coastal change has become apparent in recent years.
With improvements in instrumentation and technology, more field studies have
been conducted to measure sediment transport processes on offshore continental
shelves during storm events. However, due to the unpredictability of storm paths
and the difficulties and expense in obtaining measurements, there is still a
lack of field data. During this project, samples will be obtained in two dredge
pits, which are used to replenish beaches after these storms, to test the
overarching hypothesis that hurricanes play a major role in redistributing
sediment on the continental shelf and likely produce massive sediment deposition
in dredge pits and extensive mass wasting of the dredge pit walls. Dredge pits
may be a sustainable resource for this sand in Louisiana, but their efficacy as
sediment traps requires an understanding of their long-term evolution and marine
processes along the continental shelf. Data collection is time-sensitive because
of the goal of capturing the post-hurricane sediment on the continental shelf
and within the two dredge pits. The project supports the training of
undergraduate and graduate students at sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it is
readily known that continental shelves can be energetic environments, there is a
lack of marine observational data for sediment transport and deposition that
occurs during and immediately after major hurricanes. In particular, the
sediment fluxes of bed and suspended loads can increase one to two orders of
magnitude during hurricanes. However, these deposits may be obliterated by
subsequent events. Dredge pits serve as excellent recorders of post-hurricane
sediment deposition and can provide natural capture basins on continental
shelves that record these major events. This project will result in a post-
hurricane quantification of sediment transport and stratigraphy of the South
Pelto and Sandy Point dredge pits as well as multiple stations east and west of
Hurricane Ida along the 10-m isobath on the inner Louisiana shelf. A comparison
will be made between the pre- and post-hurricane conditions by leveraging
historical data over the past seven years (2014 to 2021). Hurricane conditions
often cause mass wasting and submarine landslides in coastal environments, which
pose a hazard to existing critical infrastructure on the continental shelf, such
as renewable wind energy and telecommunication infrastructure. It is also likely
that Hurricane Ida triggered dredge pit wall collapse and outward migration,
possibly posing a major hazard to hurricane-impacted platforms and pipelines in
the vicinity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.