* 2203450
* Conference: Facets of Noncommutative Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Sheldon Katz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 03/31/2023
* USD 30,000.00

This award provides support for a conference entitled "Facets of Noncommutative
Geometry," scheduled for June 11-12, 2022 at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign. The conference aims to bring together a group of
mathematicians with expertise centered around an expanded notion of geometry.
Two of the main sources of motivation for investigating these geometries are the
Heisenberg uncertainty principle in quantum physics and abstract algebra in
mathematics. The conference will provide a setting for two largely distinct
groups of researchers to come together, exchange ideas, and learn about recent
developments. A central aim of the conference is to provide early-career
mathematicians perspective and an entry point into this exciting and fast-moving
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noncommutative geometry is a general viewpoint in
which one seeks to apply tools, perspectives, and intuition from geometry to
noncommutative algebraic structures in the absence of a direct spectral
interpretation as rings of functions. This viewpoint has been extremely fruitful
in many settings, including representation theory, tensor categories, symplectic
geometry, and quantum field theory, often without direct communication between
the various groups. The conference will include participants who can illuminate
different aspects of this overarching theme. The meeting is designed to provide
a unique opportunity for an exchange of ideas and a stock-taking on the state of
the field as a whole. The gathering is aimed at bringing together early-career
researchers, primarily graduate students, postdocs and early-stage faculty, and
introducing them to a broad vision and providing opportunities for forming new
connections and collaborations. Attention will be paid to diversity, not only in
the application process, but also in the funding of participants and creating a
welcoming environment for traditionally underrepresented groups. The conference
will focus on highlighting recent developments to inspire the next generation of
noncommutative geometers. For more on the conference, see
https://publish.illinois.edu/facets-ncg-conf2022/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.