* 2203985
* Charge Transporting Supramolecular pi-Donor/Acceptor Arrays Based on Redox-Active Metallacycles, Metal-Organic Cages, and Daisy-Chain Coordination Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Sourav Saha, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 06/30/2025
* USD 465,000.00

With the support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
(MSN) program in the Division of Chemistry, Sourav Saha of Clemson University
will be developing charge-conducting and light-harvesting supramolecular
assemblies consisting of precisely organized electron donor and acceptor units
confined to supramolecular containers. Electron donor and acceptor aromatic
molecules contain conjugated pi-systems that allow electron delocalization
through bonds via resonance as well as through space when they are cofacially
pi-stacked like a deck of cards. In addition, electroactive aromatic molecules
often absorb and emit light, thereby displaying fascinating optical properties.
When electron rich (pi-donors) and deficient (pi-acceptor) pi-systems are
organized in an alternating fashion, their ability to conduct electrical current
is further accentuated due to facile through-space electron delocalization from
the donor to the acceptor units via charge-transfer and even partial electron
transfer interactions. In this research conducted by the Saha group at Clemson,
repeating electron donor and acceptor units will be stacked by encapsulating
them within specifically designed supramolecular containers. The containers will
be constructed using platinum metal ions and organic linkers to precisely
control their dimensions and electronic and optical properties. As such, they
will accommodate pi-donor and acceptor units of different sizes to regulate
their three-dimensional ordering and orientation. The results generated by this
work can potentially to lead to new class of semiconductors, transistors, light-
harvesting systems, and electrochromic and thermochromic materials. Dr. Saha
will work to train and mentor diverse groups of undergraduate and graduate
students, provide research experience to high school seniors through Clemson’s
EUREKA! program, and offer career guidance and motivation to largely minority
students from Georgia Southern University to pursue graduate education through a
‘Be a Grad Student for a Day’ initiative. In addition, local outreach programs
at Beck Academy Middle School and Roper Mountain Science Museum will be
conducted to engage K-12 students and encourage them to consider pursuing higher
education in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics)
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on the synthesis,
assembly, and structure–function relationship studies of robust supramolecular
pi-donor/acceptors arrays using redox-active multicomponent metallacycles,
metal-organic cages, and daisy chain coordination polymers as supramolecular
containers that can encapsulate redox-complementary guest pi-systems inside
their cavities. Tricomponent rectangular metallacycles and tetragonal prismatic
metallacages consisting of two parallel redox-active faces and orthogonal
linkers with variable lengths connected by heteroligated platinum corners will
be employed as supramolecular containers to encapsulate redox-complementary
guests. The containers and their guest-inclusion complexes will be
coordinatively linked to assemble daisy-chain polymers. Emphasis will be placed
on controlling the formation of discrete pi-donor/acceptor stacks through
systematic variations of the cavity size of the hosts and the redox properties
of the hosts and guests. The structures and compositions of inclusion complexes
will be determined using a suite of crystallographic, spectroscopic, and
electron microscopic techniques. Systematic studies will be conducted to examine
how the host/guest and guest/guest charge-transfer and electron-transfer
interactions will influence the color, emission, bandgaps, and charge transport
capability of the resulting inclusion complexes. This work, if successful, will
develop a novel bottom-up strategy to assemble robust supramolecular pi-
donor/acceptor stacks using redox-active supramolecular containers and pave way
to their applications as supramolecular wires, semiconductors, and light-
harvesting materials in future electronic and photovoltaic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.