* 2203571
* Instrument Development: Modular, Multitrack, and Multifunctional Linearly Polarized Spectrometer for Synchronized Multispectral Characterization of Molecular Assembly
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Dongmao Zhang, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2025
* USD 394,900.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program of the
Chemistry Division and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), Professor Dongmao Zhang and his research group at Mississippi State
University are developing a multichannel spectrometer for simultaneous
acquisition of UV-visible and linearly polarized resonance synchronous (LPRS)
spectra. LPRS spectroscopy is a new technique recently developed by the Zhang
group that employs linearly polarized light for excitation and detection. When
used in combination with UV-visible measurements, the LPRS method enables
quantitative determination of the absorption, scattering, and emission
properties of natural and synthetic biological, chemical, and environmental
samples. The spectral signatures obtained with the combined UV-vis and LPRS
analysis provide fingerprint-like information about the geometric features
(sizes and shapes) and the optical properties of materials. However, the current
UV-vis and LPRS analysis is time-consuming and applicable only to steady-state
samples because it requires three sequential spectral acquisitions performed
with two different instruments. Therefore, this grant supports the development
of new measurement tools to enable simultaneous multidimensional spectroscopic
characterization of dynamic systems with high temporal resolution. Such
techniques are crucial for many areas of science and technology, including
biology, materials science, clean energy applications, and environmental
protection. The broader impacts of the project also include training
opportunities for students from diverse backgrounds in the cross-disciplinary
areas of scientific instrumentation, optical spectroscopy, data acquisition and
analysis, and materials science. Furthermore, the Zhang group will organize two
optical spectroscopy workshops to provide opportunities for HBCU (Historically
Black College and University) and PUI (Predominantly Undergraduate Institution)
students and faculty to learn about the theory and unique capabilities of the
techniques being developed in this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solution-phase
processes involving the dynamical evolution of materials are ubiquitous in
chemistry, biology, and materials science. Examples of such systems include
protein aggregation, molecular assembly, and nanoparticle synthesis, as well as
post-synthetic modifications of macromolecules, supramolecular assemblies, and
nanoscale materials. Technologies that are capable of concurrently monitoring
the evolution of these materials are crucial not only for deciphering
correlations between structure and optical properties, but also for discovery
and optimization of new materials. Optical spectroscopic techniques that exploit
the interaction of light and matter have been the methods of choice for studying
such dynamic systems because of their broad accessibility and relatively high
temporal resolutions. However, existing tools are limited in their information
content because they are incapable of simultaneously resolving the complex
interplay among the absorption, scattering, and emission processes. The combined
UV-vis and LPRS analysis is extraordinarily informative because this approach
enables concurrent experimental quantification of a materialâ€™s absorption
extinction spectrum, scattering extinction spectrum, scattering depolarization
spectrum, fluorescence intensity and depolarization spectra, and fluorescence
quantum yield. Collectively, these spectral signatures provide critical
insights, many being inaccessible before, on the sizes, shapes, molecular
compositions, and optical activities of materials. The scientific investigation
outlined in this project aims to create a multichannel linearly polarized
spectrometer capable of concurrent acquisition of these multidimensional
signatures with sub-second temporal resolution. The research team will study the
formation of porphyrin assemblies as model systems for developing the
measurement approach and will investigate how the absorption, scattering, and
emission properties vary during assembly and disassembly. These studies have the
potential to reveal mechanistic pathways in the porphyrin assembly and
disassembly processes. The measurement and data analysis strategies developed
for these model systems will be extensible to numerous other dynamic systems
across a range of scientific disciplines, and provide a platform for advanced
student training and the engagement of researchers from diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.