* 2203867
* Geometry, Arithmeticity, and Random Walks on Discrete and Dense Subgroups of Lie Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Wouter Van Limbeek, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2025
* USD 175,048.00

The project lays out a program to study geometric and dynamical aspects of
random walks and percolation on general groups, building connections between
their algebraic structure, geometry, and dynamics. Classically this has been
studied for lattices in Euclidean space, and over the last half century, for
general lattices, but this project explores these notions in rich, new settings,
where their study will have applications to a wide-ranging collection of
problems in geometry, topology, and geometric group theory. The project also
includes training of PhD students and continued mentoring of undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a combination of dynamical and algebraic
methods, the PI will study the structure of subgroups of semisimple Lie groups
with arithmetic features (namely dense commensurator), as well as the closely
related notion of irreducible subgroups of products. Secondly, the project will
study the asymptotic behavior of random walks using recent breakthroughs in
spectral gap methods to establish genericity of absolute continuity and further
regularity properties. In a different direction, the project will study
expansion strength of infinite groups, generalizing the classical (finite)
expander graphs, by using random walks and relating this to the algebraic
structure of the underlying group. Finally, the project will study percolation
on Cayley graphs of finitely generated groups from the point of view of
geometric group theory, especially metric distortion and boundary theory of
percolation clusters on hyperbolic groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.