* 2203827
* CDS&amp;E: Novel Computational Models for Smart Wearable Blood Gas Monitor for Infants
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Ulkuhan Guler, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 07/31/2025
* USD 499,341.00

Despite recent developments in medical wearable technology, monitoring of
respiration parameters, compared to other vital signs, has yet to be
sufficiently investigated. The majority of respiration research has focused
heavily on respiration rate and blood oxygen saturation. Despite being well-
known, these are only a subset of respiration parameters. Beyond that, blood
oxygen and carbon dioxide partial pressures - called blood gases - have medical
significance and the potential of being measured noninvasively. This research
specifically addresses a serious and global problem, respiration disorders of
infants. Respiratory distress is one of the most common reasons for infant
admission to the neonatal intensive care unit. Studies have shown that after
successful medical treatment in the neonatal intensive care unit, earlier
discharge to a home life with remote monitoring infrastructures could improve
the survival chances of these at-risk infants. Monitoring patients with
respiratory disorders from a home setting could enhance the health and well-
being of individuals of all ages, from neonatal patients with developing lungs
to adults with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), while creating and
bringing new large data sets to the attention of clinicians. Currently,
conventional blood gas monitors employed in corded-bedside equipment can find
place in clinical settings. However, a wireless miniaturized blood gas
monitoring system supported with computational models can extend the use beyond
the hospital for long-term care. Besides these potential benefits to society,
this project advances hardware-software co-design for wireless wearable sensors.
Miniaturized blood gas research offers unique research experiences for
undergraduate and graduate students to understand technical details of different
disciplines and develop translational biomedical skills. The interdisciplinary
team provides opportunities for underrepresented students to encourage them to
pursue careers in research and STEM. The curriculum development allows to
introduce interdisciplinary topics and hands-on experimental experiences to
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a
hardware-software integration framework for a miniaturized, noninvasive,
wireless, luminescence-based oxygen sensing wearable device with an open-source
software toolkit. The toolkit accurately translates the blood oxygen levels by
utilizing measured transcutaneous oxygen diffused through the skin. Within this
framework, computational models of oxygen transport is used to iteratively
design an estimation algorithm for the intelligent sensor. This sensor is
resilient to noise arising from intra- and interpersonal variations,
environmental factors, and sensor hardware operations. The core scientific
contributions include 1) the presentation of computational models of oxygen
transport incorporating factors affecting sensor readings such as weight, age,
gender, sensor degradation, for building an estimation engine, for the first
time in literature; 2) the creation of a novel miniaturized custom-designed
wearable that measures transcutaneous oxygen; 3) the integration of hardware and
software on a flexible miniaturized wearable device for long-term comfortable
wear; 4) the determination of the computational modelsâ€™ accuracy, the
sensitivity of overall system, and the specificity of the sensor by capturing
the dynamic respiratory physiological status of individuals with longitudinal
data. The developed hardware-software platform is validated on humans. Having
the ability of sensing vital blood oxygen parameter with a wearable supported
with computational models is unique, filling an important gap in the
miniaturization of the transcutaneous blood gas sensor for noninvasive wearable
device applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.