* 2203268
* RAPID: Securing the LUMCON natural history collection, a vital Gulf Coast resource
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Stephanie Archer, Louisiana Universities Marine Corsortium
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,102.00

The Gulf of Mexico supports a wide array of habitats, from wetlands to reefs
that maintain high levels of biodiversity, estimated at over 15,000 species;
with up to 20% unknown to science. The lack of biodiversity knowledge is
significant in the context of this region with frequent hurricanes and human
influences, like oil spills, that can impact and often interrupt valuable
ecosystem services, including fisheries. Since its founding in 1980, Louisiana
Universities Marine Consortium (LUMCON) has built a marine biodiversity
collection over well over 15,000 specimens representing over 500 species. This
valuable research and education resource is of value for assessing impacts to
the Gulf of Mexico including coastal loss, hurricanes, and oil spills. It
represents a substantial set of marine and coastal collections, especially for
invertebrates, for the Louisiana coast. The Louisiana portion of the Gulf coast
is unique. It is affected by the Mississippi River outflow, extensive wetland
systems, the Dead Zone, and human influences due to the higher concentrations of
oil and gas refineries and wells. It is also a region affected by severe storms,
including hurricanes. And due to building damage during Hurricane Ida, the
collections at LUMCON are at risk.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to
secure LUMCON’s natural history collections for future research and education.
Specifically, the project will secure curatorial staff to aid in conservatory
efforts, relocate and secure LUMCON’s natural history collections in a new
location, and assess the condition of the current collection and develop and
implement a cataloging system to facilitate and inform the strategy for growing
the collection. In addition, the project will create a paid minority summer
internship program based on collections research. The student will train on
collections-based research and learn museum collections
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.