* 2203965
* Smart Photochromic Electronic Devices: Incorporation of a Bicyclic Aziridine in Organic Semiconducting Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Michael Biewer, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Michael C. Biewer of the University of Texas at
Dallas is developing a photochromic unit based on aromatic molecules that
contain nitrogen. The synthesized unit will be attached as a pendant group to a
semiconducting organic material, which will subsequently be extended into a
conjugated donor-acceptor-donor small molecule. Semiconducting materials are to
be constructed based on sulfur-containing conjugated aromatic systems known as
thiophenes. Supramolecular stacking of the prepared organic molecules is
expected to lead to materials that can become conductive when external voltage
is applied (transistor-like behavior) or light shines on them (photovoltaic
cell-like behavior). A variety of synthetic manipulations will be performed in
order to systematically investigate and maximize the changes in optoelectronic
properties upon irradiation with light. This research has the potential to
generate novel light-activated and stimuli responsive materials and polymers
with potential long term applications in smart organic electronics, including
display- and sensor-technology. Undergraduate and graduate students working on
this project will develop a broad range of skills in organic and materials
chemistry, as well as engineering. An application will be created to aid in
teaching organic chemistry topics in a remote environment. The corresponding
website will provide additional broader educational content and will be expanded
by uploading videos on mechanistic understanding of organic reactions. Outreach
and educational activities will include interactions with local high schools
through Scholarâ€™s Day events at the University of Texas at Dallas and through
summer research program. At the university level, Professor Biewer will continue
to direct summer exchange students from Mexican universities and educate majors
throughout the school of natural sciences and mathematics on the topic of
functional materials and polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
externally modulate optoelectronic properties of pi-conjugated supramolecular
assemblies and polymers, while maintaining conformational demands needed for
optimal solid state-performance, is an important challenge for modern organic
electronics. This project will focus on the synthetic aspects of the
incorporation of a novel photochromic unit based on a bicyclic aziridine ring
system into functional thiophenes. Specific objectives will concentrate on (a)
the synthesis of semiconducting small organic molecules with a donor-acceptor-
donor framework that contains a bicyclic aziridine unit conjugated to the
thiophene core, (b) modifications of the conjugated core connected to the
bicyclic aziridine unit to maximize change in mobility in photochromic states
and (c) incorporation of small photochromic molecules into optoelectronic
devices to create smart devices upon application of light. Organic synthetic
strategies will be complemented by computational modeling. The knowledge gained
will likely be applicable to the functionalization of polythiophenes and other
pi-conjugated polymers, in general. The research has the potential to yield new
insights into various structure-property relationships of bicyclic aziridine
photoswitches and their ability to influence the electronic properties of
organic electronics. Designing synthetic methods to incorporate the bicyclic
aziridine unit within a conducting material, in conjunction with the electronic
mobility along the backbone, may allow the creation of stimuli responsive
organic materials and polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.