* 2203602
* Ultraviolet Photodissociation Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Jennifer Brodbelt, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 05/31/2025
* USD 630,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Jenny Brodbelt and her group at the University of Texas
at Austin are developing innovative methods to characterize proteins using mass
spectrometry (MS). Proteins in cells participate in a vast array of functions
necessary to sustain life, and the physiological functions and activities of
proteins are modulated by structural modifications. Dr. Brodbelt and her group
develop new high performance methods that combine MS and both gas-phase
separations and reactions to examine proteins and pinpoint the modifications in
molecular detail. In particular, the Brodbelt group uses high energy lasers to
shatter proteins to create diagnostic fragmentation patterns that reveal
structures and modifications. The comprehensive plan engages students at
multiple levels in collaborative, interdisciplinary research and provides
professional training for the transition to scientific careers.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Analysis of intact proteins remains one of the frontiers of
proteomics, and the ability to characterize intact proteins offers one of the
best means to map combinatorial modifications that play critical roles in
protein structure and function. A central hallmark of the Brodbelt group over
the past decade is the development and application of ultraviolet
photodissociation (UVPD) for analysis of biological molecules. This project
emphasizes the development and applications of UVPD for analysis of intact
proteins. The main aims integrate dynamic ion manipulation strategies utilizing
proton transfer reactions, gas-phase fractionation, and charge detection
measurement methods to amplify the information content of MS/MS spectra of
intact proteins. UVPD is used to characterize isomers separated by ion mobility
via a modular drift cell, and collision cross-sections of proteins are measured.
These innovative methods are applied to decipher patterns of post-translational
modifications of proteins and extend the mass range of top-down proteomics. The
training and mentoring activities forge partnerships with graduate and
undergraduate students to encourage their professional development into future
leaders in academic and industrial sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.