* 2203635
* Understanding Mesoscale Structures of Nanocrystalline Domains in Silk using Sum Frequency Generation Vibrational Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Seong Kim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2025
* USD 360,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program in the
Division of Chemistry (CHE), and co-funding from the Biomaterials Program (BMAT)
in the Division of Materials Research (DMR), Dr. Seong Kim and his team at Penn
State University are developing powerful probes of the way living organisms
assemble water-soluble materials to produce insoluble semi-crystalline polymers
to serve various mechanical functions such as structural support and energy
storage. Their work aims to advance current understanding of how structural
order is exploited by living organisms to tailor mechanical properties of
crystalline biopolymers like those found in silk fibers. The approach will
utilize sophisticated spectroscopic tools to quantitatively probe structural
order and assembly inside natural silk. Students from underrepresented groups,
including first-generation college students, will be involved in these modern
spectroscopic studies, working in close collaboration with Dr. Kim and his
graduate students. The research motivations and methodologies will be integrated
into a graduate-level materials characterization course. Outreach activities
associated with the Frost Entomological Museum at Penn State will help
familiarize the general public with the science of materials produced by
arthropods &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main characterization method of this work
is vibrational sum-frequency-generation (SFG) spectroscopy - a nonlinear optical
process originating from noncentrosymmetry. While SFG is typically considered to
be a surface-sensitive tool, it can also distinguish noncentrosymmetric
arrangements of molecules from their disordered surroundings. While potentially
useful as a probe of nano- to meso-scale order of noncentrosymmetric crystals
dispersed in an amorphous polymer matrix (e.g., beta-sheet domains in silk
fibers), the challenges encountered in the analysis of multi-scale three-
dimensional structures are far beyond the complexity of two-dimensional
surfaces. To address this obstacle, the Kim group is working to: (i) establish
the SFG spectral interpretation of beta-sheet moieties prevalent in natural silk
fibers; (ii) decipher mesoscale three-dimensional order of crystalline beta-
sheets in silk; and (iii) conduct operando SFG analysis of silk fibers under
stress-free and tensile strain states in controlled humidity conditions. The
operando SFG methodology and knowledge established from this study will likely
be applicable to studies of other natural biopolymers such as chitin, collagen
and elastin as well as biomimetic materials, highlighting the potential for
broad scientific impact of this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.