* 2203754
* Programming Supramolecular Polymer Structure and Function Using Covalently-Fixed Monomers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ronald Castellano, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 495,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Ronald Castellano of the University of
Florida (UF) will develop a new class of synthetic supramolecular polymers that
are made from novel molecular building blocks, monomers, that are cyclic and
chiral. Structure-property investigations will exploit the robustness of the
design to control supramolecular polymer thermodynamics, mechanism, and
optoelectronic properties relevant to potential downstream applications. In the
broadest sense, this research aims to contribute to a fundamental understanding
of how to control the 3D structure of organic matter at the nano-/mesoscale to
accelerate development of next-generation materials. Broader impacts with
respect to education and training come from (1) graduate and undergraduate
students being exposed to synthetic and physical organic chemistry,
spectroscopy, computation, and polymer characterization; (2) introducing aspects
of the science to the community through outreach activities in partnership with
the UF ACS POLY/PMSE student chapter, the UF Chemistry Club, and a local
retirement community; (3) broadening the participation of members of underserved
groups in scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to
develop homochiral 1D supramolecular polymers through the covalent bridging of
two otherwise independently self-assembling monomers (“covalent-fixation”) to
create a planar chiral structure, reduce conformational degrees of freedom, and
establish strong, persistent transannular hydrogen bonding. The primary vehicles
to be used in the work are [n.n]paracyclophanes ([n.n]pCps), where the design
involves introduction of complementary hydrogen-bonding groups in a cross
pattern on the paracyclophane scaffold. The [n.n]pCps intimately transfer
chemical and stereochemical information to their neighbors within a growing
assembly. Extensive structure-property studies, involving both experiment and
theory, will be conducted to (1) develop deck-differentiated cyclophanes to
control supramolecular polymer assembly thermodynamics and mechanism through
electronically complementary intra- and inter-deck interactions, (2) expand the
cyclophane decks to useful chromophores, and (3) examine minimalist monomers
capable of self-folding and then 1D supramolecular polymerization. The
structure-property studies seek to provide information that will allow
investigators to achieve new levels of atomic level control of supramolecular
assembly thermodynamic and kinetic outcomes in designing these and related
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.