* 2203414
* Biomimetic Sensors, Catalysts, and Materials: Chemistry at the Bio/Abio Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Lauren Webb, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2025
* USD 464,215.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
(MSN) in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Lauren Webb of The University of
Texas at Austin is combining surface chemical synthesis and advanced chemical
analytics tools to study how proteins behave in abiological contexts.
Integrating biological molecules into artificial environments allows
biologically relevant function to be combined with synthetic materials in order
to incorporate, rather than replicate, these capabilities in an artificial
context. At this so-called “bio/abio” interface, basic biological functions can
be co-opted to detect analytes with exceptional sensitivity or to catalyze the
synthesis of useful molecules under environmentally friendly reaction
conditions. Professor Webb and her students are addressing the central
challenges of preparing and characterizing these systems by combining synthetic
and biological chemistry. Their discoveries could lead to new approaches for
protein-based sensors, catalysts and biomaterials as they develop characterize,
manipulate, and explore an entirely new generation of biologically functional
materials. Professor Webb is the State Director of the Welch Summer Scholars
Program (WSSP), a 39-year program that provides rising high school students in
the state of Texas with an authentic, significant, and meaningful summer
residential research experience in the chemical sciences. Broader Impacts
activities over the next three years of this proposal will 1) develop an online
summer seminar program designed for all Texas high school students and chemistry
teachers; and 2) grow a WSSP alumni network for mentoring and career development
of the extraordinary alumni base of this program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-
standing, central challenge to creating biologically-inspired functional devices
and materials is to integrate native biomolecular structure, dynamics, and
function into an abiological environment; each “bio” and “abio” component
carries its own unique set of properties that must interact in an entirely new
context. Professor Webb and her students are studying the behavior of
biomolecular-material interactions for each individual component to synthesize,
characterize, and expand bio/abio science to sensing, catalysis, and synthesis
of novel biological materials for a wide variety of potential applications. The
students involved in this project will gain a wide range of experience in
surface chemical synthesis and a suite of chemical analysis techniques including
infrared spectroscopy, x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), surface circular
dichroism (CD) spectroscopy, neutron reflectometry (NR) and scanning probe
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.