* 2203911
* Engineering Strongly Correlated Quantum Phases Through Symmetry Breaking in GNRs
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Felix Fischer, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2025
* USD 480,000.00

Professor Felix Fischer of the University of California, Berkeley is supported
by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division
of Chemistry to develop bottom-up synthesis, purification and investigation of
one-dimensional graphene nanoribbon-based quantum materials. The synthetic
products are tailored for specific ferromagnetic, metallic and superconducting
properties that are relevant to next-generation electronics. Graphene
nanoribbons are representatives of an emerging class of bottom-up synthesized
designer quantum materials whose electronic structure can be tuned with atomic
precision by chemical design. The manufactured materials will be the basis of
stronger, yet more compact magnets, new schemes for low-power, portable
electronic devices, quantum sensors, accelerated data processing systems, and
more efficient energy generation, transduction, and conversion technologies. The
project promises to streamline and accelerate computer chips while
simultaneously reducing their energy demand. The project will provide training
for a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students in the highly
interdisciplinary field of quantum materials science. An outreach plan for
collaboration with a local primarily undergraduate institution and the Bay Area
Scientist in Schools (BASIS) program is geared towards broadening participation
from underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
Professor Fischer and his students will lay the foundation for the rational
bottom-up design and synthesis of strongly correlated phases in the 1D limit
that holds the key to unlocking exotic quantum materials. Control of quantum
electronic states in strongly correlated low-dimensional materials could ring in
a new era of low-power high-frequency quantum information processing that scales
far beyond the predictions of Mooreâ€™s law. The experimental validation of
theoretical models that describe unconventional forms of high temperature
superconductivity or the realization of atomically thin switchable wires holds
the promise to streamline and accelerate computer chips while simultaneously
reducing their growing energy demand. Professor Fischer and his team will
leverage their expertise in bottom-up synthesis, custom polymerization
techniques, and advanced scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and spectroscopy
(STS) to rationally design, manufacture, and characterize the exotic quantum
phenomena emerging form electron-electron interactions in graphene nanoribbons.
The synthetic products are expected to exhibit novel physical properties that
extend far beyond the parent 2D graphene, such as highly tunable band gaps,
photoemission, delocalized spin-states, coherent magnetic spin-chains, symmetry
protected topological states, and even metallic band structures, all tailored by
real space structural parameters including among others width, symmetry, edge
termination, and doping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.