* 2203565
* RUI: Plasmonic Nanoparticle Sandwiches: Using Peptoid Nanosheets as Platforms for Free-Standing Nanoparticle Arrays
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ellen Robertson, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2025
* USD 290,204.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) and
Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) programs in the Division of Chemistry,
Ellen Robertson and her students at Union College are developing methods to
prepare two dimensional (2D) molecular nanosheets that incorporate gold and
silver nanoparticles. Two-dimensional arrays of gold and silver nanoparticles
are promising sensors for detecting hydrophobic pollutants in water, but it is
critical that: 1) the arrays remain stable in water; and 2) that the packing
arrangement of the particles within the arrays is controllable. Dr. Robertson
and her students are using the oil-water interface as a platform to direct the
assembly of nanoparticles between two thin molecular layers that are highly
water-stable. The discoveries of the Robertson research team could lead to the
development of sensors capable of detecting low levels of hydrophobic pollutants
in water. This project will help prepare undergraduates at Union for careers
and/or graduate studies in STEM (science, technology, engineering and
mathematics) by providing hands-on research opportunities for three to five
undergraduates each year, with an intentional emphasis on increasing
participation of groups underrepresented in STEM; by establishing a
collaboration between the Robertson lab at Union College with an R1 institution,
enabling undergraduate students to work in a graduate lab setting; and by
integrating the research into Union College’s nanotechnology curriculum,
engaging a greater number of students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
molecular layers that the Robertson lab uses to produce water-stable 2D
nanoparticle arrays are composed of amphiphilic peptoid polymers, a relatively
new class of peptidomimetics. These polymers form water-stable bilayer peptoid
nanosheets through a mechanism at fluid interfaces that involves monolayer
assembly and collapse. When carried out at the oil-water interface,
hydrophobically functionalized nanoparticles dispersed in the oil phase are
incorporated into the peptoid nanosheet hydrophobic interior. By varying the
properties of the nanoparticles used in the nanosheet synthesis (i.e.,
concentration, ligand, core size, and material), Dr. Robertson and her students
aim to control the structural and opto-electronic properties of the gold and
silver nanoparticle-embedded nanosheets. The effects of the synthesis conditions
will be assessed through a variety of characterization techniques, including UV-
visible spectroscopy, Raman microscopy, light microscopy, scanning electron
microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, and atomic force microscopy.
Nanosheets with promising opto-electronic properties will be tested for their
ability to serve as surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) sensors to detect
hydrophobic pollutants, such as polychlorinated biphenyls, in
water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.