* 2203946
* Collaborative Research: Exploring self-organization of functional nucleic acid supramolecular assemblies with stimuli responsive properties
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Kirill Afonin, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2025
* USD 280,677.00

This project is jointly funded by the Biomaterials program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 1:
NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of ribonucleic acid or RNA
is essential for understanding major cellular processes needed for life as well
as the origin of various diseases. By using rationally designed RNAs as building
blocks, it becomes possible to assemble Nucleic Acid NanoParticles, or NANPs,
with pre-defined properties and architectures. The ability to readily respond to
changes in biological environments makes biocompatible NANPs an attractive
material for clinical use. Also, the biochemical versatility of NANPs can be
combined with the optical, electronic, and magnetic properties of inorganic
nanomaterials. These augmented NANPs can then be organized into supramolecular
assemblies with controlled complexity and functions suitable for a broad range
of biomedical, electronic, and imaging applications. However, despite the recent
progress, it is still a challenge to engineer sophisticated, responsive, NANP
supra-assemblies with regulated morphology. The proposed research program aims
to develop a generalizable toolkit for the construction of stimuli-responsive
NANP-based materials designed for end users in biotechnology. Building
functional NANP supra-assemblies will improve the performance of current
therapeutic systems, allow for the engineering of reconfigurable biomaterials,
and become instrumental in furthering our understanding of the interactions
governing the function of endogenous biomolecules. During this program, the
undergraduate and graduate students will receive multidisciplinary training in
experimental and computational RNA nanotechnology. This project will also expand
the educational domain called ouRNAno that reaches out to and informs the
community about recent advances in the field of RNA nanotechnology and will
continue cultivating excitement for research through hosting community STEM
events with local schools and science museum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNA nanotechnology benefits from RNA’s
ability to assemble through both canonical and non-canonical base pairings that
form 12 geometric families. This offers a diverse set of structural and
interacting motifs which allow for the construction of Nucleic Acid
NanoParticles (NANPs). The versatile biochemistry of NANPs can be combined with
the optical, electronic, and magnetic properties of inorganic nanomaterials. The
further organization of these augmented NANPs into rationally designed
supramolecular assemblies with controlled structural complexity can be used for
application in biooptics, design of responsive devices, soft biomimetic
machines, tissue mimics, and artificial muscles. Despite the existence of
computational tools for NANP design, the use of NANPs as modular building blocks
for supramolecular assemblies has never been systematically investigated.
Therefore, this research program aims to address this gap in knowledge by
developing a generalizable NANP-based programmable platform that simultaneously
encodes targeted physicochemical, mechanical, and biological properties through
networks of independently programmable architectural parameters. To achieve
these goals, the team proposes three main objectives: (i) correlate the
programmable parameters of NANPs with the physicochemical and mechanical
properties of their supramolecular assemblies; (ii) evaluate the effect of
functionalization of individual NANPs with inorganic nanomaterials on the
physicochemical and mechanical properties of their supramolecular assemblies;
and (iii) investigate the effect of stimuli-dependent kinetic pathways on the
properties of functional supramolecular assemblies. This project will
substantially advance the framework for the engineering of NANP supra-assemblies
as novel stimuli-responsive materials and enable their use in a broad range of
biomedical, electronic, and imaging applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.