* 2203411
* Electronic phases and transport in quantum matter at strong coupling
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Alex Levchenko, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 05/31/2025
* USD 240,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research on quantum materials where the strong electron-electron interaction
leads to unique transport, thermodynamic and magnetic properties. The research
agenda addresses both fundamental physics of electronic interactions in complex
materials and practical physics of mesoscopic devices relevant for applications
in the domain of quantum science with micro and
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conversion of heat into electricity in
solid state systems is governed by thermoelectric effects. The thermoelectric
transport in quantum materials and devices is at the heart of various modern
electronics applications. Over the last decade, transport measurements in
atomically thin two-dimensional materials, such as graphene composed of a single
layer of carbon atoms, provided overwhelming evidence that the flow of electrons
in such systems exhibits hydrodynamic behavior that resembles the flow of a
viscous fluid. These advances pushed the limits of hydrodynamics, providing new
perspectives on old fundamental problems and opening doors for completely new
discoveries of emergent physics phenomena. This project is, in part, devoted to
new research on thermoelectric resistance of such systems as they are subjected
to magnetic fields. The PI will also extend these studies to other forms of low-
temperature electronic behavior in solids such as superconductivity, where
electrons flow without any resistance, and magnetism, as well as their
coexistence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the PI's educational
and outreach activities. The project places significant emphasis on training
graduate and undergraduate students by engaging them in research in a highly
collaborative environment with a postdoctoral scholar and colleagues from other
groups. The PI will reach out to the public and high-school student audiences
through (i) collaboration with the USA Physics Olympiad team to foster new
generation of physicists and train high-school students for international
scholastic competition and (ii) public education via entertaining Wonders of
Physics shows. The PI will also be involved in the scientific coordination of a
physics summer school as well as organization of international conferences and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research on topics of strongly correlated electron
systems which are at the center of experimental and theoretical attention in the
areas of modern condensed-matter physics. The research agenda addresses both
fundamental physics of electronic correlations in complex materials as well as
practical physics of mesoscopic devices relevant for applications in the domain
of quantum science with micro and nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has two main thrusts with several interconnected sub-topics motivated by
recent and ongoing experiments. In the first thrust focused on
superconductivity, the PI will develop (i) models and mechanisms for
experimentally observed manifestations of quantum critical points in
thermodynamic and transport properties of multicomponent superconductors; (ii)
group theoretical methods for symmetry-constrained classification of
superconducting order and methods adapted from the integrable nonlinear
equations to construct new crystalline solitonic phases; and (iii) microscopic
methods to describe nonequilibrium dynamics of superconductors with
unconventional pairing glue at strong coupling. In the second thrust focused on
hydrodynamics and topology in quantum matter, the PI will investigate (i)
viscous electronics in Dirac and Planckian materials; (ii) electronic
magnetohydrodynamics in topological crystals; and (iii) generalized
hydrodynamics of superfluid condensates in cold atomic traps.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the PI's educational and outreach
activities. The project places significant emphasis on training graduate and
undergraduate students by engaging them in research in a highly collaborative
environment with a postdoctoral scholar and colleagues from other groups. The PI
will reach out to the public and high-school student audiences through (i)
collaboration with the USA Physics Olympiad team to foster new generation of
physicists and train high-school students for international scholastic
competition and (ii) public education via entertaining Wonders of Physics shows.
The PI will also be involved in the scientific coordination of a physics summer
school as well as organization of international conferences and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.