* 2203532
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Developing new laser ablation (U-Th)/(He-Pb) hematite double dating techniques to date ancient oxidation
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Rebecca Flowers, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 11/30/2023
* USD 80,155.00

This project is focused on improving methods that Earth scientists can use to
determine the formation age of the mineral hematite. Hematite is a wide-spread
mineral in rocks and soils and often forms due to oxidation on Earth’s surface
as well as on other planets — notably Mars. Hematite can incorporate uranium
when it forms. Given that uranium undergoes radioactive decay it is possible to
conduct both uranium-lead dating (U-Pb) and uranium-thorium-helium dating
((U-Th)/He) on hematite crystals. Investigators will apply methods that can make
these measurements simultaneously at a small scale on hematite crystals by
blasting them with a laser and measuring the isotopes through mass spectrometry.
An additional property of hematite is that it records the magnetic field at the
time it crystallizes. This ability to record the ancient magnetic field enables
Earth scientists to reconstruct the past position of Earth’s continents and can
also be used to gain insight into the timing of hematite formation. They will
make magnetic measurements of hematite including measurements that use new
capabilities to make magnetic maps at the microscopic scale using an instrument
called a quantum diamond microscope. The study will focus on hematite within
ancient sedimentary rocks known as iron formations. In the United States, iron
formations in the Lake Superior region are the major source of domestic iron
production. By applying these dating methods to iron formation, they will
constrain the timing of hematite formation in these units, where the timing of
oxidation (that is, hematite formation) is debated. If this project is
successful, these combined methods of measuring the age of hematite will enable
a multitude of future studies. For example, it would be possible to pursue more
advanced studies on hematite formation within iron formation, to study the
processes and timescales of deep soil leaching (also known as laterization), and
determine the timing of ancient surface exposure and chemical alteration in far
greater detail using these combined methods. The project will support the
research of an early-career scientist, advance development of new analytical
capabilities at both University of Carlifornia Berkeley and University of
Colorado Boulder, and support both undergraduate and graduate student research
for first-generation students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These investigators seek to
develop simultaneous in situ laser ablation (U-Th)/He and U-Pb dating of
hematite, which is termed LA-(U-Th)/(He-Pb). Although bulk (U-Th)/He and in situ
(U-Pb) methods have been used previously on hematite, the coupled laser-ablation
technique has never been applied. This method can provide a powerful tool for
assessing the timing of oxidation and weathering in a wide range of hematite-
bearing environments. Researchers will investigate the timing of hematite
crystallization in Lake Superior region iron formation through this method
development in conjunction with paleomagnetic data, which can provide
complementary chronologic insight. They will focus on a carefully selected set
of samples that will enable method development and give new insights into the
origin of iron formations. All samples will be characterized prior to
geochronologic measurements via electron backscatter diffraction and electron
microprobe to understand the chemical heterogeneity of the samples and the
distribution of crystallites within hematite aggregates. This characterization
will permit targeting of individual crystallites through LA-(U-Th)/(He-Pb) and
provide context relative to potential polycrystalline diffusion behavior. This
study has two main sample targets: (1) large, high-purity hematite samples from
iron formation that will be used for method development; (2) typical iron
formation from the Menominee Group. Menominee Group samples will be analyzed
through both LA-(U-Th)/(He-Pb) and paleomagnetism. Paleomagnetic analyses will
be conducted at both the centimeter and micrometer scale to constrain hematite
formation relative to folding and through comparison to Laurentia’s apparent
polar wander path. The well-constrained regional history of deposition,
tectonism, and near-surface weathering provides testable hypotheses for the
timing of hematite formation in these samples. Successful radiometric dating of
these materials will provide confidence in the utility of the LA-(U-Th)/(He-Pb)
method in natural samples beyond museum-quality hematite
specimens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.