* 2203933
* Magnetic order in disordered dipolar nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Robert Streubel, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2025
* USD 391,817.00

This project is jointly funded by Condensed Matter Physics and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to identify factors
that affect magnetic properties of nanoparticle assemblies, including
ferromagnetic liquid droplets and hydrogel sensors, so that they can be used for
critical health and technology applications. Ferromagnetic liquid droplets are
liquid bodies that can take and sustain virtually any shape while in liquid
environment and can transition between a non-magnetic object and a permanent
magnet. These unique properties could find application in drug delivery,
microfluidic channels, and actuators. Smart hydrogel sensors are envisioned for
continuous health monitoring due to their biocompatibility and sensitivity to,
e.g., water acidity, that enlarges or shrinks the hydrogel. Embedded magnetic
nanoparticles undergo a phase transition that can be detected without the need
for electric wires into or out of the human body. This project provides mentored
research training and career development to graduate and undergraduate students
and leverages institutional services to recruit underrepresented students. The
principal investigator engages the science-curious public and high school
students in the proposed research via existing university services, social
media, local conferences, and National Science Foundation-funded outreach
programs and integrates his findings into undergraduate and graduate courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic order by
disorder is a complex non-trivial phenomenon that governs the transition between
a vanishing (superparamagnetic) and a stable (ferromagnetic) magnetization with
long-range, quasi-long-range, or short-range order. This complexity is even
larger in liquid systems that undergo a reversible transformation between
paramagnetic ferrofluid and ferromagnetic liquid by the assembly and jamming of
superparamagnetic nanoparticles on curved liquid-liquid interfaces. The
interfacial assembly is mediated by oppositely charged ligands that anchor the
nanoparticles and reduce their electrostatic charge and spacing. The goal of
this project is to determine design strategies for disordered ensembles of
superparamagnetic nanostructures that combine reversible transformation between
superparamagnetism and ferromagnetism with hard-magnetic properties. The
principal investigator accomplishes this by studying the relationship between
structural short-range order and magnetic properties in the dried state using
nanoparticle assemblies and lithographically patterned nanostructures with
different degrees of disorder, symmetry, layer thickness, and spacing and
applying these findings to ferromagnetic liquid droplets. Through coordinated
experimental and numerical studies using micromagnetic Monte Carlo simulations,
magnetometry, ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy, and advanced x-ray and
electron microscopies, the principal investigator corroborates or refutes the
following three hypotheses: (1) Materials with increasing disorder favor a
transition from ferromagnetism to non-collinear magnetization to
superparamagnetism that is delayed in anisotropic arrangements; (2) Structural
short-range order governing magnetic order can be inferred from macroscopic
properties; and (3) In-field assembly and jamming of nanoparticles at liquid-
liquid interfaces enable nanopatterning of the surfactants with an enhanced
remanent magnetization and coercive field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.