* 2203994
* Polarization Dynamics and Coupled Critical Electrochemical Limits in Ceramic Electrolytes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Peng Bai, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2025
* USD 355,630.00

Liquid electrolytes used in commercial Li-ion batteries are flammable and can
increase accidents. Solid-state electrolytes, especially ceramic ones, are
promising safe alternatives. They exhibit high room-temperature conductivity,
nonflammability, and the capability to stabilize lithium metal anodes to
increase the energy density of Li-ion batteries. However, during battery
recharge, lithium metal penetrations (or dendrites) still occur to short-circuit
the battery. This can occur when either the applied current is too high, or the
charging time is too long. While many existing investigations focus on the
dendrite process within the ceramic electrolytes, this project focuses on the
electrochemical processes before the onset of the metal penetration of the
dendrite. The project focuses on the coupled relationship between the applied
current and the charging time. The understanding obtained from this project will
help prevent the formation of these dendrites, and therefore enable the design
of safe and efficient solid-state lithium metal batteries. This project will
offer educational and research opportunities for K-12 teachers and students
during the summer and introduce to them the basic concepts of materials science
related to next-generation solid-state batteries. Videos of in-depth lectures
and experiments will be made available online for interested students and the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses Ta-doped Li7La3Zr2O12
(LLZTO) as a model system to investigate the transport and interfacial dynamics
that dictate the coupled electrochemical limits (i.e. current density and areal
capacity). To avoid the large variances in properties of the ceramic pellets,
millimeter-sized samples will be cut from the same mother pellet to fabricate
miniature cells. The nearly identical “daughter” samples ensure high
consistency. To avoid the interfacial contact loss due to repeated Li plating
and stripping (a problem of the widely used galvanostatic cycling method), this
project adopts the one-way polarization technique to ensure intact interfaces
and thereafter the correct and accurate interpretation of the true working
current density. The polarization test is combined with concurrent impedance
diagnosis, which not only decouples the collective dynamics to specific sources,
but also reveals the transient evolution of each impedance component. This
project will exploit the electrochemical concept of Sand’s capacity, and the
fundamental concepts of Haven ratio and correlation factors from materials
science, to facilitate the development of a unifiable fundamental understanding
of ion transport in all Li-ion-conducting electrolytes. Intimate integration of
electrochemical theory and tests with complementary characterizations will
enable multiscale and multimodal validations toward a comprehensive yet
predictive understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.