* 2203903
* Role of protein unfolding in endosomal escape
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Alanna Schepartz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2025
* USD 567,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Schepartz from the University of California,
Berkeley is studying the process that enables certain proteins to traffic
efficiently across endosomal membranes into the cytosol. This process is often
referred to as “endosomal escape”. Endosomal escape is poorly understood and
represents the fundamental bottleneck limiting the intracellular utility of
protein therapeutics. Schepartz will test the hypothesis that endosomal escape
demands protein and/or delivery agent unfolding and seeks to identify the
biophysical criteria – the design rules – that make a protein “deliverable”.
Were such design rules known, scientists could develop and prepare peptides and
proteins with confidence that they would reach their intended intracellular
location. The single molecule technique known as fluorescence correlation
spectroscopy (FCS) is the very best way to monitor intracellular trafficking, as
it is the only method that quantifies endosomal escape directly and without
amplification. Yet the set-up is tricky and the math is complicated; both limit
its adoption in academia and industry. The Schepartz team proposes two highly
complementary activities (an FCS BootCamp and BASIS lesson for 5th graders) to
extend the impact of their science beyond established communities. Both include
elements related to Innovation, Informal Science Communication, Higher
Education/Professional Development, and Broadening Participation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most proteins and peptides circumnavigate a complex path
to traffic into the cytosol or nucleus. Although some cyclic peptides diffuse
passively through biological membranes, these molecules are the exception, not
the rule. For most peptides and proteins, the journey to the cytosol involves
endocytosis and demands not just endocytic uptake but also endosomal escape.
Most molecules described as “cell-penetrating peptides” (CPPs) escape endosomes
with efficiencies of &lt; 10%. As a result, although there has been an enormous
amount of outstanding work on the basic science of peptidomimetics and
artificial proteins, the utility of these molecules largely ends at the cell
surface. ZF5.3 is unlike most CPPs. The polypeptide known as ZF5.3 is a 28-amino
acid, non-toxic, de novo-designed mini-protein that traffics with unprecedented
efficiency (&gt; 50%) to the cytosol and nucleus, even when covalently fused to
a protein cargo. The remarkable activity of ZF5.3 requires a penta-arginine
motif–five Arg residues displayed in a defined array on an ⍺-helix–and a unique
portal created by the HOPS (homotypic fusion and protein sorting) complex, a
multimeric protein complex associated with endosomal transport. This proposal
will test the hypothesis that endosomal escape demands protein and/or delivery
agent unfolding and seeks to identify the biophysical criteria that make a
protein “deliverable”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.