* 2203823
* Quantum Integrable Systems and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Anton Zeitlin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2025
* USD 257,168.00

Integrable systems are a fundamental mathematical tool in multiple subfields of
mathematics and physics, and more importantly, are instrumental in building
bridges between seemingly disparate areas. This project deals with the recent
resurgence of integrable systems in the context of algebraic geometry and
representation theory, motivated by the study of quantum field theories. The
results of the research are expected to elucidate the phenomenon of three-
dimensional mirror symmetry originally discovered in theoretical physics.
Broader impacts include establishing an interdisciplinary program for
mathematics and physics students. The project contains undergraduate and
graduate student research topics and aims for vertical integration of research
and education. The PI will also co-organize several conferences designed for
early-career researchers. The project is jointly funded by the Geometric
Analysis program, the Algebra and Number Theory program, and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project deals with the geometric realization of several points of view on the
Bethe ansatz approach to quantum integrable systems. One approach uses quantum
Knizhnik-Zamolodchikov equations emerging naturally in the enumerative geometry
of Nakajima quiver varieties. Another one relies on the study of QQ-systems,
generalizing the relations satisfied by the Baxter operators. The geometric
realization of QQ-systems is derived from the properties of the difference
equation version of oper connections on the projective line, generalizing the
correspondence between oper connections and Bethe equations for the Gaudin
model. The PI plans to show how these geometric points of view on the Bethe
ansatz are bonded together within the framework of the quantum q-Langlands
correspondence. This is expected to lead to new results in the study of the
mathematical formulation of three-dimensional mirror
symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.