* 2203948
* Boronic Acid Methods for Chemical Manipulation of Biomacromolecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Zachary Ball, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 531,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Zachary Ball from Rice University is studying
selective chemical reactions in complex biological environments. The experiments
will seek to understand how to design reactions to manipulate the atomic
structure of proteins, using a combination of reaction design and novel
screening approaches. Reaction design in complex environments remains
challenging, but successful development of methods for the preparation of
chemically modified proteins would have numerous beneficial applications. Hybrid
or chemically-modified biologics are increasingly important classes of new
drugs, and these molecules find use as molecular probes to better understand
biological function, or as “smart” responsive soft materials. The project will
integrate outreach efforts to expose local high school students to modern
scientific research. Research experiences for high school science teachers are
an important component of this project and serve to more widely disseminate the
value and excitement of modern chemical research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
this support, the Rice research team will explore the unique properties of
boronic acids to facilitate selective bioconjugation in several research
objectives. Because polypeptides are polyfunctional environments with few
uniquely reactive sites, it becomes necessary to pursue novel approaches to
selectivity. Efforts will explore new directions in an ongoing program to design
metal-catalyzed pathways with biocompatible boronic acid reagents for
manipulating protein structure. First, boronic acids will be examined as cross-
coupling reagents for new C–C and C–X bond formation, focusing in particular on
the remarkable and unique reactivity of pyroglutamate-histidine sequences to
enable one-step construction of protein-containing macromolecular conjugates and
nano-objects without the need for secondary bioconjugation. Second, boronic
acid–catalyst conjugates will be investigated as catalysts for the modification
of glycoproteins and polysaccharides, based on dynamic covalent chemistry of
boronic ester formation with hydroxy-rich regions to template proximity-driven
reactivity, a novel approach to selective chemistry for oligosaccharide-
containing structures. Complementary outreach efforts are designed to improved
lay understanding of this exciting and important field of interdisciplinary
research, and also to encourage, nurture, and motivate the next generation of
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.