* 2203309
* Tuning Carbon Nanotube Band Gaps by Guanine Functionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Robert Weisman, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2025
* USD 495,000.00

Professor Robert B. Weisman of William Marsh Rice University is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Division of
Chemistry to investigate and control the properties of single-wall carbon
nanotubes linked to DNA. These nanotubes are a prominent family of artificial
nanomaterials whose unusual properties and potential uses can lead to new
scientific discoveries and useful real-world applications in the areas of health
care, energy, and infrastructure safety. This project is based on the discovery
by Weisman and co-workers of a reaction that bonds DNA to nanotubes to form
stable hybrid structures that have controllable optical and electronic
properties. The investigators will use experiments and computations to further
explore the nature of these nanotube-DNA hybrids and to examine their potential
for use in biomedical sensing and quantum information processing. Apart from
these research goals, the project will advance science education at several
levels. Graduate students working on the project will gain essential hands-on
training and will develop skills in oral and written technical communication.
Undergraduate students participating in the studies will get valuable research
experience. The Weisman lab will also host high school teachers during the
summers in an ongoing program that expands their knowledge and leads to enriched
science curricula affecting hundreds of high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will deepen our understanding of the unique
covalent reaction between guanine nucleobases and carbon nanotubes induced by
singlet O2. This reaction perturbs the nanotube electronic structure by
introducing a dense array of shallow excitonic traps whose spacing and depth can
be controlled by the choice of ssDNA oligo structure. It thus has the potential
to produce nanotube hybrids with engineered band gaps. Experiments supported by
molecular dynamics and quantum chemical computations will investigate 1) how
interactions between sensitizer and nanotube affect the covalent reaction; 2)
the chemical bonding between DNA and nanotube; 3) the source of spectral
broadening in the hybrids; 4) the parameters controlling functionalization
extent. The results will clarify the detailed structures of the hybrids and the
mechanism of the functionalization reaction. Optimal conditions for efficient
formation of the desired products will also be identified. Customized DNA-
functionalized nanotube samples will be prepared for targeted collaborative
projects to further probe their properties and explore possible applications in
quantum optics and biomedical sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.