* 2203958
* Workshop: Diversity and dynamics of herbaceous plant communities in forest ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Liza Comita, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 46,590.00

Much of our understanding of how forests work is based on trees because they are
the largest and most obvious organisms in forests. However, trees make up less
than one quarter of all the plant species in many forests. Vines, epiphytes
("air plants"), and small plants like ferns and wildflowers are more common and
just as diverse as trees. Therefore, our understanding of forest biology is
limited because these other plants are often quite different from trees. Small,
non-woody plants tend to have different ways of living, growing, and reproducing
tree than trees. Also, they may respond quite differently to changes in light,
water, nutrients, and human activities. These differences from trees mean that
we are still unable to answer important questions about plant diversity. For
example, how does diversity on the forest floor change with climate and
geographic location? And how do differences in rainfall affect what kinds of
plants can grow? If we know the answers to these questions, we can also answer
questions such as what conditions allow non-native ‘invasive’ plants to spread?
And how will plants on the forest floor respond to increasing temperatures or
more intense droughts predicted with climate change? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
address this lack of understanding, the researchers will run a workshop where
they will determine which questions should be prioritized, accounting for
feasibility (i.e., what are the low-hanging fruit?) and urgency (i.e., what are
critical knowledge gaps for conservation and management?). The workshop will
bring together a diverse group of early-career and experienced researchers, with
expertise in herbaceous plant taxonomy and systematics, herbaceous plant
ecology, forest ecology, ecological sampling techniques, statistical modeling,
conservation, and policy. Participants will be selected from a variety of
institutions and countries in temperate and tropical regions. The workshop will
result in resources made openly available to the scientific community, including
a review of recent important research and top fundamental and applied research
questions. Additionally, workshop participants will propose standardized methods
to embed inventories of herbaceous plants within existing forest monitoring
networks, allowing many other researchers to sample herbaceous plants
consistently across a wide variety of forest habitats to address the identified
research priorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.