* 2203942
* Investigation of Two New Protein Post-Translational Modifications Derived from a Key Metabolite in Valine Metabolism
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2022,01/31/2026
* Y George Zheng, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 01/31/2026
* USD 494,550.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Prof Y. George Zheng of the University of Georgia is
investigating new molecular mechanisms of life process regulation by novel post-
translational modification of proteins. Specific chemical modifications in
proteins can impact key attributes and functions of affected proteins, such as
structural conformation, enzymatic activity, intracellular localization, and
interaction with other biomolecules. Through fine-tuned post-translational
modifications, cells and organisms adjust and regulate their physiological
states in response to various internal and external stimuli. Currently, the
molecular mechanisms of many post-translational modifications and their roles in
regulating biological processes are incompletely understood. This also
highlights another key point; namely that there are likely a good number of
post-translational modifications (PTMs) yet to be characterized. This project
endeavors to advance biological research field by identifying as yet
unrecognized post-translational modifications and elucidating the mechanisms by
which several of these PTMs regulate key life processes such as DNA
transcription, cell cycle control, and signal transduction. Multidisciplinary
methods and tools in the chemical and biological sciences will be explored and
applied to identify, validate, and functionally annotate post-translational
modifications in the human proteome. The proposed work is expected to support
education and diversity, consistent with the the principal investigatorâ€™s
established record in the scientific training of graduate, undergraduate and
high school students from diverse backgrounds. Early career trainees will learn
and apply state-of-the-art methods in chemical biology to address relevant
questions in molecular signaling, thereby benefiting the chemical biology
science community broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a particular
focus will be placed on identifying and validating two new post-translational
modifications in human proteins that are derived from the key metabolites in the
valine metabolic pathway. The researchers hypothesize that the reactive
metabolite, methacrylyl-CoA, and/or its hydrolyzed product methacrylate,
produced in valine metabolism are capable of modifying cellular proteins through
two different biochemical mechanisms: acylation of specific lysine residues
(lysine methacrylylation) and alkylation of specific cysteine residues
(S-2-carboxypropylation). Tailored chemical probes will be developed to
specifically recognize and label lysine methacrylylation and cysteine
S-2-carboxypropylation molecular modifications in proteins and peptides, and
then be applied to set up chemoproteomic platforms to map out methacrylylated
and S-2-carboxypropylated protein substrates at the proteomic level.
Bioinformatics will be used to delineate the distribution and scope of lysine
methacrylylation and cysteine S-2-carboxypropylation in the human proteome.
Furthermore, cellular and biochemical experiments will be conducted to
investigate dynamic controls and downstream effects of these protein
modifications. This work is projected to expand understanding of valine
metabolites and their contribution to protein posttranslational modification,
and to a broader level, advance the tool kit for molecular-level understanding
of the expressed human proteome and the role of PTMs in regulation and
signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.