* 2203791
* RUI: Anomalous and motor-driven dynamics in crowded biomimetic networks
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Janet Sheung, Scripps College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2025
* USD 451,524.00

Non-Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As you read this sentence, billions
of pieces of cellular cargo are being transported across the cells in your body
via many tightly coordinated physical mechanisms. The inside of our cells is a
crowded three-dimensional mesh which can restructure dynamically as needed.
Physicists' current understanding of transport processes of small (micron-sized)
particles is insufficient to explain what is actually observed when cells are
placed under a microscope. This project will create "toy models" of cells on
microscope slides and measure both the transport of small particles as well as
the mechanical response of the sample corresponding to the different kinds of
physical mechanisms driving the transport. In this way, the research team will
empirically determine critical parameters needed to improve scientific models
and theories on intracellular transport processes. Additionally, to help train,
inspire, and diversify the next generation of scientists, each summer the
principal investigator will volunteer with an existing pre-college outreach
program to provide research opportunities to six high-achieving but
underprivileged tenth-graders from the Los Angeles metropolitan area. They will
then be mentored by faculty and current undergraduate students at Scripps
College through their college applications and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this project is to advance our understanding of the
relationship between transport and mechanical properties within an active,
biomimetic material far from equilibrium. Eukaryotic cells rely on targeted
transport of molecules from &lt; 1 nm to as large as &gt; 1 Î¼m across tens of
microns in a dynamic, complex, and crowded environment to sustain life. In
particular, molecules are corralled, mixed, and separated by emergent transport
mechanisms where non-equilibrium dynamics and steric effects arising from
molecular crowding both play crucial roles. The research team will create fully-
tunable crowded and non-equilibrium biomimetic environments on microscope slides
and simultaneously characterize the passive and active transport, network
connectivity, force response, and viscoelastic moduli using a custom-developed
optical trapping capable lightsheet microscope. This project aims to combine
experimental results and accompanying theoretical models to generate predictions
testable in vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.