* 2203669
* CAS: Deconstructing Plastic and Agricultural Waste via Organosulfur Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Rhett Smith, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2025
* USD 344,869.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Rhett Smith of Clemson University will
research ways to recycle agricultural and plastic waste, two underutilized and
environmentally detrimental waste streams that represent critical barriers to a
sustainable economy. The proposed research aims to benefit society by (1)
elucidating new, sustainable ways to recycle plastic waste, (2) allowing access
to sustainable products made from plant-derived material instead of from
petroleum, and (3) alleviating environmental damage of plastic waste in the
environment. This work will also benefit society through sustainability
education. Resources on green and sustainable chemistry will be made available
online where they may be accessed for free worldwide. This project will also
help to improve participation in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics degrees by engaging students from historically underserved and
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work seeks to establish thio-
cracking as a mechanism for chemical recycling/upcycling of plastic and
agricultural waste. The thio-cracking approach being pursued involves the
reaction of waste materials with elemental sulfur to yield organics and
organosulfur compounds. Mixtures so derived are expected to be amenable to
desulfurization to give new organic feedstocks. One aim of the research is to
establish reactivity pathways between sulfur and functionalities found in target
waste compounds including polyethylene terephthalate, polycarbonates, and
lignin. These studies will involve the study of reactions of authentic waste
materials and of small molecular model compounds. The anticipated reactivity
will facilitate the formation of C–S bonds as sulfur will react with
radical/radical-reactive species formed in the course of the thermal
decomposition of organics at temperatures below 350 °C. This work aims to unveil
fundamentally important mechanisms and microstructures resulting from C–S bond-
formation and yield new organosulfur polymers. This work further seeks to
provide one-pot protocols to convert plastics and biomass into new polymers and
small molecular derivatives at significantly lower energy cost than required for
many current chemical recycling strategies. This research has the potential to
contribute to society by enabling waste reservoirs to be reclaimed for value-
added applications, with this approach to recycling drawing upon the thermal
reversibility of S–S bond formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.