* 2203630
* Collaborative Research: Ethylene-Forming Enzyme
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Christo Christov, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 282,774.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Division of
Chemistry, Robert Hausinger and Jian Hu at Michigan State University and Christo
Christov at Michigan Technological University are studying the catalytic
strategy of the ethylene-forming enzyme (EFE). This bacterial or fungal protein
is a member of the non-heme Fe(II)- and 2-oxoglutarate (2OG)-dependent
oxygenases and is distinct from the well-known plant enzyme that also forms
ethylene but by a distinct process. EFE catalyzes two distinct reactions, with
one producing ethylene and the other generating the nitrogen-rich compound
guanidine. Ethylene is the natural plant-ripening hormone and has been advanced
as a fuel source alternative to gasoline. Guanidine is a potential nitrogen
fertilizer. Thus, the reactions that produce ethylene and guanidine are of
fundamental interest and have potential national economic benefits and societal
impacts. Investigation of the EFE enzyme will provide advanced training in
biochemical, structural, and computational approaches to two postdoctoral
scientists and to undergraduate students. Scientific advances obtained from this
project will be incorporated into university graduate courses. In addition, the
findings from these studies will be communicated to lifelong learners in the
general public via presentations at the university Science Festival.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this proposal is to elucidate the
catalytic mechanism of EFE by a combination of experimental and computational
studies. Critical to this process are studies that examine the enzyme’s two
reactions: (1) decomposition of 2OG into three molecules of carbon
dioxide/bicarbonate and ethylene and (2) the conversion of 2OG to succinate and
carbon dioxide and transformation of the amino acid L-arginine (L-Arg) into
guanidine and L-Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate. To understand the molecular
determinants that control the relative activities for the two reactions,
biochemical, structural, and computational approaches will be applied to site-
directed variants of the best studied EFE from the bacterium Pseudomonas
syringae, an EFE homolog from the fungus Penicillium digitatum, and to
reconstructed ancestral EFE proteins. Using this information along with
structure-guided protein engineering, EFE variants that are optimized for
producing the biofuel ethylene or the plant fertilizer guanidine will be
created. This work significantly extends the structural/mechanistic information
available for other important Fe(II)- and 2OG-dependent oxygenases that are
unable to catalyze these reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.