* 2203113
* CAS: Augmenting the Applicability and Sustainability of Direct Arylation Polymerization (DArP)
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2025
* Barry Thompson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 11/30/2025
* USD 465,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Barry C. Thompson of the University of
Southern California is studying green and energy efficient methods to prepare
conjugated polymers. This class of organic semiconductors has shown a great
promise for a diverse array of optoelectronic applications, such as sensors,
solar cells and light emitting diodes. In this research, systematic studies will
be conducted in order to enhance the sustainability of direct arylation
polymerization, a controlled and atom-economical method to synthesize conjugated
polymers. Strong emphasis will be placed on mechanistic understanding of this
catalytic process in green solvents and development of rational methods for
engendering functional group tolerance. The combination of these two approaches
has the potential to transform the sustainability, accessibility and scalability
of conjugated polymers. In the long run, this could lead to practical large-
scale production of polymers with previously inaccessible molecular structures
and properties. Broader impacts of this work will be demonstrated through
integrated set of activities. Participation in the University of Southern
California-Cerritos Community College Internship Program will entail hosting
community college students, providing an effective way to engage primarily
under-represented groups. This internship program will be extended to involve
students from Los Angeles Pierce College, an HACU Member Hispanic Serving
Institution. Additionally, a pioneering program focused on Write-to-Learn
pedagogies to facilitate student learning and retention in undergraduate science
classes will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the rapidly increasing
performance of applications of conjugated polymers (CPs) has brought increased
attention to the field, current synthetic approaches have lagged behind what is
required for continuing discoveries and the increasing focus on sustainable
processes and materials in synthetic polymer chemistry. This project will focus
on addressing deficiencies in direct arylation polymerization (DArP), with the
potential to transform this polymerization into a controlled, sustainable,
scalable, and broad-scope method for preparing CPs. In the first objective,
mechanistic features of DArP will be investigated in dihydrolevoglucosenone, a
bio-based solvent derived from cellulose and classified as an alternative to
dimethylformamide. Other green methods for the polymerization will involve
heterogenous emulsion polymerization, use of earth-abundant metals for
catalysis, and lowering of reaction temperature. The second objective will
explore strategies to achieve controlled chain-growth in DArP by transcribing
catalyst-transfer direct arylation conditions to polymerizations using a
fluorene-tetrafluorobenzene monomer and a variety of halogenated aromatics as
the initiators. The third objective targets reaction conditions to increase the
functional group tolerance of DArP. This is to be achieved by focusing on CPs
bearing acidic/reactive and palladium-coordinating functional groups. The broad
scope of sustainable approaches outlined in this research has the potential to
provide advances that can contribute to more sustainable chain-growth
polymerization processes in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.