* 2203324
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the effects of different nitrogen forms on marsh resilience to environmental change
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* James Morris, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 234,022.00

Nitrogen delivery from watersheds to the coast harms aquatic ecosystems,
including the formation of dead zones where oxygen concentrations drop below
levels that can support most aquatic life. Salt marshes provide an important
line of defense against nutrient pollution by intercepting watershed nitrogen
before it enters estuaries. This nitrogen can enhance the growth of marsh
plants, much as fertilizers enhance growth in gardens. However, some forms of
nitrogen can also be used by microbes, who use it as a substitute for oxygen to
decompose plant organic matter in low-oxygen sediments. Understanding which of
these two outcomes of nitrogen delivery is most likely to occur is important to
the environment. If marsh plants take up that nitrogen and grow larger, this
will cause the marsh to gain elevation by trapping more sediment and adding more
plant material to the sediments. This process will increase salt marsh
resilience to sea-level rise. However, if marsh microbes can outcompete marsh
plants for the added nitrogen, then it could enhance sediment decomposition and
reduce the ability of marshes to keep up with rising sea levels. The results of
this research will help predict how marshes will respond to sea-level rise in
coastal systems that experience large inputs of land-derived nitrogen, helping
to create more resilient coastal communities. This research also supports
workforce development through training across multiple levels of education (high
school, undergraduate, and graduate), in particular for people from historically
marginalized groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand how nitrogen speciation
and plant genetic diversity affect the ability of salt marshes to keep pace with
sea-level rise, this research has three goals: quantify how environmental
nitrogen availability alters responses of the coupled plant-microbe system,
determine how these responses vary under different flooding regimes, and assess
how different populations of cordgrass respond to different nitrogen sources. To
address our first goal, we are conducting paired plot-level nutrient enrichment
experiments in two locations along the eastern US coast where nitrate and
ammonium will be added at a range of concentrations for two years. We are
measuring the effects of nitrogen addition on marsh plants, microbes, and carbon
and nitrogen cycling. To address our second goal, we are performing experiments
at both locations, where nitrogen form is crossed with elevation to assess how
variation in elevation alters the responses of the plant and microbial
communities to different forms of nitrogen. These experiments are purposefully
designed so that results can be used in a new generation of the Marsh
Equilibrium Model that incorporates how future nitrogen inputs will alter the
capacity of marshes to keep pace with sea-level rise. Lastly, greenhouse
nitrogen uptake experiments are providing essential data on population-specific
uptake rates of both nitrogen forms in the absence of sediment microbes. Taken
together, this research mechanistically addresses how different forms of
nitrogen and plant genetic variation affect marsh ability to store carbon and
keep pace with sea-level rise. This information is being incorporated into a
modeling framework that allows resource managers to predict how marshes will
respond to the combined effects of nutrient enrichment and sea-level
rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.