* 2203189
* EAGER: CAS-Climate: Research Coordination Network on the Indirect Environmental/Energy Impacts of Digitalization
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Kasantha Moodley, Environmental Law Institute
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,959.00

This project is designed to build a community of researchers with a focus on
improving society's understanding of the indirect energy and environmental
(E&amp;E) impacts of the digital economy. There is a slowly increasing body of
research that seeks to understand and quantify the direct E&amp;E impacts of
digitalization, including the increase or reduction of energy use, emissions
arising from the use of devices (and/or their supporting infrastructure), and
environmental impacts from operating infrastructure such as data centers.
However, far more complicated are estimates of digitalization's indirect E&amp;E
impacts. Indirect impacts may include those associated with the substitution of
digital for physical products, or rebound effects that occur if savings (in time
or money) from digitally-mediated behaviors induce energy-intensive activities
(like short term rental platforms increasing long distance travel). Ensuring the
long-term sustainability of digital infrastructure and the human behaviors it
enables will require greater research efforts at the intersection of multiple
and often disparate disciplines along with increased scientific cooperation
across national borders. This RCN seeks to close disciplinary and knowledge
gaps, increase the quality and quantity of research, and begin to grow a new
field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project goals are to: increase needed multi-
disciplinary interactions, especially between the physical and behavioral
sciences; facilitate greater collaboration between U.S. and European
researchers; identify knowledge gaps and high-value research; improve scholarly
impact; and advance work to secure greater research support. By fostering
collaboration between disciplines and providing a better sense of research
priorities, a research coordination network can be instrumental in leveraging
funds from existing and new sources to grow support of research in the topic
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.