* 2203112
* New frontiers in synthesis of high-entropy transition metal borides enabled by microwave-induced plasma
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Shane Catledge, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 08/31/2025
* USD 283,117.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of this project is
that it addresses the need for advanced ceramics as a key enabling technology
for many applications in aerospace, defense, power generation, and processing
industries having significant national impact. The study of materials designed
for operation under harsh conditions is essential to meet a range of
challengesâ€”from creating better turbines, reactors, and batteries to developing
future energy systems. The experimental and computation components of this
project help support the goals of the National Materials Genome Initiative (MGI)
in the effort to discover, manufacture, and deploy advanced materials faster and
with less cost than ever before. The class of materials known as high-entropy
ceramics developed in this project extends the range of high temperatures and
resistance to rusting as needed for advanced material systems, such as
hypersonic vehicles. The investigations involve understanding how these new
materials form, along with their mechanical and rust resistance. The materials
are processed using a highly efficient technique based on a state of matter
known as plasma; a processing approach not yet explored in this field. Both
experimental and computational methodologies are employed to provide new
knowledge about how these materials can be synthesized, characterized, and
modeled. The community are engaged about the wonders of plasma technology
through involvement with a local science center, with aim for a broad viewing
audience including the general public and K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates a novel approach for synthesis of high-entropy transition
metal borides enabled by microwave-induced plasma. Compared to conventional
processes that rely primarily on convection, the advantages of this approach
include: enhanced diffusion, reduced energy consumption, very rapid heating
rates and considerably reduced processing times, decreased sintering
temperatures, and improved physical and mechanical properties. The plasma
discharge is highly efficient in promoting microwave heating and chemical
reactions via highly active species such as electrons, ions and radicals. This
synthesis route is yet unexplored for high-entropy ceramics and presents
opportunity to study the mechanisms contributing to formation of this relatively
new class of materials. The kinetics and reaction pathway leading to complete
phase transformation via this unique approach is investigated, along with
characterization of structure, hardness and oxidation resistance. The
computational effort guide component selection by computing entropy forming
ability with partial occupation method, predict oxidation resistance using
CalPhad to couple thermodynamics with phase diagrams, and model mechanical
properties with special quasi-random structures. Outcomes from this project
include: new understanding of how microwave-induced plasmas affect and enhance
reaction pathways/kinetics toward high-entropy boride formation and development
of new models for mechanical and oxidation resistance properties along with
validation from experiment. Community outreach in this project focuses on the
wonders of plasma technology for a broad viewing audience including the general
public and K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.