* 2203340
* CAS: Modular, Simple, and Efficient Synthesis of Electron-Rich Pyrrolopyrroles for Novel and Tailorable Conjugated Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Graham Collier, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 05/31/2025
* USD 395,134.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Graham Collier of Kennesaw State
University is developing a new approach for synthesizing conjugated monomers
that will participate in numerous polymerization strategies and access a diverse
class of semiconducting recyclable polymers. Semiconducting polymers are organic
macromolecules in which a backbone of alternating single and multiple bonds
results in pi-conjugation. This enables overlapping of molecular orbitals, which
in turn allows for the delocalization of electrons. Following the doping
process, the delocalized electrons become free to move around, resulting in an
electrical current as they pass along the conjugated polymer backbone.
Currently, conjugated polymers are the most important class of plastics used for
optoelectronic devices such as LED screens in mobile devices and computers,
solar cells, energy storage, sensors, and many others. However, many of the
conjugated systems that meet performance metrics for these applications have
complex structures, require multiple synthetic steps and generate toxic waste
during polymerization protocols. This work addresses these issues and will focus
on the synthesis of conjugated monomers in fewer synthetic steps from
commercially available aldehydes, anilines and other biobased starting
materials. Furthermore, the synthesis will be performed in the air and will not
require extensive purification. The polymerization will also bypass commonly
required cryogenic air- and water-free conditions. Beyond fundamental insights
into the influence of monomer design on the polymer properties,
degradable/recyclable copolymers also will be prepared. The advances in the
synthesis of conjugated polymers that will be enabled by this research broadly
support energy security by lessening demand on fossil fuel resources and
employing less energy-intensive processing methods. This project will provide
graduate and undergraduate students with training in polymer synthesis and
macromolecular characterization techniques. Laboratory research will be
complimented by efforts to develop upper division organic/polymer curriculum
that will enable students to become familiar with fundamental concepts of
macromolecular science, academic research, and how these are connected to
societal problems. Synergistic research and education initiatives will provide
opportunities for under-represented groups, especially African Americans, women,
and first-generation students from rural North
Georgia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on the development of
modular, simple, and efficient synthesis of electron-rich pyrrolopyrroles for
novel and tailorable conjugated polymers. In the first thrust, dihalogenated
pyrrolo[3,2-b]pyrroles (H2DPP) will be prepared and incorporated into the main
chain of conjugated polymers using direct heteroarylation polymerization. A
strong focus will be placed on fundamental design and structure-property
relationships such as optical, electrochemical, and thermal properties. The
second thrust will center on the synthesis of degradable and recyclable H2DPP-
based conjugated copolymers. This will be achieved by acid-catalyzed step-growth
copolymerization of dialdehyde H2DPP with various diamines. Such strategy will
eliminate the need for transition metal catalysts. More importantly, the
resulting azomethine functional groups in the polymer backbone can readily be
degraded by acid to their respective monomers. Outcomes from this work have the
potential to provide fundamental information regarding new monomeric building
blocks, develop simple polymers for sustainable approaches in organic
electronics, and demonstrate the viability of H2DPPs in redox-active
applications. The designed processes have high atom economy, are energy
efficient and more environmentally benign than currently utilized
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.