* 2203806
* Bio-Optical Computing Devices: Multi-Valued Logic Elements via Photonic Bio-Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Vladimir Tsukruk, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2025
* USD 390,000.00

The principal investigator of this project aims to develop a novel materials
platform for potentially powerful bio-computing beyond current semiconductor-
based materials. Quantum computation has long been theorized to be the next
generation powerful computing but currently relies on specific materials and
phenomena that work at non-natural environment such as extremely low
temperatures. Beyond original quantum systems, the principles of super-computing
with multi-level logic elements can be expanded by exploring novel physical
phenomena and materials to achieve multi-level signal processing with
drastically increased productivity. This approach requires further exploration
of principles beyond binary logic and traditional classical inorganic structures
and physical phenomena. These novel photonic-based computational logic elements
will be considered in this project with the ability to be integrated with future
electronic circuits. This research is to provide a flexible, bendable, conformal
and sustainable platform for bio-photonic thin film transistors, as for the
human-machine interface, with enormous parallel processing abilities for
wearable and implantable bioelectronic devices for skin, under-skin and brain
use. The educational philosophy of the PI focuses on the individual students
themselves and their early involvement in research, which is critical for
getting students into sustainable research careers, especially young people from
unrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is the
exploration of the design and integration of heterostructured bio-based photonic
materials as active dielectric layers with different wavelength-active organic
semiconductors to create bio-organic field-effect transistors (BOFET). These
structured materials will be a base for a prospective multi-value logic system
that may enable powerful bio-computing. The main conceptual hypothesis of the
proposed research is the suggestion that the integration of unique electronic
and optical properties, responsive behavior and photonic properties of robust
and flexible chiral bio-derived materials with thin film electronic technology
might lead to the creation of super-multi-value logic BOFET devices with
superior computational performance at ambient conditions in future wearable
human-interface friendly bioelectronics. Three major research tasks to be
conducted in this project include: i) synthesis and fabrication of active
biophotonic thin films from cellulose-nanocrystals with chiral nematic
organization in conjunction with responsive photonic behavior as triggered by
external illumination from different photon energies and polarizations and
relative humidity; ii) design and fabrication of an active dielectric layer
integrated with organic semiconducting polymers at an organic/inorganic
interface and further integration with electronic-relevant substrates to enable
BOFETs with unique opto-electronic properties; and iii) testable design of full-
scale multifunctional BOFET prototype device as a novel photonic-based multi-
value logic element with potential for high level logic operations including
ternary and quaternary logic values. Finally, the PI will study critical output
electronic characteristics at variable photon energy, polarization, and
environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.