* 2203670
* EAGER GERMINATION: Immersive Training Studio for Technology-Environment-Energy-Water-Society (TEEWS) Grand Challenges
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Alexander Dowling, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 297,356.00

This project is funded through the NSF Directorate for Engineering Germination
program, which seeks to foster the development of pedagogical approaches to
increase the ability of academic researchers to formulate research questions and
ideas with potentially transformative outcomes. The Immersive Training Studio
for Technology-Environment-Energy-Water-Society (TEEWS) Grand Challenges aims to
translate a successful entrepreneurial process for problem formulation and
solution discovery to an academic setting. As part of an 8-week experience, 20
graduate fellows at the University of Notre Dame will be trained in
transformative problem formulation, helping them expand their doctoral research
to emphasize broader societal impacts. Through partnerships with nonprofit and
community organizations, graduate fellows will be given the unique opportunity
to directly contribute to solving community-sourced problems. By cultivating
transferable and adaptable skills, graduate fellows will be empowered to focus
their careers on broader-impacts-centered, transformative problem solving, with
consequent societal benefits. Moreover, the focus on broader impacts-driven
research may increase engagement and retention of women and other
underrepresented groups in engineering. Successful implementation of this
approach will lay the foundation for scaling this innovation ecosystem across
disciplines (to science, public policy, economics, law, humanities), across
learners (to undergraduates, post-docs, faculty, community partners), and across
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovation ecosystems characterized by a
social, open, contextualized, and tangible culture of learning have been used to
inspire and create the conditions for innovation in entrepreneurial settings,
but are not commonly used to provide a learning environment for embedding
grounded problem formulation in doctoral research. The Immersive Training Studio
for Technology-Environment-Energy-Water-Society (TEEWS) Grand Challenges will
partner with INVANTI, a local startup incubator, to translate a successful
entrepreneurial learning framework for problem formulation and solution
discovery to an academic setting. Graduate fellows will use a facilitated
process to engage with community partners to understand the problem, identify
barriers, and formulate research questions. A new graduate seminar will provide
training in systems engineering, community engagement, human-centered design,
and convergence science to prepare fellows for the immersive summer experience.
Project activities will include: (1) creating an innovation ecosystem for
formulating transformative research questions, (2) developing and delivering a
graduate transdisciplinary integration seminar, (3) leveraging and expanding a
transdisciplinary research culture to recruit and mentor graduate fellows, (4)
training approximately 20 fellows via an 8-week immersive studio experience, and
(5) evaluating and refining the training program. The projectâ€™s theory of change
is that by providing scaffolded training and experiential learning in an
innovation ecosystem, encouraging mentorship from faculty, and offering cultural
supports for ongoing exposure to a broad range of grounded, issue-based
research, the program will train doctoral graduate students to formulate,
critique, and refine transformative research
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.