* 2203610
* Turbulence in the Long-lived, Very Stable Atmospheric Boundary Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Inanc Senocak, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 05/31/2025
* USD 453,861.00

Stable conditions of the atmosphere are frequently observed during nighttime in
mountainous terrain or during cold seasons over land. Stable conditions persist
for days as a long-lived weather regime in polar regions. A better understanding
of atmospheric flows under stable conditions is key for advances in areas such
as mass balance of polar ice sheets, climate modeling, orographic precipitation,
fog formation, severe downslope windstorms, and associated aircraft turbulence.
Despite numerous theoretical, computational, and experimental investigations of
stable conditions in the atmosphere, its accurate representation in numerical
weather prediction (NWP) models remains to be a challenging task. Over or under
estimation of turbulent mixing is known to create unintended consequences in
other aspects of meteorological modeling, such as incorrect predictions of
stronger winds and precipitation. This project aims to better comprehend
turbulence in long-lived, stable conditions and develop a reliable theory for
its mathematical representation in computer models, which is expected to pave
the way to more accurate weather forecasts and climate projections with reduced
uncertainties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objectives of the project
will be achieved through intensive direct numerical simulations of turbulence in
the Ekman layer under the joint action of a surface cooling flux and a constant
ambient stratification. The configuration is an idealization of long-lived
atmospheric boundary layers observed in polar regions and differs from the
common approach of simulating stable Ekman layers with surface cooling only. The
project will quantify the effects of an expanded dimensionless parameter space
on turbulence. The project will extend and refine similarity theories and
correlations for long-lived stable Ekman layers. A quantitative classification
scheme to account for the global intermittency of turbulence in stable boundary
layers is expected at projection completion. This project will contribute an
atmospheric boundary layer module to an existing open source spectral/hp element
flow solver and provide research experiences in computational sciences and high-
performance computing to undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.