* 2203690
* Ecological Change in a Mammalian Community in Extreme Southern Patagonia
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Jonathan Perry, Western University of Health Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 10/31/2024
* USD 152,758.00

This interdisciplinary research effort among biological anthropologists,
vertebrate paleontologists, and geologists, will study how mammals adapted to
their changing environment during the Miocene epoch (23-5.3 million years ago).
The extraordinary preservation of primate and sloth fossils from the Mid-Miocene
Santa Cruz Formation allows investigation of diet, body size, locomotor
patterns, and community ecology before and after a peak in global temperature.
Today, these groups in South America are primarily herbivorous and wholly tree-
dwelling; they are also vulnerable to habitat destruction and shifts in weather
patterns because they depend on warm, wet forests. Understanding how these
groups adapted to major climatic shifts in the past will advance scientific
knowledge about the effects of ecological change on vulnerable mammalian groups
more generally. The project also will foster international collaborations and
support graduate student training, public science outreach, and K-12 science
outreach including the development of teaching kits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will focus on primates and sloths living before and after a major spike
in global temperature (Mid Miocene Climatic Optimum). Previously, most of the
work on the Santa Cruz Formation of Argentina has focused on the rich field
sites of the (older) Lower Member of the formation. This project provides an
opportunity to study the younger sites of the Upper Member, which coincide with
the temperature maximum. Previous ecological reconstructions suggested that the
habitats of the Lower Member were warmer, wetter, more closed forests and that
those of the Upper Member were open woodland. However, new dating of the fossil
sites suggests that global temperature was higher during the time of the Upper
Member, casting doubt on these earlier ecological reconstructions. This project
will focus on gathering new fossil samples from known Upper Member localities
and on finding new localities. It will also include new geological research to
improve correlations across localities and it will include an in-depth analysis
of plant remains to help with ecological reconstruction. Mammalian comparisons
between members will focus on three key aspects of sloth and primate biology:
body mass reconstruction, dietary inference, and locomotor inference. Evidence
for differences in these aspects of biology will consist of the size and
morphology of teeth and long bones. Researchers will use cutting-edge techniques
to quantify tooth wear and topography as well as long bone dimensions and cross-
sectional properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.