* 2203505
* Mechanisms of Protein Protection by Desiccation-tolerance Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Gary Pielak, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 335,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Gary J. Pielak from the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill to investigate mechanisms of protein protection used by large and
small desiccation tolerance molecules. Organisms selected to survive desiccation
do so by making protective molecules, but the mechanisms of protection are
mostly unknown. From a practical perspective, understanding dehydration
protection will improve biomanufacturing processes and bio-based products, such
as biologic drugs and industrial enzymes. These studies will provide graduate
and undergraduate students with specialized training in protein chemistry and
physical biochemistry, which are useful skills for basic and industrial
research. The PI will also work with the Carolina Covenant, a program that helps
low-income UNC students graduate debt-free, to train students interested in
chemistry research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four main ideas proposed to explain
desiccation protection — water retention, vitrification, water replacement and
molecular shield hypotheses — will be tested by using a combination of protein
engineering, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy and rheometry. The most common natural protective small molecule is
the nonreducing disaccharide, trehalose, but there are also several classes of
protective disordered proteins. The most well-studied members are the Late
Embryogenesis Abundant (LEA) proteins, which were discovered in plants but are
also found in animals. The most recently discovered class of protective proteins
— Cytosolic Abundant Heat Soluble (CAHS) proteins — are unique to tardigrades.
CAHS proteins are remarkable not only because they protect other proteins and
enzymes but also because they form protective gels. This project will compare
and contrast each of these types of protective molecules to better understand
how their structures contribute to the survival of organisms under dehydrating
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.