* 2203844
* Polariton-Assisted Imaging of Ultrafast Chemical Transformations
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Milan Delor, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2025
* USD 442,564.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Milan Delor and his research group at Columbia University
are developing a new microscope to directly image interactions between molecules
separated by large distances. These long-range molecular interactions are of
high current interest for potentially transformational technologies including
ultra-efficient energy harvesting, catalytic systems that drive highly complex
chemical reactions, and quantum sensors that can detect the tiniest
perturbations in their environment. Long-range molecular interactions are
notoriously difficult to characterize and control because they occur between
just a few molecules and often on extremely fast timescales, inaccessible to
current technologies. The Delor group is working to develop a microscope that
leverages polaritons, part-light part-matter particles, to significantly
increase the sensitivity of optical microscopy and enhance long-range molecular
interactions. This technology will be combined with short laser pulses and
angle-resolved imaging to yield an ultrafast microscope that is designed to
directly image interactions between individual molecules occurring over a
trillionth of a second. The research focuses on understanding how long-range
communication between molecules can be controlled. The group plans to publish
extensive technical blueprints to allow other researchers to reproduce and adapt
the microscope for other applications. Developing the home-built microscope and
applying it to molecular systems of high current interest will also provide
hands-on training for undergraduate and graduate students in optics, sensing,
and chemical dynamics, areas of expertise that are in high demand in academia,
government laboratories, and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-range molecular
interactions induce collective dynamics that are crucial for processes as
diverse as coherent energy flow, cooperative catalysis, biological allostery,
and quantum entanglement. Collective effects are notoriously difficult to
characterize as they typically occur on femto-microsecond timescales, in sub-
ensembles of 2–100 coupled molecules, and over sub-micron spatial scales. In
this project, the Delor group is working to develop a unique ultrafast imaging
approach that leverages polaritons (propagating part-light, part-matter
particles at metal-dielectric interfaces or in photonic cavities), combined with
ultrasensitive momentum-resolved optical microscopy, to image collective effects
in tiny molecular ensembles over sub-micron scales. This new approach called
PolImUR (Polariton-assisted Imaging of Ultrafast photoinduced Reactions) is
being implemented in a pump-probe far-field microscope that uses elastic
scattering as contrast mechanism and will be optimized to leverage the extreme
sensitivity of polaritons to their environment. Using a variety of polaritonic
substrates, the group plans to demonstrate sub-10-molecule sensitivity and a
spatiotemporal dynamic range spanning 40 femtoseconds–1 microsecond and 50
nanometers–20 microns. The researchers aims to leverage these features to
directly image and characterize cooperative catalysis on plasmonic substrates,
and coherent energy and information exchange between (entangled) molecules.
These processes underlie efforts around the community to develop collective
chemistry (e.g. polariton chemistry) and quantum technologies (e.g. remote
quantum sensing) that rely on long-range molecular
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.