* 2203404
* Conference: 2021 AHMB MINDS Conference Grant
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,06/30/2022
* Walter Murfee, Nova Southeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 06/30/2022
* USD 4,125.00

This award will fund the 7th annual MINDS (Mentoring for Innovative Design
Solutions) Workshop organized by Alpha Eta Mu Beta National Biomedical
Engineering Honors Society. The workshop will be held virtually from October 6-9
in parallel with the BMES 2021 Annual Meeting. This will allow the students
selected for the MINDS Scholar Program to also participate in the BMES Annual
Meeting. The MINDS Scholar Program is an innovative approach that provides
students with the opportunity to collaborate and network with peers and mentors
across the country for a 5-month period while building necessary engineering
design skills including three key considerations that are not usually stressed
in coursework projects. The three key considerations are (1) market
considerations for commercialization (unmet need, size of market reimbursement
potential, etc.), (2) regulatory strategy, and (3) evaluating prospects for
intellectual property protection. The 7th MINDS Scholar Program will focus on
the development of biomedical technologies that solve health care problems while
considering end-user needs such as people with disabilities. The program begins
with an initial workshop where students will virtually meet their team members,
drawn from other universities across the US, and mentors. The team then selects
a central design idea that will be developed over the subsequent 5 months.
Students will then work with their teams and mentors to develop a design
solution that considers issues such as market evaluation, intellectual property
issues, and regulation. Teams will be encouraged to submit their designs to
various design contests, investment opportunities, and grant programs. The
collaborative and long-distance communication skills that the team will develop
will better equip them to work in an environment that is increasingly dependent
on communication between distant facilities and
customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority of design courses in the US,
particularly in biomedical engineering programs, do not have sufficient time to
provide students with a strong experience in the non-technical aspects that are
key to design success: market potential, intellectual property, and regulation.
This program will provide students, selected through a competitive process from
across the US, with key experience related to real-world design processes for
medical systems. It will also provide students with significant experience in
working on a geographically separated team and with peers from varied
backgrounds, both of which are strongly valued by
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.