* 2203311
* Investigating the regulation of chromatin associated proteins by intrinsically disordered regions
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Catherine Musselman, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,299,999.00

Each cell in a multi-cell organism originally contains a full copy of the genome
in its nucleus, but only a subset of these genes is active and in use. Proper
regulation of which genes are on, and which are off, in each cell is critical to
steer development and all basic body functions. The genome does not exist as
naked DNA but is wrapped around complexes of proteins called histones, which
together with the DNA form so-called chromatin. Gene regulation is in large part
dictated by how this chromatin is packaged around individual genes, which is in
turn controlled by various large protein complexes in the nucleus. A critical
aspect of these protein complexes’ function is the ability to read post-
translational modifications (PTMs) on the histones, which act as labels to guide
them to the correct place. However, how these PTMs contribute to this process is
still poorly understood within the overall complexity of chromatin. This project
addresses fundamental questions of how histone PTM readout in a chromatin
context is regulated by highly conserved elements within these chromatin-binding
proteins to control proper gene transcription during development. In addition to
the scientific goals, the PIs will work closely with a local commuter college to
recruit and retain young students from underrepresented groups into the
sciences. They will also work to enhance communication between the scientific
and lay communities by encouraging the use of art in this conversation, through
participation in the Art of Science Fellowship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
questions addressed in this project are fundamentally important for
understanding how histone PTM readout is regulated in the chromatin context.
Specifically, this project will investigate how evolutionarily conserved,
intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) found adjacent to histone reader domains
regulate nucleosome dynamics, histone PTM readout, transcription, and
development. The mechanistic basis of this regulation will be uncovered using a
series of NMR spectroscopy experiments on conserved IDRs-reader pairs. This
project will test the functional importance of these IDRs in vivo using an
allelic series of zebrafish mutants. Selective removal and substitution of these
deeply conserved amino acid residues and comparison to loss-of-function alleles
will allow, for the first time, testing of the developmental and physiological
contribution of these IDRs. This project was supported jointly by Molecular
Biophysics and Genetic Mechanism Clusters of the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.