* 2203518
* Ultrahigh-Throughput Single-Molecule Spectroscopy and Multidimensional Super-Resolution Microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ke Xu, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Ke Xu and his research group at the University
of California-Berkeley are developing ultrahigh-throughput approaches for
single-molecule spectroscopy and multidimensional super-resolution microscopy.
The rise of super-resolution microscopy over the past decade has revolutionized
how researchers study chemical, biological, and materials systems at the
nanometer scale. This project extends super-resolution microscopy to high-
dimensional measurements in order to enable new capabilities for chemical
imaging at the single-molecule level. New approaches include the use of
expandable hydrogels to control diffusion, incorporation of microfluidic
techniques, and the application of machine learning approaches to analyze data
from the high-throughput measurements. The measurements enabled by this research
have the potential to reveal new knowledge about the behavior of single
molecules and to provide new tools and concepts that will benefit diverse
research fields in fundamental ways. Moreover, the project provides advanced
student training in modern experimental technologies and big-data analysis
methods that are increasingly important skills for employment in both academia
and industry. The project also supports Professor Xu in providing an inclusive
environment through his commitment to teaching, mentoring, and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rise of super-resolution microscopy based
on the detection of single-molecule fluorescence, often known as single-molecule
localization microscopy (SMLM), has revolutionized the study of chemical,
biological, and materials systems over the past decade. In this project, the
research team led by Professor Xu is developing new experimental approaches to
enable high-dimensional and high-throughput measurements of single-molecule
properties in order to expand the capabilities of SMLM. In addition to
experimental approaches that take advantage of expandable hydrogels and
microfluidic techniques to record diffusion rates and fluorescence spectra for a
very large number of single molecules, the team is also working to apply machine
learning algorithms to analyze the data from the ultrahigh-throughput single-
molecule spectroscopy measurements for millions of molecules. Through the
integration of these diverse techniques, the project aims to provide high
temporal resolution for recording the fast dynamics of untethered single
molecules, to enable the extraction of high-dimensional molecular information
from single-molecule images for super-resolution mapping, and to elucidate size
effects in macromolecule diffusion. Broader impacts of the work include
potential applications of ultrahigh-throughput and multidimensional single-
molecule measurements across a wide range of research areas. Students working on
the project also gain valuable cross-disciplinary training based on the new
knowledge, tools, and concepts that are being
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.