* 2203892
* Model Systems for Studying Carbohydrate-Carbohydrate Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Amit Basu, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Amit Basu of Brown University is studying how
carbohydrates interact with each other in biological systems. Cell surfaces are
coated with complex carbohydrates, also known as glycans, that mediate
communication between cells and neighboring cells. A detailed molecular
understanding of how these cell surface glycans engage with other cells is a
prerequisite for being able to design molecules and materials that comprise new
technologies that will interact with cells and tissues. Students and researchers
working on this project will be trained in a variety of chemical and biophysical
tools that will be used to identify the fundamental principles underlying
glycan-mediated recognition. These scientists will move on to graduate school in
chemistry and biology, medical school, and to jobs in higher education, the
private sector, and government. This project will be used in a variety of
outreach efforts that connect local schools with scientists who will share with
young students how the tools of chemistry, biology, and physics are used to
study the world around us.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbohydrate-carbohydrate
interactions (CCI) between cell surface carbohydrates and glycolipids mediate
cell-cell adhesion in a variety of biological processes, such as metastasis,
development, and neural development. This project will focus on the role of
three carbohydrates – galactose (Gal), glucose (Glc), and sulfo-galactose (sGal)
– all found in the myelin sheath, a series of lipid bilayers that encircle
axons. Previous studies have shown that CCI can be readily detected using
various glycoconjugates and that the interaction is exquisitely carbohydrate
specific. However, the detailed molecular basis for these interactions remain
unknown. Thus, the broader question that this project seeks to is – can
characterize carbohydrate-carbohydrate interactions be better characterized at
both a molecular and supramolecular level? More specifically, this project seeks
to identify the structural features that contribute to CCIs and to determine the
thermodynamic parameters of this interaction using a variety of biophysical
tools, including NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance) and ITC (isothermal titration
calorimetry).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.