* 2203756
* CAS: Mild Methods for the Selective De(hydro)chlorination of Polyvinyl Chloride
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Shaama Mallikarjun Sharada, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 539,543.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Megan Fieser and Dr. Shaama Mallikarjun
Sharada of the University of Southern California (USC) are studying
environmentally friendly routes to repurpose poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) waste.
While PVC is a valuable polymer (plastic), serving critical roles in
construction and medical applications, generation of hydrochloric acid prevents
common recycling. In this research, catalytic methods will be developed to
convert PVC to useful organic and Cl-containing products that avoid the
formation of harmful and corrosive chemicals. These approaches aim to transform
the sustainability and value of chemical recycling of PVC products. Broader
impacts of this work will be in the support of women in science and engineering
(WISE) graduate students and the education of plastic pollution to the general
public. Dr. Fieser and Dr. Mallikarjun Sharada will continue to serve as faculty
advisors to the Women in Chemistry (WiC) and Women in Chemical Engineering
(WChE) groups, respectively, at USC. Beach cleanups and an outreach education
website will inform the general public about the challenges of and solutions to
plastic pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of environmentally
friendly and sustainable processes for recycling, upcycling, and pyrolysis of
PVC without generating harmful and corrosive byproducts is important for
addressing the plastic waste issue. Through complementary experimental and
computational efforts, this research aims to unveil new homogeneous catalysis
routes for repurposing PVC into value-added chemicals and polymers. The work
will focus on controlling product selectivity via catalyst design and
optimization of reaction conditions, with computational analysis supporting
experimental choices. In the first objective, selective dechlorination of PVC
will leave benign chlorine-containing products and polyethylene as the organic
byproduct, which could be used in existing recycling streams. In the second
objective, dehydrochlorination will be optimized to form alkene functional
groups without the formation of hydrochloric acid. Tandem methods with
dehydrochlorination will lead to functionalized polymers and small molecule
dienes, representing sustainable upcycling of PVC. In the third objective,
computational analysis of catalytic mechanisms will serve to interpret
experimental findings and screen catalysts and salts to guide and accelerate
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.