* 2203506
* Collaborative Research RUI: Examination of the Effect of Templating Agents on the Size, Shape and Chiral Recognition of Bifurcated Amino Acid Based Amphiphilic Molecular Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Kevin Morris, Carthage College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 85,371.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Eugene Billiot, Fereshteh Billiot and Mark Olson
of Texas A&amp;M University Corpus Christi (TAMUCC), along with their
collaborator Kevin Morris at Carthage College, will synthesize and characterize
a novel class of “branched” amino acid-based surfactants. The goal of the
research is to understand the molecular factors responsible for the aggregation
and self-assembly of these molecules into structures that will interact with and
recognize molecules of biological importance. Synthesis of the surfactants will
use a green chemistry approach where materials will be prepared from amino acid-
based starting materials instead of potentially hazardous polyaromatic
hydrocarbons. Furthermore, since the surfactants are amino acid-based, they are
expected to be biocompatible. The research will help fill a void in the current
knowledge base that is critical for the proper design and selection of more
efficient chiral selectors. In addition, since enantiorecognition of the systems
under study is based upon amino acid-scaffolding, the knowledge gained from
these studies will be potentially transferable to other amino acid-based systems
such as proteins. This project is a collaboration between two primarily
undergraduate institutions, with one of those two institutions, TAMUCC, being a
Hispanic-serving institution (HSI). Thus, the research to be funded by this
grant will serve as a tool for the research team to recruit, train, and mentor
students from underrepresented and economically challenged backgrounds and to
encourage these students to pursue post baccalaureate degrees in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is focused on investigating and
elucidating the factors responsible for (a) self-assembly, (b) function, (c)
higher ordered structure and (d) molecular recognition of amino acid-based
macromolecular assemblies (AABMAs). A comparison of the properties of “linear”
AABMAs to novel “bifurcated” AABMAs will be made and how they are affected by
factors such as surfactant concentration, surfactant type (linear vs
bifurcated), pH, and type of counterion/templating agent affect the size, shape,
physical properties, and enantiomeric recognition of AABMAs. The AABMAs will be
studied in both their monomeric and polymeric forms. The AABMAs micelles will be
crosslinked by exposure to Co60 gamma radiation or 185 nm vacuum UV radiation.
The effect of pH, counterion/templating agent, and surfactant concentration on
polymerization, self-assembly, function, higher order structure and molecular
recognition will be studied. A variety of techniques such as nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR), fluorescence, Small Angle Neutron Scattering (SANS), small
angle X-ray scattering, cryo-transmission electron microscopy, dynamic light
scattering methods, as well as capillary electrophoresis (CE) will be utilized
to learn more about the physical properties of the AABMAs formed. Thermodynamic
studies will be conducted to yield insight into the binding interactions between
the chiral molecular recognition units of the surfactants/polymer micelles and
the chiral analytes that will be targeted for chiral separations using titration
microcalorimetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.