* 2203466
* Collaborative Research: RUI: An In-depth Characterization of Divalent Cadmium Binding to Human Cardiac Troponin C and the Impact on Subsequent Protein Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Anne Marie Spuches, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 312,108.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Anne M. Spuches from East Carolina University and Nicholas Grossoehme
from Winthrop University will investigate the impact of divalent cadmium,
Cd(II), binding to human cardiac troponin C protein (hcTnC) and its impact on
subsequent protein interactions. Cadmium toxicity remains an important
environmental concern. Chronic cadmium exposure, either from environmental
sources or tobacco smoke, can result in numerous health problems including
cognitive impairment in children and cardiovascular disease. It is known that
Cd(II) can mimic divalent calcium, Ca(II), and can disrupt calcium signaling
pathways but little else is known about how this happens at the molecular level.
The proposed research aims to investigate Cd(II) binding to human cardiac
troponin C, a Ca(II) binding protein responsible for heart muscle contraction,
and to explore this toxic metal’s impact on subsequent protein interactions.
Furthermore, the proposed project will provide both undergraduate and master’s
students the opportunity to engage in independent and meaningful research
projects in the field of bioinorganic chemistry. They will be introduced to
cutting edge instrumentation and will communicate their findings at national
conferences or through publication. These activities will allow students to
develop the research and collaborative work skills and the confidence necessary
for successful careers in the pharmaceutical or biotechnology industries or in
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research uses a combination of
calorimetric, spectroscopic, and computational methods to investigate Cd(II)
binding to hcTnC and understand how the presence of Cd(II) impacts subsequent
protein interactions within the troponin complex. First, Cd(II) binding to the
N-terminal domain of human cardiac troponin C and cysteine replacement mutants
will be characterized by isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC), NMR, and mass
spectrometry methods. Next, site-specific binding of Ca(II) and Cd(II) to EF-
hand metal binding knockout mutants in addition to synthesized EF-hand peptides
III and IV will be investigated using ITC, fluorescence, and circular dichroism
spectroscopy. Finally, hTnC-TnI and TnT protein interactions will be explored in
the presence of Cd(II) through the use of surface plasmon resonance (SPR), ITC,
and molecular dynamics simulations (MDS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.