* 2203601
* NSF-ANR: Molecular Control of Actin Cortex Organization and Phase Transitions
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Shiladitya Banerjee, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 02/28/2025
* USD 362,063.00

The fundamental goal of this project is to uncover the molecular mechanisms
controlling the assembly and organization of the cellular actin cortex. The
actin cortex is a thin network of actin filaments and myosin motors coupled to
the cell membrane, whose structure and organization regulate cell shape changes
during migration, division, and morphogenesis. While the key molecular
components of the cortex have been characterized, how they assemble and maintain
diverse actin network organizations remain poorly understood. This collaborative
project aims to understand the multi-scale dynamics of cortex assembly by
integrating new multi-scale modeling tools with in vitro experimental
techniques, which will benefit the communities of researchers studying cell
biology, biophysics and mechanobiology. This collaboration will provide training
in state-of-the-art simulation and experimental techniques to postdocs and
students, in multidisciplinary and stimulating environments, where they will
collaborate and develop international professional networks. Lessons learnt from
this project will be integrated into graduate and undergraduate curriculum in
Biophysics developed by the PI, to demonstrate how self-organized biological
systems emerge from the interaction between molecular
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop new experimental
approaches to manipulate the assembly, turnover, and force generation in
reconstituted actin networks. In parallel, the researchers will build a multi-
scale model for the cortex, integrating data at the molecular scale to generate
predictions at the network scale that will be tested experimentally. Using these
tools, the researchers aim to build cortex-like actomyosin networks that can
dynamically morph into different organizations. The second aim is to determine
how the mechanochemical properties of cortical actin networks can be tuned at
the molecular scale to drive transitions between different force-generating
actomyosin structures. This project aims to transform the current paradigm by
showing that distinct actin networks, rather than being independently built, are
mechanically integrated within the cortex and emerge via phase
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/France project is
supported by the US National Science Foundation and the French Agence Nationale
de la Recherche, where NSF funds the US investigator and ANR funds the partners
in France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.