* 2203378
* Low voltage electron back-scatter diffraction: enabling high resolution mapping of heavily deformed materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Marc De Graef, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2027
* USD 506,367.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern engineering materials often
have a complex microstructure that makes it difficult to accurately predict how
they will behave under the influence of a applied forces. Many aspects of the
deformation behavior of a material are still poorly understood. Since
deformation occurs at a very small length scale, we need to use electron
microscopes operated at a fairly high magnification to image the internal
behavior of the material at this length scale. In this research project,
cutting-edge microscopy techniques are advanced to quantitatively determine the
local deformation in a number of metals and alloys; such measurements provide
insight into the behavior of these materials, in particular when these metals
are used in structural applications in our modern society. These algorithms are
available to the community through publications and open source code. Open
source text books are developed for the materials community and provide a
mechanism for the on-demand creation of free open source text
books.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
thermomechanical processing of materials systems and the subsequent annealing
and recrystallization processes have for more than a century now been the
subject of numerous experimental and theoretical studies, in particular for
metallic systems. Despite extensive work on recrystallization, many details of
this process still remain unclear due to the difficulty to quantitatively and
accurately characterize the deformed state of a material; this state can be
considered as a precursor state, setting the stage for the subsequent annealing
process, so understanding this state is of paramount importance. Extracting
lattice strains from deformed samples is challenging but requires a renewed
attention due to recent improvements in electron back-scattered diffraction
(EBSD) detector systems. A physics-based EBSD prediction model is combined with
the ability to incorporate the local deformation tensor in the pattern
generation algorithm. In particular at lower microscope accelerating voltages,
i.e., less than 10 kV, there is the potential to enhance the spatial resolution
of EBSD measurements to a few tens of nanometers, especially when combined with
sensitive direct electron detectors. Whole pattern matching of EBSD patterns
against realistic simulated patterns for a deformed lattice make it possible to
routinely reach strain sensitivities of better than 0.0001 over large sample
areas. The proposed research consists of a tight combination of computational
model development and in-situ experimental work. Portions of this work are
carried out in collaboration with colleagues at UCSB and at Johns Hopkins
University. All algorithms are made available to the community in peer-reviewed
publications and as open source code. On the educational side, the OpenChapters
project addresses the issue of rapidly rising cost of material science and
engineering text books by creating an open source mechanism for the generation
of free text books by a crowd-sourcing approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.