* 2203496
* EAGER GERMINATION Collaborative Research: Leveraging a Research Development Professional Network to Catalyze Statewide Innovative and Societally Relevant Research
* ENG,EFMA
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Jeanne Viviani, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 04/30/2024
* USD 24,541.00

This project is funded through the NSF Directorate for Engineering Germination
program, which seeks to foster the development of pedagogical approaches to
increase the ability of academic researchers to formulate research questions and
ideas with potentially transformative outcomes. Major societal challenges can
benefit from large, coordinated solutions that leverage interdisciplinary teams
with collaborations from academia, government, industry, and other stakeholders.
However, many college and university faculty have limited experience, tools, and
support to successfully engage in diverse teams that extend beyond their
department, much less their institution. The goal of this project is to create
and sustain inter-institutional teams composed of junior and senior faculty
members with diverse STEM perspectives and methodologies focusing on pressing
regional issues such as coastal challenges. This statewide research intervention
project will be developed and supported by research development professionals
embedded in higher education institutions across Florida. Broader impacts will
accrue from instantiation of interdisciplinary, inter-institutional research
teams who develop research projects capable of successfully addressing societal
challenges. Success in this project will provide a template for replication and
scaling by states and other sizable networks focused on addressing intractable
problems with team-based solutions that cross disciplinary
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project directly addresses gaps in
researcher professional development, networking, and support by creating and
guiding inter-institutional teams formed around important societal needs and
informed by key community stakeholders. It involves a two-stage research
intervention that commences with a collaborative learning and ideation event and
continues with supported team and project development. The facilitators of these
activities will be Research Development (RD) staff from Florida colleges and
universities, under the guidance of a faculty expert in team science. These RD
professionals are members of FloRDA, a statewide network of research staff from
a diverse set of 21 member institutions, including primarily undergraduate and
minority-serving institutions. During this program, RD professionals will serve
as the “glue” to form and facilitate faculty teams, as connective boundary
spanners with institutional knowledge as well as broader knowledge encompassing
opportunities for strategic growth, existing community partnerships, and
statewide policy and funding initiatives. These facilitators will nurture newly
formed research teams into stable groups with aligned goals and defined member
roles, leveraging activities designed to enhance knowledge integration and
create a shared transdisciplinary framework. Success in this project may enhance
understanding of how to implement team science approaches in geographically
dispersed groups. It will also be important for charting a path through which RD
professionals can foster and support team science spanning multiple and diverse
partner organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.