* 2203366
* Quantifying and Designing for Electrostatic Preorganization in Enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Mark Eberhart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 370,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program in the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Anastassia Alexandrova from the University of
California, Los Angeles, and Dr. Mark Eberhart from the Colorado School of Mines
are developing tools and methods to enable the design of artificial enzymes.
Enzymes are general protein-based and serve as the workhorses for biological
catalysis. One of the great challenges confronting modern chemistry is to
illuminate the mechanisms responsible for the catalytic efficiency displayed by
most enzymes that is the products of bimolecular evolution are Darwinian
selection pressure for biological function. This program will explore the role
of enzyme structure distal to the site of catalytic activity; namely, the active
site. Such long range interactions are thought to be a key feature
distinguishing natural enzymes from their artificial counterparts. This
investigation will combine advances in computational chemistry with experimental
testing and benchmarking. Experimental approaches will be used to assess the
effect of distal changes in enzyme structure upon catalytic efficiency. The
novel computational methods will be employed to determine how these distant
structural changes specifically alter the proximal reaction site environment and
promote or inhibit enzyme catalysis. The approach taken will be to first predict
the effects of specific structural alterations to enzyme efficiency, followed by
the expression of the mutant, designed enzymes, followed by experimental testing
their catalytic efficiency. In this way, there will be an inherent feedback loop
between computation and experiment in this research. The computational tools
developed in this investigation will be made available to other research groups
exploring computationally-aided molecular design. This project also includes an
outreach program intended to familiarize K-12 students with the great challenges
and opportunities afforded by the advances in molecular biology and chemistry
when coupled with equivalent advances in computation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop new computational tools based on charge density-
partitioning to assess the effects of enzyme structure on electrostatic pre-
organization in natural and designed enzymes. These tools will be used, and
concurrently refined, to study pre-organization in several representative enzyme
classes, and to interrogate the progress of pre-organization accompanying
natural and laboratory enzyme evolution. The goal of these studies is to uncover
relationships between enzymatic structure, active site charge density, reaction
barriers, and catalytic efficiency and specificity. If successful, the insight
resulting from these investigations will facilitate the inclusion of pre-
organization into enzyme design paradigms. Ultimately, such predictions are
experimentally testable, and such have the potential for broad impact in the
protein design field by introducing tools to effectively predict and design
strategic electrostatic environments that promote the desired catalytic
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.