* 2203623
* EAGER GERMINATION: Computational Modeling from Scenario Development: A Pedagogy for Generating Novel Research Questions to Address Critical Societal Issues
* ENG,EFMA
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Deborah Rupp, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 05/31/2024
* USD 274,648.00

This project is funded through the NSF Directorate for Engineering Germination
program, which seeks to foster the development of pedagogical approaches to
increase the ability of academic researchers to formulate research questions and
ideas with potentially transformative outcomes. This project aims to develop and
test a structured creativity framework that broadens exploration of challenges
through the identification of impactful and scientifically rigorous research
questions using a combination of two techniques: narrative scenario development
and computational modeling. While scenario modeling emphasizes speculation and
creativity, computational modeling is associated with precision and formulation.
Leveraging this combination of approaches is predicted to result in research
questions and agendas with strong potential for impact on critical societal
challenges. A pilot pedagogical framework for research-focused graduate students
will be deployed, with evaluation providing feedback to enable iterative
improvement. Graduate students will be recruited from a range of disciplines,
recognizing that the formulation of research questions that address critical
societal challenges can require creation of bridges between multiple types of
complex systems and disciplines. This project could generate a novel pedagogy
that would be available and useful to a broad range of researchers, with the
promise of enhancing their capacity to conceive societally impactful
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop and pilot a semester-
long, multidisciplinary graduate course on the generation of research questions
about critical societal-scale challenges that couples scenario development and
computational modeling. The course will involve a quasi-experimental design and
will generate longitudinal, multi-source and multi-criteria evaluation data. All
students will take part in instructional modules focused on A) Review of a
standardized set of critical societal challenges, B) Narrative scenario
development, and C) Computational modeling. Subsequent to completion of the A
module, students will be divided into two groups which will undertake B and C
modules in contrasting sequence (i.e., B then C, versus C then B). Student
capacity to generate research questions will be evaluated before and after each
module. Continuous monitoring, learning, and adjustment over semesters of course
delivery should result in an improved and validated course for scaling and
dissemination. This novel pedagogy is anticipated to have broad impact via its
capacity to test the novelty, creativity, and quantitative feasibility of
scenario-generated research questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.