* 2203658
* CAS: Development of Structure-Property Relationships in Photoluminescent Bismuth Organic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Karah Knope, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2025
* USD 172,944.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Luminescent materials – compounds
that emit light upon exposure to electromagnetic radiation – are used in every-
day technologies ranging from light bulbs to counterfeiting inks. Yet there are
ongoing concerns regarding the sustainability, price, and toxicity of the
components commonly used in existing technologies. In this project supported by
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research and Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B Program in the
Division of Chemistry, design principles for luminescent materials based on
bismuth – a cheap, globally sourced, environmentally benign element – are
developed by pairing experimental and computational approaches. The experimental
studies focus on the preparation and atomic-level characterization of the
features that give rise to luminescence in bismuth-based compounds. These
efforts are coupled with complementary computational studies that further
elucidate the factors that underpin the observed luminescence. The insight
gained from these studies fundamentally advances our ability to control the
properties of bismuth based compounds and provides a new platform for
luminescent materials design. Additionally, the research is integrated with
activities that support formal K-12 science curricula and fosters STEM
engagement through collaboration with local partners including the Smithsonian
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tunable
luminescent materials are an important class of compounds due to their
application in areas ranging from energy-efficient lighting to sensing
technologies. Yet there are obvious advantages to the development of materials
built from globally available, cheap, nontoxic elements. This project, supported
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research and Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms B Program in the
Division of Chemistry, will broadly establish structure-property relationships
in bismuth-based compounds built from molecular complexes and clusters.
Correlation of structural features, both molecular structure and noncovalent
interactions, with photoluminescent behavior using X-ray diffraction,
temperature dependent spectroscopic measurements, and computational studies will
provide insight into how metal ions with closed shell ns2 electron
configurations can be used to tune material properties through structural
modifications, electronic effects, and extended noncovalent interactions. Such
work will advance our understanding of main group synthetic, coordination, and
materials chemistry and afford new knowledge that is essential to the
realization of the more applied aspects of main group coordination and materials
chemistry. These efforts are integrated with the group’s commitment to preparing
students for diverse careers in the workforce and broadening participation in
STEM disciplines via the development of a variety of educational activities that
support K-12 students and teachers. Local partnerships leverage the group’s
proximity to institutions such as the Smithsonian to reach a large audience and
broadly catalyze STEM engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.