* 2203161
* Catalytic halogen bonds in enzymatic bond breaking and making in DNA
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Anthony Rappe, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 656,974.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program of the Chemistry
Division is funding Professors Pui S. Ho and Anthony K. Rappé at Colorado State
University to determine how halogens can replace magnesium in the design of
catalytic proteins (enzymes) that break and make the bonds in DNA. Magnesium is
the metal typically used by enzymes to help cut or join DNA in cells. Dr. Ho’s
group has shown that the catalytic magnesium in an enzyme found in mice can be
replaced by an unnatural chlorinated or iodinated amino acid. This project will
determine how an interaction called halogen-bonding allows elements on opposite
ends of the periodic table to catalyze the same DNA-modifying reactions. This
science probes the idea of using halogen-bonding as a design tool to engineer
synthetic enzymes for biotechnology applications. This project will provide
training in structural and computational chemistry to graduate and undergraduate
students, including those from underrepresented groups. Finally, an outreach
project will help middle school and high school students learn how scientists
use “X-ray vision” see the atoms in three dimensions in DNA and
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The making and breaking of the bonds along the
DNA backbone are critical reactions in a broad range of genomic processes.
Endonucleases and ligases typically use magnesium ion or similar metal cations
as catalysts to specifically cut and rejoin DNA fragments. The Ho and Rappé
groups have shown that the essential catalytic divalent magnesium ion in mouse
endonuclease G (mEndoG) can be functionally replaced by a chlorinated or
iodinated tyrosine. The resulting halogenated construct recapitulates the
activity of the wild type mEndoG to specifically cleave four-stranded DNA
Holliday junctions that contain a 5-hydroxymethylcytosine base. This cleavage
reaction is catalyzed by a hydrogen bond (H-bond) enhanced halogen bond
(X-bond), or HBeXB, for short. In addition, the halogenated enzyme was found to
catalyze a unique ATP-independent DNA joining reaction that is also seen in the
wild type mEndoG. This research project will characterize the structural and
mechanistic properties that allow this metal-free, X-bond catalyzed enzyme (or
cX-Zyme) to act as a site-specific endonuclease and an ATP-independent ligase.
From a broad scientific perspective, this work raises the interesting
possibility that one may be able to exploit X-bonding quite generally as a novel
method to promote specific catalytic chemistry in enzyme active
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.