* 2203829
* High-Speed Quantum Magnetic Widefield Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Mark Ku, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2025
* USD 390,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program of the
Chemistry Division and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), Mark Ku and his research group at the University of Delaware are
developing a novel magnetic imaging technology based on nitrogen-vacancy (NV)
centers in diamond as quantum sensors. This new approach to using NV quantum
sensors promises a unique set of capabilities for sensing weak magnetic fields
with high spatial resolution and over a wide field-of-view. High-speed, wide-
field (WF) NV magnetic imaging has the potential to enable a variety of
breakthrough applications involving chemical imaging and quantum sensing.
Specifically, the Ku group is working to develop novel instrumentation – a
dynamical quantum magnetic imaging (DQMI) microscope – that will advance the
state-of-the-art in frame rate, spatial resolution, and sensitivity of real-time
magnetic imaging. The research team is pursuing an approach that combines the
integration of a novel camera technology for NV magnetic imaging and the quantum
control of NV sensors in order to provide a foundation for a number of high-
impact measurement and imaging applications, including real-time WF detection of
radical compounds and their redox reactions; micron-scale nuclear magnetic
resonance imaging; imaging, tracking, and counting of nano-particle tags for
chemical sensing; and imaging of neuronal activity. The broader impacts of the
project also include potential applications in the development of new quantum
technologies, and the development of a new course for the Quantum Science and
Engineering graduate program at the University of Delaware. The research project
also will provide advanced training opportunities for the next generation of
scientists and engineers, including graduate and undergraduate students from
diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop
a novel high-speed, wide-field dynamical quantum magnetic imaging (DQMI)
microscope using NV centers in diamond as quantum sensors. The research team is
working to enhance the sensitivity of magnetic imaging through quantum control
of the NV centers and the environment. The DQMI approach has the potential to
enable real-time imaging of dynamic magnetic fields over a large field-of-view
at frame rates up to ~1000 frames-per-second (fps) and correlation imaging with
MHz sampling rates and sub-micron resolution. The research team is working
toward these goals by integrating a novel camera technology for NV magnetic
imaging and quantum control of the NV sensors. The Ku group plans to demonstrate
new capabilities for real-time imaging of dynamical magnetic fields, magnetic
noise, and magnetic correlation functions. Techniques are also being developed
to enhance sensitivity by controlling the coupling between NV centers and
environmental spins. Furthermore, the research team is developing a novel
technique to interface NV centers with a sample of interest via the use of
diamond micro-chips. The broader impacts of the project are enhanced through
educational activities, including active involvement and training of graduate
and undergraduate students to prepare the next generation of scientists and
engineers; a continued focus on recruiting, retaining, and advancing students
from groups that are underrepresented in STEM fields; and the development of a
new Experimental Methods for Quantum Systems course as part of the newly
launched Quantum Science and Engineering graduate program at the University of
Delaware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.