* 2203609
* Probing the Gas/Water Interface on Electrochemically-Generated Nanobubbles
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Bo Zhang, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 05/31/2025
* USD 480,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Bo Zhang and his research group at the
University of Washington are developing and applying new approaches to study the
gas/water interface of electrochemically generated nanobubbles. Processes that
occur at the electrode/solution interface, including bubble formation, play a
critical role in electrochemistry. Many electrochemical reactions that are
relevant for energy conversion and storage and environmental chemistry are gas-
evolving reactions. For example, H2 and O2 are produced from the
electrocatalytic water splitting. Despite its key importance, the early stage of
bubble formation remains challenging to study due to the lack of proper imaging
tools with sufficient sensitivity and resolution. In this project, the Zhang
group is developing a single-molecule fluorescence imaging approach to probe the
surface of nanobubbles in order to further understand the chemical nature of the
nanoscale gas/solution interface. The research seeks an improved understanding
of electrocatalytic reactions that will enable the development of more efficient
and selective catalysts. This project provides unique interdisciplinary training
opportunities for graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students in the areas
of electrochemistry, fluorescence microscopy, nanotechnology, and energy
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The measurements being developed in this project
seek a better understanding of the chemical environment at the gas/solution
interface of nanobubbles. Toward this goal, the research team led by Professor
Zhang analyzes the dynamic adsorption and desorption processes of single
fluorophores. They are working to extract a series of key kinetic parameters
including the adsorption equilibrium constant, adsorption and desorption kinetic
constants, and the sticking probability for molecules at the interface. They use
solvatochromic dye molecules to probe the polarity of the interface. Moreover,
the research team will image single nanobubbles generated on nanoelectrodes to
better correlate fluorescence signal with bubble size and shape. The research
promises to offer new insights on the chemical and physical nature of the
gas/solution interface of nanoscale bubbles that has important implications for
developments in clean energy and other catalytic processes. The use of
nanoelectrodes and their arrays will enable a better understanding of mass-
transfer effects in bubble nucleation. In addition to the scientific impacts of
the work, the project provides advanced training opportunities for
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.