* 2203727
* CAS: Responsive Macromolecules by Wavelength Controlled Vinyl Ketone Photopolymerization and Photodegradation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Dominik Konkolewicz, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Dominik Konkolewicz of Miami University is
employing radical photopolymerization to prepare well-defined and
photodegradable polymers made of vinyl ketones. Polyvinyl ketones are a class of
polymers that are widely used not only as components for packaging materials and
agricultural films, but also as functional plastics in applications such as
imaging, microfabrication and sensors. An interesting feature of these polymers
is that they can be degraded to their low-molecular weight fragment upon
exposure to UV irradiation, making them ideally suitable for recycling. This
research will focus on investigating chemical mechanisms of radical
photopolymerization and photodegradation of a diverse range of vinyl ketones.
The gained mechanistic insights will then be used to develop photo-gated
plastics that are prepared under visible light and degrade under ultraviolet
irradiation. Broader impacts from the project will involve the development and
implementation of outreach activities that engage middle and high school
students. Through the polymer chemistry and polymer materials science and
engineering divisions of the American Chemical Society, the project will engage
members of the polymer chemistry community by developing educational resources
through the macromolecular alliance for community resources and outreach
(MACRO), as well as webinars. The project will also provide training and
mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students of diverse backgrounds.
Undergraduate students from underserved groups will be recruited and mentored
through engagement with the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(LSAMP), with a specific focus on preparing LSAMP students for research through
first year research experience project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vinyl ketones are
unique photoactive monomers leading to polymers that have distinct photo-
responsive properties. However, the full potential and broad use of vinyl
ketones has been hindered in part due to incomplete understanding of monomer
reactivity and underlying polymerization mechanisms. This research will study
the mechanism of radical generation in vinyl ketone photopolymerization and
photodegradation. The developed methodology could offer unique opportunities for
vinyl ketones in reversible additionâ€“fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT)
polymerization to enable access to diverse functional groups. Detailed
mechanistic studies will also be performed to address challenges in atom
transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) of vinyl ketones and further understand
pathways toward efficient polymerization of these complex monomers. Furthermore,
using these mechanistic insights into the polymerization of vinyl ketones,
photochemical polymerization induced self-assembly (photoPISA) and photochemical
degradation induced modifications of self-assembly (photoDIMSA) will be
performed to promote and modulate the self-assembly of polymers. The DIMSA
approach could impact the polymer self-assembly broadly, as well as targeted
delivery in stimulus responsive polymers. If these studies are successful, new
additive manufacturing and 3D printing technologies could result, enabled by
orthogonal light responsiveness, with one wavelength of light synthesizing
advanced polymeric structures, and the other wavelength adding complexity by
post-polymerization degradation on selected regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.