* 2204700
* Conference: Categorical methods in representation theory and quantum topology
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Vyacheslav Krushkal, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 02/28/2023
* USD 20,000.00

The award will support participation of primarily early-career researchers in
the workshop "Categorical Methods in Representation Theory and Quantum
Topology," and the Distinguished Lecture Series "Virginia Mathematics Lectures,"
which will take place on April 15-17 and 18-20, 2022, respectively, at the
University of Virginia. The workshop will consist of talks by leading experts on
connections between categorification in representation theory, quantum groups,
and quantum topology, as well as short talks by early-career participants.
Participants will be introduced to exciting new directions in representation
theory and topology, and will gain experience for future projects. The diversity
of mathematical researchers and areas represented at the workshop will foster
new collaborations and new research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
will address topics on link homologies, quantum groups, Hopf algebras, and
categorification, as well as interactions of these subjects. Categorification,
which is the central theme of the workshop and subsequent lecture series, has
played an important role in several areas of modern mathematics, including
representation theory and quantum topology. These events at the University of
Virginia seek to foster communications between experts and students in these
fields. By encouraging interactions with leading experts and exchanges of
emerging new ideas, the workshop will provide a platform to further scientific
advances and facilitate collaborations between two seemingly different fields.
The workshop website is http://math.virginia.edu/ims/workshop-
spring-2022.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.