* 2204225
* Cys-Tyr Cofactor in Iron and Copper Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Aimin Liu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 09/30/2025
* USD 495,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Aimin Liu from the University of Texas at San
Antonio is investigating protein-derived cofactors that contain a cysteine-
tyrosine crosslink (Cys-Tyr). These cofactors are generated in a unidirectional
protein post-translational modification. They have biological significance
because they instill catalytic function in some enzymes, such as galactose
oxidase, and enhance the catalytic efficiency of other enzymes, such as thiol
dioxygenases. However, the chemistry of the cofactor synthesis and how the Cys-
Tyr cofactor contributes to catalysis are not well understood. The proposed
research will focus on the elucidation of the mechanism by which the Cys-Tyr
crosslink of the cofactor is formed in enzymes. The graduate and undergraduate
students who are engaged in the research plan will learn how to determine
protein structure through crystallography, advanced spectroscopies, and the
rapidly developing technology of substitution of an amino acid in a protein with
unnatural amino acids. They will also gain expertise in the study of catalytic
function in proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to
understand the extraordinary stability of the one-electron oxidized free radical
form of the Cys-Tyr cofactor in copper-dependent galactose oxidase. The proposed
studies will seek to determine the radical spin density distributions of the
copper center and aromatic residues in the active site of the enzyme and how
these distributions affect proton/electron transfer during catalysis. The
research is expected to generate insight into how the Cys-Tyr cofactor in human
thiol dioxygenases facilitates catalysis by characterization of substrate-bound
complexes and cofactor-bearing structures. These studies will leverage the
demonstrated ability of the research team to genetically substitute targeted
amino acids with noncanonical amino acids (ncAAs). Although the strategic
substitution minimally alters the target amino acid residue, it alters the
electronic and chemical structure of the functional groups. The ncAA-containing
enzyme variants and their reactions with different substrates will be studied
using a combination of chemical, spectroscopic, and structural biology methods.
These studies aim to provide insight into the irreversible, self-processing, C-S
bond formation and the processes by which the radical is stabilized and the
redox activity of the copper active site is tuned. Ultimately, the project sets
out to contribute to addressing the fundamental challenge of predicting protein
structure and function ways that are distinct from and synergistic with current,
best-in-class, prediction methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.