* 2204490
* Spring Lecture Series in Computational and Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Tulin Kaman, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2023
* USD 25,369.00

This award provides participant support for the Spring Lecture Series (SLS) on
`Numerical linear algebra: from scientific computing to data science
applications' at the University of Arkansas in Fayetteville, Arkansas, on May
4-6, 2022. Numerical linear algebra is at the core of many fields of science and
engineering, whether in solving linear systems that arise from simulations of
physical phenomena, or in obtaining various solutions of optimization problems
in data related applications. As the world around us is progressively being
analyzed or modeled with the help of available data, the types of computational
problems encountered are changing, and as a result the field is currently
undergoing a deep transformation. The principal speaker at the lecture series,
Yousef Saad, will present an overview of methodologies that are used in both the
scientific computing and data science disciplines in a series of five lectures.
To build a bridge between Scientific Computing and Data Science, one of the
goals of the lectures is to introduce data science techniques to non-specialists
in scientific computing. Additionally, there will be ten one-hour lectures by
invited speakers as well as poster and oral presentation sessions by young
researchers which are intended to provide an opportunity for the exchange of
ideas and expertise within and between the various computational science
domains. Furthermore, a public lecture by Professor Sabine Van Huffel will be
accessible to the community at large, and will focus on the power of
matrix/tensor algebra and data-driven artificial intelligence (AI) in digital
healthcare. A Women in STEM panel in intended to provide an environment for
sharing of ideas and experiences with the goal of fostering diversity in
research and promoting the participation of underrepresented groups in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lectures will present fundamental ideas of
numerical linear algebra with an emphasis on those methods that have the
potential to play an important role in data science, including eigenvalue and
singular value problems, sparse matrix techniques, graph-based methods, Krylov
subspaces methods, and preconditioning. Part of the lectures will be devoted to
specific problems of in data science, covering applications of graph-based
methods, randomization methods, network analysis, dimension reduction, and
neural networks, among other themes. This lecture series will provide unique
opportunities for early career researchers and graduate students to interact
with prominent experts in their research areas. More information is available at
https://fulbright.uark.edu/departments/math/research/spring-lecture-
series/index.php&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.