* 2204114
* Development of Activity-Based Probes for Genome-Modifying Enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Kabirul Islam, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2025
* USD 537,317.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Dr. Kabirul Islam from University of Pittsburgh is
investigating DNA-modifying enzymes that protect and control genetic
information. DNA is the essential blueprint that defines species at the
molecular, cellular and organismal level. Genetic information is protected and
faithfully decoded by a wide range of genome-modifying enzymes, many of which
remain to be discovered. It is, thus, of fundamental importance to characterize
such enzymes from eukaryotic organisms. This project will take an
interdisciplinary approach, combining organic chemistry, mechanistic
biochemistry, cell biology, proteomics and bioinformatics with the aim of
uncovering novel genome-modifying enzymes. The proposed activity will integrate
high school, undergraduate and graduate students, including those from under-
represented groups, into the research to provide appropriate training experience
for a career in scientific research and development and/or pedagogy. The
educational plan is geared toward establishing a mentoring platform for doctoral
students to overcome initial challenges and reach important milestones along the
doctoral research and development pathway. The PI puts forth a plan to improve
retention of PhD students in the field of
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in gene expression that underlie the
development of eukaryotic organisms are primarily mediated by chemical
modifications on the genetic material. The focus of this project is to study a
particular type of nucleobase modification; namely cytidine methylation. The
current repertoire of enzymes that establish, recognize and remove cytidine
modifications in DNA is far from exhaustive, due in part to the lack of
appropriate pharmacological probes. This research will focus on developing
first-in-class oligonucleotide-based activity probes carrying electrophilic
functionalities, which are to be employed to capture DNA-modifying factors via
complementary reactivity from embryonic stem cells. Subsequently, chemoproteomic
and bioinformatic analyses, and biochemical validation will be conducted to
identify novel enzymes and signaling pathways that underlie cellular
differentiation, lineage commitment, and ultimately, organismal development. The
new tools developed in these studies will be made broadly available to
researchers interested in addressing how chemical modifications in DNA store and
regulate critical information beyond that which is present in the primary
sequence alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.