* 2204236
* CAS-Climate: Supramolecular and Dynamic Covalent Chemistry of Carbon Dioxide
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Ognjen Miljanic, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2025
* USD 495,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Ognjen Miljanic of the University of
Houston (Texas) will be studying methods to capture carbon dioxide, the gas at
the center of current concerns about climate change. Preventing the worst
effects of climate changes will require both reducing carbon dioxide emissions
and capturing and removing some of the carbon dioxide already present in the
atmosphere. Professor Miljanic and his team aim to develop chemicals capable of
reversibly trapping carbon dioxide from various sources—from industrial flue
gases to air itself. During this research effort, students will be recruited
from diverse backgrounds reflective of the Houston metropolitan area and trained
at the interdisciplinary nexus of organic and supramolecular chemistry with a
clear awareness of the broader problems of environment and climate. Prof.
Miljanic will teach a class on Energy and Sustainability and write opinion
pieces in mainstream media aiming to bring the science behind environmental
problems and solutions closer to the broad public audience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project—to identify molecule
capable of capturing carbon dioxide within a broad concentration range—will be
accomplished through three separate but interrelated research efforts. First,
molecules known as cyclotetrabenzoins (pioneered by Prof. Miljanic in 2015) will
be used to include the carbon dioxide molecule within their square-shaped
internal cavities. In this cavity, a molecule of carbon dioxide will be
stabilized by the equidistant [pi···pi] interactions with the four benzene walls
of the cyclotetrabenzoin macrocycle. Second, dynamic combinatorial chemistry
will be used to identify molecular species that bind carbon dioxide strongly
through the dynamic amplification of such species during reversible reactions.
Finally, the carbon–oxygen double bonds are potentially dynamic themselves and
their reversible activation/deactivation will be used to develop an
unprecedented new way of sequestering carbon dioxide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.