* 2204997
* Geometric Inverse Problems Arising from Seismology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Teemu Saksala, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2025
* USD 170,000.00

This project aims to investigate new geometric inverse problems arising from
seismology. By solving inverse problems, information can be gained about an
unknown medium via indirect, incomplete, and often noisy measurements. A common
example of this is seismic imaging, which uses seismic waves to probe the
subsurface of the Earth, and is heavily utilized in oil and gas exploration as
well as critical mineral exploration and subsurface CO2 sequestration. This
imaging technique is based on measuring the arrival times of seismic waves and
solving the wave speed through the planet. The seismic wave speed depends on
material properties, and thus recovering it provides information about the
structure of the Earth. Fermat’s principle in physics states that a wave takes a
path between two locations that can be traveled in the shortest time. Thus, the
travel time of a wave defines a mathematical model for a distance, in which the
distance between two locations is measured using a clock instead of a ruler.
This type of physically-motivated mathematical framework is commonly studied in
the field of differential geometry. This research further develops the
mathematical theory of seismology by posing and solving increasingly realistic
and complex inverse problems modeling planetary interiors. Serving as the
theoretical foundation underlying applied seismology, the techniques and
problems in this study will contribute towards better characterizing the Earth,
it’s transmission of seismic events, and its deep interior structure.
Additionally, this project will provide training opportunities for students and
early career researchers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
advancing three categories of geometric inverse problems with the common
objective of achieving increased physical realism. This is done by fundamentally
changing the geometric setting to be non-Riemannian. In the mathematical theory
of indirect measurements, the Earth is commonly modeled by a Riemannian manifold
with a boundary. Under this assumption, the corresponding inverse problem is to
recover a Riemannian metric from the boundary distance function, that is the
travel time of a wave between a pair of boundary points. However, Riemannian
geometry as a mathematical framework is often an insufficient representation of
the geophysical reality. To pursue physical accuracy, Finsler metrics are a good
geometric model for the fastest qP-polarized waves in anisotropic elastic media.
However, the class of all Finsler metrics is so large that travel time
measurements alone cannot determine these metrics uniquely. For this reason,
this project will investigate certain sub-classes of Finsler metrics arising
from linear elasticity, specifically focusing on the Berwald metrics that have
many Riemannian properties. Most importantly, they have a canonical Levi-Civita
connection. The three categories of problems solved in this research will
include: 1) non-Riemannian travel time problems with complete datasets, 2)
travel time problems that consider partial datasets for both the sources and
receivers, and 3) integral geometric problems in anisotropic media. These
categories of problems are all interconnected and mutually supportive.
Ultimately this work will guide the field of inverse problems towards
increasingly realistic seismological scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.