* 2204601
* RET Site in Manufacturing Simulation and Automation
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Faisal Aqlan, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 10/31/2024
* USD 596,868.00

This project is a renewal of Penn State Behrend’s RET site in Manufacturing
Simulation and Automation. The site provides research training and curriculum
development experiences to high school and community college instructors from
the Erie region (covering counties in PA, OH, and NY). The goals of the program
are: 1) to maintain a STEM-based collaboration platform at Behrend by engaging
high school teachers and community college instructors in state-of-the-art
manufacturing research, 2) to facilitate the development and dissemination of
curricular modules and classroom activities that connect STEM classes with
manufacturing regionally and nationally, 3) to explore a sustainable educational
model that connects high schools, community colleges, university, and industry
to instill future generations with greater awareness and interest in
manufacturing, and 4) to help fill the skills gap in manufacturing and prepare
students for manufacturing careers. Each summer, participants are immersed in
interdisciplinary research projects and training sessions, industry tours, and
curriculum design workshops. During the academic year, the RET team continues to
engage with participants through classroom visits, engineering conferences, lab
tours for their students, and other follow-up activities to ensure the
sustainability of program outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RET site will
recruit 12 high school teachers and community college faculty each year, a total
of 36 participants in three years. The program will improve instructors’
research and professional skills and help them translate cutting-edge
manufacturing research to their classrooms by creating and delivering engaging
classes. Knowledge will be conveyed to students through hands-on activities,
manufacturing simulations, and other interactive experiments. This, in turn,
will influence the students to consider advanced studies and careers in
manufacturing. The developed materials and activities will be evaluated and
revised every year based on pre/post survey results and feedback from the
curriculum design expert, the external evaluator, and industry advisors. To
reach out to a broader audience, the site experiences will be shared for public
access via online educational platforms and nationwide RET
symposiums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.