* 2204630
* LSAMP BD: CU Boulder CO-WY AMP
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Robert Davis, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,074,365.00

The Colorado-Wyoming Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP CO-
WY AMP) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) activity will offer 12 talented students
from multiple LSAMP alliances the opportunity to pursue doctoral degrees in STEM
fields at the University of Colorado Boulder. The four key goals of the CU
Boulder BD project are to 1) Increase the number of certified LSAMP URM students
successfully completing STEM doctoral programs; 2) Retain and graduate URM STEM
PhD students at CU Boulder; 3) Provide targeted academic and research skill
development opportunities, professional development activities, effective
faculty-peer mentoring, and ongoing financial support; and 4) Institutionalize
effective recruitment and retention strategies that successfully advance URM
graduate students through a STEM PhD degree. Toward these goals, the program’s
objectives are to: 1) Leverage BD funding to secure additional resources and
opportunities for URM doctoral students by aligning BD efforts with other
federally funded training grants; 2) Establish effective relationships with
program administrators of LSAMP programs nationally; and 3) Actively engage
faculty in the recruiting, retaining, mentoring, and preparing URM doctoral
students for their careers. The project will implement a comprehensive program
that includes rigorous academic preparation, research training experiences, and
professional development activities for the BD Fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will contribute to advancing the NSF’s Mission “To promote the progress
of science: “to advance the national health, prosperity and welfare, or to
secure the national defense” and its 2018-2022 Strategic Plan to: “foster the
growth of a more capable and diverse research workforce and advance the
scientific and innovation skills of the nation.” This project will increase the
number of Ph.D.-level scientists by having BD Fellows discover, and subsequently
conduct, state-of-the art research. Fellows will work alongside esteemed STEM
faculty in computer science, engineering, and physics, leading to a doctoral
degree, and, ultimately, careers in research and teaching, thus contributing to
our nation’s STEM enterprise. As the recruitment pool of LSAMP baccalaureate
recipients includes a high proportion of individuals from underrepresented
minority populations, the project anticipates that BD Fellows will be students
from these groups. Therefore, the project will contribute significantly to
broadening participation in academe and science research. Project success will
aid in the recruitment and retention of future STEM scholars, long after the
project has ended.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.