* 2204058
* NSF-ANR: Developmental Mechanics Of Brain Evolution
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Lakshminarayana Mahadevan, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 01/31/2025
* USD 266,014.00

The geometry of the cerebral cortex is related to its cellular, connective and
functional organization. Across species, specific folds are associated with
primary sensory and motor functions, as well as with complex functions such as
language or creativity. Because of this, brain folding anatomy is widely used in
the research of biomarkers for function and dysfunction in such contexts that
include psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, major
depressive disorder, and autism spectrum disorder. This joint proposal between
the PIs focuses on differentiating the role of genetic and mechanical factors
influencing the formation of folding patterns across multiple species. The study
will use a combination of phylogenetic comparative approaches, reconstructing
brain folding trajectories, computational physics and physical gel experiments
to understand the development and evolution of the cortex. The trans -Atlantic
partnership between two of strongest hubs in the USA and Europe for biological
and neuroanatomical research, Paris and Boston, will allow the PIs to
synergistically collaborate at the interface between computational neuroscience,
physics, neuroimaging, and applied mathematics. Several research groups of
biologists and physicists in the Paris/Boston region are interested in the role
of mechanical forces during development and evolution, and this project will be
a unique opportunity to increase our interactions beyond the confines of this
specific project. The analysis of brain folding is currently used in the
research for biomarkers of psychiatric disorders, however, little is known about
the biological significance of folding variability. All code and data funded by
this project will be made available open source, as both PIs have done in the
past. Many of the tools work directly in the Web, allowing the PIs to integrate
researchers and citizen scientists from all over the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project fits within one of NSF's big 10 ideas -
understanding the rules of life. Within this question, one of the grandest
questions in biology is that of morphogenesis - how do cells and tissue self-
organize to create functional organs. This proposal's outcomes will include
comparative study of brain cortical morphogenesis across species to understand
the origin of folding patterns and the role of mechanical factors in determining
them. The use of physical gel experiments and numerical simulations will be of
broader interest in understanding other morphogenetic programs in the
cerebellum, and other organs besides the brain. By studying different
developmental trajectories within and across species, the project will shed
light on the link between early, region specific gene expression patterns and
the patterns of cortical folding. From an evolutionary standpoint, the project
will provide evidence for why there is a strong conservation of folding patterns
among phylogenetically related species, such as carnivores or primates.
Together, these comparative views will bring about an evolutionary perspective
to the study of variability in brain folding, and thus shed light on the link of
folding to functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/France
project is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the French Agence
Nationale de la Recherche, where NSF funds the US investigator and ANR funds the
partners in France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.