* 2204011
* CDS&amp;E: HAM3R: Heterogeneous Automated Management of Multiscale Methods and Resources
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Rong Ge, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 07/31/2025
* USD 515,918.00

To run large and detailed simulations, scientists need to resolve physics at
different time scales. Separating each scale into individual simulations and
coupling them together greatly lowers the execution time. The process of
coupling the simulation is laborious, complex, and error-prone. Achieving
performance and energy efficiency requires domain scientists to have deep
knowledge of computer architectures and systems, and extensively tune the
algorithms and resource requests. The current state-of-the-practice of manual
coupling and optimization leads to duplication of programming efforts and
solutions that are not portable to new problems and sizes, and to computer
architectures and systems. This interdisciplinary project builds technologies,
namely HAM3R (Heterogeneous Automated Management of Multiscale Methods and
Resources), to automate the coupling and optimize the computing and energy
efficiency for multiscale simulations. HAM3R is broadly applicable to multiscale
problems in computational chemistry, physics, biology, and materials science.
Greater simplicity and flexibility of simulation codes have broad impacts on
computational science by reducing the entry barrier to domain scientists.
Enabling domain researchers to leverage advanced cyberinfrastructure will
accelerate scientific throughput, which can have transformative effects across a
spectrum of disciplines. This project broadens the engagement of students and
underrepresented groups and user communities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project develops a versatile software framework (named HAM3R) for predictive
resource, workload, fault, and power management that enables automated
optimization of performance, scalability, and energy efficiency of multiscale
models on heterogeneous HPC systems. HAM3R is a transformative software
framework that removes the complexities of coupling multiscale simulations from
domain scientists by enabling dynamic coupling of multiscale models that
combines an API, library, and runtime to support broad coupling styles and
domains. The analysis of computation and data bottlenecks yields enhanced
analytical and machine-learned performance models. HAM3R will equip multiscale
models with automated resource allocation -- including predictive load-balancing
by proactive management of computation, communication, and data movement -- to
enable scalability and efficient simulations on heterogeneous HPC systems. This
project’s Intellectual Merit advances the following areas: (1) data-centric
optimizations to reduce the cost of data motion intra- and inter-scale by
migrating computation and using lossy data compression; (2) customized local
recovery for process failures; (3) model-predictive load balancing schemes
within and across scales that support intelligent resource management and
dynamic adaption; and (4) advanced power management across heterogeneous devices
to ensure energy-efficient execution. The project demonstrates the capabilities
of HAM3R in two different popular multiscale modeling frameworks: coupled
molecular dynamics and lattice Boltzmann method simulations via domain
decomposition; coupled dissipative particle dynamics and finite element method
simulations via heterogeneous multiscale methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.