* 2204516
* Curation and Securing of the SUNY Oswego Herbarium
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kamal Mohamed, SUNY College at Oswego
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2025
* USD 224,784.00

Plant specimens collected and preserved over many decades provide an
irreplaceable primary resource for current and future research. Additionally, as
Earth continues to face rapid environmental change and biodiversity loss, the
geographically referenced historical record provided by plant specimen
collections is invaluable to advancing scientific understanding of the impacts
of environmental change. Unfortunately, the trove of data herbaria represent is
often at risk of degradation or unavailable for study if resources have
prevented institutions from properly housing, cataloging, repairing, and
organizing specimens or sharing digital records with the global scientific
community. The Oswego Herbarium at the State University of New York at Oswego is
one such herbarium, which has recently been properly re-housed in a new facility
but remains largely un-cataloged and unavailable to researchers. The overarching
goal of this project is to protect and preserve the Oswego Herbarium’s specimens
and to make specimen data broadly available via open-source online databases.
This will provide the broader scientific community access to the Oswego
Herbarium and secure the collection for long-term future use. Key partners for
this project will be 20 students in a paid internship program emphasizing
participation from underrepresented groups, which will increase diversity,
equity, and inclusion in the herbarium and museum workforce by providing hands-
on training and networking opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Oswego
Herbarium’s 50,000 plant specimens represent at least 1,100 species in 180 plant
families, dating from the 1820s to today, and originating from all continents
but Antarctica. The most extensive coverage is from the upstate New York region,
and the collection contains at least 127 threatened or endangered plant species.
With substantial contributions made by female botanists such as Dr. Mildred
Faust, the Oswego Herbarium also highlights the contributions women have made to
advancing botanical science. To achieve the goal of securing the collection and
broadening access, the project team will (1) complete specimen curation and
repair; (2) catalog all specimens; (3) digitize the collection using high-
resolution photography; and (4) share digitized specimen data on open-access
repositories including the Consortium of Northeastern Herbaria, iDigBio, GBIF,
and the New York Flora Atlas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.