* 2204635
* Heat transport in topological matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Dmitri Feldman, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2025
* USD 270,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research,
education, and outreach activities with a goal to achieve a fundamental
understanding of topological matter by investigating how heat is transported
within such matter. Topological matter is a new class of materials, which
exhibit uniquely robust physical properties that are exceptionally stable to
environmental effects. This property opens the door for many potential
applications in measurement science, and more importantly, quantum information.
These applications are related to the existence of elusive particles called
anyons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We normally think of electrons as having no parts.
Yet, in topological matter they often behave as if they were made of composite
particles called anyons. These anyons are promising for building the fundamental
components of a quantum computer, in which topological protection would help
reduce otherwise unavoidable computational errors introduced by the material's
interaction with its environment. The nature and even the existence of anyons in
many systems remain hotly debated. The primary focus of this award is to develop
ways to probe the existence and nature of anyons. So far, various electronic
experiments have been proposed and implemented for this purpose. Yet, electronic
tools have significant limitations and do not work in systems that do not
conduct electricity. However, this is not a limitation for heat transport. The
key idea of this project consists of focusing on heat transport (rather than
electronic transport) to understand anyons, and hence, topological matter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the PI's educational and outreach
activities which contribute to the development of the US workforce in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics through research training of
undergraduate and graduate students, writing pedagogical review articles,
organization of conferences and workshops, and outreach to K-12 students and the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports research, education, and outreach activities aimed at achieving a
fundamental understanding of heat transport in topological matter. The last
several years have witnessed several breakthroughs in the experimental detection
of quantized thermal conductance, including the observation of its fractional
quantization, which gives evidence of non-Abelian anyons. Yet, many aspects of
topological heat transport remain poorly understood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has two research thrusts. The first one focuses on the problems of heat
dissipation and the interplay of the charge and heat transport, which are
crucial for the interpretation of the experimental data. The second thrust
builds on the idea of thermal interferometry of anyons. Interferometry is the
most direct way to probe fractional statistics. During the last two years, there
has been dramatic progress in the experimental implementation of interferometry
of charged anyons. Building on these recent developments, this project will
extend the idea of anyonic interferometry to neutral anyons and to systems that
do not support electric currents. The project will address several related
problems in interferometry of charged and neutral anyons and in topological heat
transport at ultra-low temperatures. The technical approaches will combine
conformal field theory, Keldysh technique, algebraic theory of anyons,
refermionization, Bethe ansatz, and other tools. The research will benefit from
interaction with experimentalists from the Weizmann Institute of Science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the PI's educational and outreach
activities which contribute to the development of the STEM workforce in the US
through research training of undergraduate and graduate students, writing
pedagogical review articles, organization of conferences and workshops, and
outreach to K-12 students and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.