* 2204112
* Bridging Linguistic Fieldwork and Psycholinguistics to Investigate Reflexive Processing
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Jed Sam Guevara, Guevara, Jed Sam Pizarro
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2024
* USD 148,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Linguistics program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Brian Dillon at the University of
Massachusetts Amherst, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist investigating how speakers understand pronouns in real-time.
The goal of this project is to better understand the complex mental processes
that make language comprehension seem effortless for many adults in their native
language. This project will focus on how unique grammatical features, such as
word order and complex voice system, shape the real-time comprehension of
pronouns. More broadly, the goal of this project is to help us better understand
the relative contributions of sentence structure (syntax) and sentence meaning
(semantics) in real-time language comprehension. A better understanding of how
humans use linguistic information to understand language can in turn help in the
development of natural language processing systems to allow computers to better
approximate human language use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates
these questions by exploring how comprehenders process reflexives in real-time.
Reflexive pronouns are pronouns that are subject to strict syntactic and
semantic licensing requirements, and can be used to understand how rapidly these
sources of information are used to constrain comprehension. To examine the
relative contributions of structural information (e.g., c-command and syntactic
locality) and semantic information (e.g., thematic roles), the researcher will
deploy a series of experiments using the Visual World paradigm. The experiments
in this project will measure the extent to which comprehenders attend to
different referents over time to better understand how quickly and accurately
comprehenders identify the antecedent of a reflexive. The project will yield the
first comprehensive set of linguistic and psycholinguistic data on the
comprehension of reflexives. The project's results will also help establish the
methodological validity of using the visual world paradigm to study retrieval
interference; and directly address the lack of linguistic diversity in the
psycholinguistics literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.