* 2204926
* Computational Statutory Reasoning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Benjamin Van Durme, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2025
* USD 597,369.00

Tax law is a huge, complex body of text, paralleling how the huge, complex U.S.
economy is taxed. All three branches of government continually add new text:
Congress adds to the Tax Code, the IRS issues interpretations, and courts write
decisions in tax cases. It is challenging if not impossible for any single human
to be aware of all of tax law. This can lead to entirely-sensible tax-law
authorities interacting in ways unforeseen by their authors, enabling tax-
avoidance strategies used by individuals and corporations with clever tax
advisors. Such strategies cost the government billions of dollars and feed
public perceptions of tax unfairness. Developing artificial intelligence (AI)
that can automatically understand and reason with tax-law text would have two
benefits. First, tax-avoidance strategies possible with existing tax law could
be identified and shut down. Second, creators of new tax-law text (congressional
staffers, IRS attorneys, and judges writing opinions in tax cases) could verify
that they were not inadvertently enabling new tax-avoidance strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to develop tools to
automatically understand and reason with tax-law documents. This includes tax
statutes and case law. The main research questions are how to reason about which
statutes apply to a given case, how new statutes potentially impact previous
decided cases, and how to automatically determine whether one case constitutes
precedent for another case. First, this project will build benchmark datasets to
measure progress on the above research goals, relying on existing expertise in
dataset curation and on open legal data. Second, recent progress on converting
textual data to structures supporting automated reasoning needs to be extended
to the legal domain. This will require innovations in mapping language
(statutes) into machine interpretable rules as compared to extracting text into
data. Third, this project will develop legal domain ontologies, schemas, and
information extraction models to analyze US case law. Progress on analyzing
statutes and cases will involve extending capabilities in areas such as semantic
parsing, entity typing, coreference, annotation science, schema induction and
inference, AI system engineering, textual inference, and domain specialized
language model pre-training. The effort will lead to new ways of thinking about
the creation and use of legal language, with advances in natural language
processing and automated reasoning, especially in the area of few-shot
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.