* 2204039
* Coherent Strategies to Achieve Luminescent Gold Clusters for Photonic Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Ramakrishna Guda, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2025
* USD 426,609.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Ramakrishna Guda of Western Michigan
University is working to create highly luminescent gold nanoclusters for optical
applications. In large pieces, gold is metallic and does not emit light.
However, when it is broken down to tiny clusters with only a smaller number of
atoms, such gold cluster will emit light. While these luminescent gold clusters
are photostable and less toxic than many semiconductors, their luminescence is
not as bright. Dr. Guda and his students will work to rationally design and
synthesize gold clusters that luminescence with greater quantum efficiencies and
over a broad range of colors. Their discoveries could lead to nanoclusters for
light harvesting and optical sensing applications. The project will also provide
research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, as well as
introduce nanoscience to high school students and their teachers through
education workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atomically precise quantum-sized gold
nanoclusters offer discrete electronic states, distinctive photoluminescence and
exclusive excited-state relaxation that make them ideal candidates for various
photonic applications. Achieving highly luminescent gold nanoclusters is
challenging and is impeding their progress as photonic materials. The Guda
research team will synthesize gold clusters with increased the rigidity of gold
atoms at the cluster surface, with the goal of amplifying photoluminescence. The
optical activity of gold clusters is expected to be further improved by
judiciously functionalizing the surface with organic chromophores to achieve
efficient energy transfer from a surface-bound chromophore to gold cluster or
vice-versa. A combination of ultrafast time-resolved absorption and
photoluminescence techniques will be used to unravel the mechanism of excited-
state relaxation in these hybrid structures and provide feedback to design
clusters with enhanced optical activity. The mechanistic studies are expected to
shed light on intrinsic energy and charge transfer interactions between
chromophores and atomically precise gold clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.