* 2204570
* LSAMP BD: North Carolina A&amp;T State University Preparing Future Minority Ph.D. Researchers (PFMPR)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Tonya Smith-Jackson, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce by developing
highly competitive students from populations underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP
Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to increase the quantity and quality of
STEM graduate students from underrepresented populations, with emphasis on PhD
matriculation and completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's
institutions of higher education contribute to addressing one of the objectives
of NSF's 2018-2022 Strategic Plan, namely to "foster the growth of a more
capable and diverse research workforce and advance the scientific and innovation
skills of the Nation." The vision of this grant is to provide a national model
to produce underrepresented scientists and engineers with doctoral degrees in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The performance site for this LSAMP BD Activity is
North Carolina A&amp;T State University (NCAT), one of the eight universities
included in the North Carolina Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(NCLSAMP) program. This project is designed to attract, retain, and graduate a
cohort of underrepresented PhD students in STEM disciplines equipped with career
readiness skills and self-efficacy to enter the STEM workforce. This holistic
graduate student development model, includes academic and professional skills
building for STEM careers alongside targeted activities involving a select
combination of evidence-based strategies reflected in the literature on social
cognitive career theory, self-efficacy, and STEM research identity. These will
be conducted through a combination of competency-based academic success and
career readiness workshops and a personalized, culturally reflective mentoring
program that connects students with faculty at NCAT and at participating peer
institutions. This project will positively impact the retention and graduation
rates of STEM graduate students from underrepresented populations in doctoral
programs, thus producing a diverse workforce of STEM
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.