* 2204263
* Engineering cyanine aggregation and self-assembly to access exceptionally red-shifted organic chromophores
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Justin Caram, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Ellen M. Sletten and Justin R. Caram of
the University of California-Los Angeles are developing new fluorescent chemical
compounds that emit light in the shortwave infrared region of the
electromagnetic spectrum. Shortwave infrared waves are invisible to the human
eye but can be detected by special cameras. A major advantage of these waves is
that they can pass through tissue and be used for imaging in complex organisms.
Additional opportunities are also seen in improving long-haul telecommunications
of fiber optical networks. In the first part of this research, small organic
molecules will be prepared and structurally modified to achieve desired
absorption and emission properties in the infrared region. These photophysical
properties will then be amplified several orders of magnitude through self-
assembly in solution yielding exceptionally red-shifted aggregates. To aid in
experimental design and speed discovery, computational modelling will be used to
correlate the structure of these aggregates with their electronic properties.
The research activities associated with this award will increase broadening
participation and enable training of high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students in synthetic organic chemistry and spectroscopy. The creation of a
PHOTONbooth and participation in “Illuminating the World of Molecules” events
will provide attractive strategies to generate public interest in science and
introduce STEM concepts to participants in the greater Los Angeles area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on cyanine aggregation and self-
assembly to access exceptionally red-shifted organic chromophores for the
shortwave infrared region (SWIR) region of the electromagnetic spectrum. In the
first objective, modified monomeric cyanine dyes will be synthesized through
heteroatom substitution and lengthening of the polymethine chain. This
structural modification will promote SWIR J-aggregates above 1300 nm and
facilitate investigation of two of the current limitations of such aggregates,
namely low quantum yield (objective 2) and their need to be stabilized in a
matrix or nanoparticle for use in dilute/complex environments (objective 3). New
structures will be investigated using circular and linear dichroism and modelled
computationally to access excitonic structures and correlate them with
photophysical properties. This work, if successful, will provide fundamental
insight on the chromophore-chromophore coupling and long-range order necessary
for emissive, band edge J-aggregate formation. The organic SWIR J-aggregates
associated with this work have the potential to develop inexpensive,
environmentally friendly and scalable nanotechnology in a wavelength regime
deemed to be eye safe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.