* 2204689
* I-Corps: Measuring thermal efficiency in buildings using a thermal energy imaging platform with AI and thermodynamic analysis
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2022
* Michael Mann, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of automation technology for energy assessment related to thermal
efficiency. Aging infrastructure and insufficient weatherization measures have
increased power and natural gas consumption levels and emissions. The best means
of reigning in consumption rates are improved energy efficiency and
weatherization enabled through proper quantified energy assessments. The
proposed technology enables faster, safer, and more accurate thermal assessments
for residential and commercial buildings, providing a data-rich source for
identification of points of largest energy consumption and measures to improve
thermal efficiency of structures. The primary market this technology is public
and private educational institutions like higher-education universities and K-12
institutions. Facility and Plant Managers may be able to use the technology to
rapidly identify measures to reduce utility charges and increase the lifespan of
structures. The quantification of energy consumption also may enable these
mangers to access further state or federal funding for structural improvements.
In addition, the proposed technology may be useful for weatherization experts
and structural engineers working on construction projects and aiding utility
providers for energy infrastructure inspection.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a technology to quickly convert
thermal images captured from a UAS mounted radiometric infrared sensor to energy
utilization estimations using artificial intelligence, data analytics, and
thermodynamics. The thermal images captured by the infrared sensors are
corrected for atmospheric attenuation and processed by the artificial
intelligence to identify individual components of a building’s façade and any
thermal anomalies. Thermodynamic procedures are utilized to calculate the heat
conductance or the U-value of each element and calculate the financial impact of
heat loss from the building depending on the dimensions of the elements being
considered along with the type of utility used for space heating/cooling. This
technology solution is slated to automate thermal assessment processes for
buildings and reduce the overall processing time by 90% and on-site inspection
time by 60% compared to traditional assessment techniques. The initial research
for the technology was performed over a three-year period where thermal images
of various structures throughout North Dakota were analyzed and cross-referenced
for their thermal profiles. The technology has since been improved by adding
financial impact calculations and corresponding modeling tools along with a more
structured data workflow process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.