* 2204230
* Development of New Tools for the Chemical Analysis of the Internal Surfaces of Porous Materials using Annihilation Gamma Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Alexander Weiss, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2025
* USD 405,224.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, the research team led by Professors Alexander Weiss,
Varghese Chirayath, and Ali Koymen from the University of Texas at Arlington
(UTA) are developing a new technique to probe the chemical composition of
otherwise inaccessible internal surfaces of porous materials. The research team
at UTA has recently shown that the energy spectrum of gamma rays resulting from
the annihilation of positrons (anti-matter electrons) with electrons at the
surface can be used to determine the elemental composition of the topmost layer
of external surfaces. The team is now working to demonstrate that positron-
annihilation gamma spectroscopy can be used to reveal chemical changes to the
hidden surfaces inside of nanoporous metals brought about by catalysis or
reactive gas exposure. The project is aimed at the development of a hitherto
unavailable tool for the chemical analysis of porous materials' internal
surfaces. The results of this research have potential impact across many areas
of research, including catalysis, energy storage, gas separation, carbon
capture, and dilute alloy design. The project provides training to undergraduate
and graduate students in advanced surface modification and characterization
methods. The students involved in this project are from the highly diverse
student body of UTA, which is a Hispanic Serving Institution. The research team
also collaborates with the STEM academy of the Arlington Independent School
District (AISD) to provide training to select high-school students.
Participation by students in the cutting-edge research of this project is
serving to mold the next generation of leaders in advanced chemistry
instrumentation and making a unique contribution to workforce development in
this area of critical national need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The response of
catalytically active internal surfaces of porous materials to their environment
strongly suggests that surface composition controls catalytic function,
demonstrating the need for tools capable of probing internal surfaces with high
surface selectivity under in operando conditions. There is a glaring absence of
experimental methods that can non-destructively provide chemical information
about the top atomic layer of internal surfaces that is free of interference
from bulk signals. With the support of the Chemical Measurement and Imaging
(CMI) program, the positron research team at UTA is developing an in operando
characterization tool for the inaccessible internal surfaces with elemental
sensitives as low as 1% of the topmost atomic layer. The team is combining the
superior surface selectivity of positron spectroscopy with the ability of 511
keV annihilation gamma radiation to exit through millimeters of sample or
reaction cells without any loss of information. The unparalleled surface
selectivity of the technique stems from the trapping of the implanted positrons
in an image-potential well on the vacuum side of the sample surface before
annihilation. As recently demonstrated by the UTA team, the energy spectrum of
the gamma radiation resulting from the annihilation of the surface-trapped
positrons reflects the elemental composition of the topmost atomic layer through
the element-specific Doppler broadening of the annihilation gamma energy. Using
calibration spectra obtained from controlled external surfaces to benchmark the
Doppler broadened annihilation spectrum, the team is now developing the
technique to measure the chemical composition at the internal surfaces of
nanoporous gold (Au) and nanoporous copper (Cu), including variations that occur
upon exposure to reactive gases or during catalysis. The research team is
exploring the nature of catalytically active sites in these materials with the
goal of providing a global view of the internal surface configuration of
nanoporous Au and Cu under the action of reactive stimuli like ozone and carbon
monoxide through controlled experiments in ultrahigh vacuum and in operando
conditions. In addition to the scientific broader impacts of the work, the
project provides advanced training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students, and supports outreach activities to engage local high school students
in STEM research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.