* 2204367
* Understanding Smooth Structures via Regular Homotopy of Surfaces in 4-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Hannah Schwartz, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2025
* USD 168,974.00

The classification of smooth structures on 4-dimensional topological spaces is
surprisingly subtle and complex, and far from understood. Lower dimensions (1,
2, and 3) do not have enough room for interesting problems to arise, while there
is ample space to resolve them in higher dimensions (above 4). A consequence of
this is that many well-known questions remain unanswered only smoothly in
dimension 4, such as the Poincaré and Schönflies conjectures first posed in 1904
and 1908, respectively. The primary goal of this project is to advance the
mathematical techniques and machinery necessary for the eventual resolution of
these outstanding problems. This will be achieved by studying relatively
"simple" smooth 4-manifolds and their submanifolds up to various notions of
equivalence, through manipulating surfaces within these manifolds and
understanding limitations on how these surfaces intersect and embed. As a
broader impact, the PI is passionately involved with the Prison Teaching
Initiative (PTI) at Princeton University, a program recruiting volunteer
graduate students, postdocs, and faculty to teach college courses to
incarcerated students in New Jersey Department of Corrections institutions. The
PI is actively working with the PTI to co-develop a new math course for non-math
majors to be offered as part of the BA curriculum, examining legal cases in
which mathematics has been used (both correctly and incorrectly) in the
courtroom. The PI is also designing and co-teaching a course in which students
learn basic knot theory by using it to model circus arts such as aerial
acrobatics, juggling, and tightrope walking. The PI is currently working with
undergraduate students to compile their insights and observations from the first
iteration of this course, with the goal of publishing these results in an
undergraduate journal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The classification of closed,
simply-connected 4-manifolds up to homeomorphism is well understood, due to
groundbreaking work of Freedman from the 80's. The goal of this research project
is to further understand the difference between the smooth and topological
categories in dimension 4. Examples of compact topological 4-manifolds admitting
infinitely many distinct smooth structures were first produced by Friedman and
Morgan, using the work of Donaldson. In contrast, compact topological manifolds
of dimension other than four admit at most finitely many smooth structures. The
PI is interested in developing concrete and useful methods of relating pairs of
smooth 4-manifolds that are homeomorphic but not diffeomorphic. In particular,
the project will focus on (1) smooth 4-manifolds up to "stable" diffeomorphism,
i.e. modulo connected summing with copies of the product S^2 × S^2, (2) the
diffeomorphism types of topological 4-balls that embed in the standard 4-sphere,
and (3) embeddings of contractible manifolds called corks up to regular homotopy
and topological isotopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.