* 2204382
* Collaborative Research: CQIS: A Sound Leap (SouL)
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Md Arif Hasan, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 10/31/2025
* USD 406,831.00

This grant will support research that will be a leap forward in advancing sound
as a classical analogue of quantum information science (QIS), promoting the
progress of science, and ensuring US leadership in QIS, which is a national
priority. The development of robust, classically entangled acoustic waves
analogous to quantum bits, or qubits, can make impactful contributions as core
components of practical quantum-like technologies without suffering from quantum
fragility. By exploiting recently discovered analogies between acoustics,
quantum mechanics, and condensed matter physics, this research will create the
foundations for a path to promising and validating modes of storing, processing,
and retrieving information in acoustic waves that complement conventional
quantum technologies. This grant will support the development of educational
resources that bridge the educational gap between classical mechanics and
quantum mechanics for future QIS learners. It will help broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in gaining a working understanding of
acoustic quantum analogies and related complex quantum
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the core of QIS, quantum entanglement has the
property of non-separability. While non-separability creates the possibility of
operating in parallel on the coherent superpositions of states for multipartite
quantum systems, the quantum coherent superpositions of wave functions
(probability amplitude) collapse upon measurement or thermal fluctuations.
Costly solutions are cryogenics and error corrections, both use significant
hardware and software resources. However, quantum computing is essentially phase
computing; it exploits the possibility of achieving and rotating the coherent
superpositions of states of correlated multipartite systems with complex
amplitudes that are represented as vectors in large, exponentially complex
Hilbert spaces. The notion of “classical entanglement” for sound waves possesses
the non-separability and complexity essential to reach the promise of
parallelism in quantum computing, yet without the fragility of decoherence even
at room temperature. The research team will investigate metamaterials comprising
arrays of externally driven, linearly and nonlinearly coupled, acoustic
waveguides, known for supporting acoustic waves analogous to qubits, namely
phase-bits or phi-bits. The team will experimentally, computationally, and
theoretically investigate the exponentially complex and scalable Hilbert spaces
of states of multiple phi-bits and the non-separability of their coherent
superpositions. They will analyze the scalability and controllability of Hilbert
space with billions of dimensions and their QIS applicability, and demonstrate
systematic and predictable proof-of-concept operations within these Hilbert
spaces to establish foundations for acoustic quantum-like gates and algorithms
for future quantum-like information processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by Dynamics, Control and Systems Diagnostics (DCSD)
Program and Mechanics of Materials &amp; Structures (MOMS)
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.