* 2204755
* I-Corps:  Laparotomy simulator with mechanical feedback for surgical training
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2022
* Paul Egan, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a platform for training surgical residents to practice and
improve critical suturing techniques for laparotomy. This is expected to enhance
resident learning during simulation training, which may translate to improved
knowledge and muscle memory. The learning experience may improve knowledge,
skills, and readiness for surgical residents, which may result in improved
clinical outcomes. Expected outcomes include the minimization of complications
following abdominal closing and better patient well-being and satisfaction as
more well-prepared physicians enter practice. Effective development and
deployment of this technology may significantly lower the barrier required to
train surgeons for advanced surgical procedures, and result in an improvement in
healthcare training and practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a simulation software platform for surgical
training. The proposed human-in-the-loop learning approach is a surgical
laparotomy simulation with mechanical feedback additionally supported with
instruction by an experienced surgeon suitable to effective surgical training.
The device may lead to a better understanding of how human errors in suturing
affects force distributions in sutured biomaterials, and which strategies for
suturing are the most optimal mechanically. In addition, it may be used to match
the learning approach to the capabilities of the trainees that are at different
training stages. The proposed technology also may be used to simulate patients
from diverse backgrounds, which may lead to knowledge of how variances of
mechanics and geometry presents challenges in determining the best techniques
for surgical operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.