* 2204125
* ADVANCE Adaptation: American University Creating Gender and Racial Equity Among STEM Faculty
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Monica Jackson, American University
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The American University (AU) ADVANCE Adaptation project will improve the
professional and academic environment for all faculty with a focus on the
retention of women and underrepresented racial and ethnic minority (URM) faculty
in STEM fields. This focus is informed by prior work done with an ADVANCE
Catalyst grant, which showed that changes to faculty hiring practices were
achieving increased diversity in new faculty, but departures of diverse faculty,
particularly URM women was a major issue. The Catalyst work also found
inequitable experiences and support for faculty on term and tenure-track career
pathways. Thus, the ADVANCE AU project focuses on improving the overall academic
climate for women and URM faculty in STEM including tenure track, tenured, and
term faculty. The goals of the project are to: 1. Enhance faculty mentoring
through training for both mentors and mentees; 2. Review and revise department
level policies with “Boyer-inspired” tenure, promotion, and reappointment
reforms; 3. Elevate, recognize, and reward the diversity, equity, and inclusion
work done by AU faculty through various strategies; and 4. Create an
institutional administrative position with responsibilities for faculty
diversity and equity in the provost office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ADVANCE AU
project will clarify existing policies and develop and execute new tenure,
promotion, and reappointment guidelines that integrate inclusive and antiracist
principles. This and other aspects of the project are expected to increase STEM
faculty feelings of belongingness in their departments and at AU. The Boyer-
inspired framework, selected to combat the “teaching versus research” dichotomy,
categorizes faculty work into four distinct but overlapping functions: 1) the
scholarship of discovery; 2) the scholarship of integration; 3) the scholarship
of application; and 4) the scholarship of teaching. The utilization of the
framework is expected to increase the visibility of non-traditional faculty work
and to expand the definition of faculty work as related to tenure and promotion.
Findings from the project are expected to shed light on how to engage academic
leaders in important and “difficult conversations” about the perpetuation of
racial and gender inequities via policies and practices in programs and
departments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster
gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation" awards provide support for the
adaptation and adoption of evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit
institutions of higher education as well as non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.