* 2204265
* Evolutionarily Conserved Variations in Menaquinone Structure: Functional Implications
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Debbie Crans, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 356,269.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Debbie C. Crans, Dean C. Crick, and Adam Chicco from Colorado State
University will study the utilization of lipoquinone by electron transport
systems. Lipoquinones are molecules that contain a redox active head group and a
long lipid-like tail. These two molecular components confer biologically
essential properties upon lipoquinones, namely the ability to transport
electrons and protons between different biomolecules such as enzymes and to be
part of the hydrophobic biological membrane interior. These properties make
lipoquinones essential for energy production in biological systems and
consequently for life. The team will explore how the structure of lipoquinones
affects the enzyme to which they bind and the electron transport processes in
which the enzymes are involved. The research aims to elucidate the fundamental
link between chemistry and biology in evolutionarily optimized electron
transport systems in bacteria. The proposed project will bring together senior
scientists and students in chemistry, microbiology, and respiratory physiology.
Students at all levels, including underrepresented minorities in science, will
gain interdisciplinary research experience and skills as well as science
communication skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the link
between the structure and function of lipoquinones, which is elusive. The
significance of these highly conserved menaquinone structures that are required
for oxidative phosphorylation pathways in bacteria has remained unclear. A
multidisciplinary approach will be taken to determine the link between structure
and function of lipoquinones in bacteria using tools developed by the
Crans/Crick team. Studies in Aim 1 will assess the impact of synthetic and
native lipoquinone on the kinetics of in situ oxidative phosphorylation (oxygen
uptake) using evolutionarily optimized electron transport systems. Aim 2 will
focus on the measurement of the substrate affinity of dehydrogenases and ATP
synthase for various lipoquinones. Aim 3 will focus on the structural
characterization of lipoquinones in hydrophobic environments using mainly NMR
spectroscopy. Structural and functional data will be obtained from studies of
Corynebacterium tuberculostearicum, Mycolicibacterium (previously categorized as
Mycobacterium) Smegmatis and Enterococcus faecalis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.