* 2204079
* CAS-Climate: Mechanically Active Degradable Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Junpeng Wang, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 10/31/2025
* USD 420,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Junpeng Wang at the University
of Akron is developing mechanically active degradable polymers. Polymers,
commonly referred to as plastics, are long-chain macromolecules that consist of
predominantly carbon-carbon bonds. Plastics that can degrade in response to
external stimuli are desirable for a variety of applications, including
removable coatings, recyclable materials, and repairable electronics. Their
degradation is typically enabled by the cleavage of degradable functional groups
that are incorporated in the polymer backbone. However, degradable functional
groups can also lead to stability issues as they can be triggered under ambient
conditions. This project will encompass the design and synthesis of a family of
polymers that address the stability issues by introducing “locking” moieties to
degradable polymers. A locking moiety will maintain the backbone integrity and
mechanical properties of the polymer during storage and normal use of the
materials. When degradation is needed, the locking moiety will be unlocked to
enable stimuli-responsive degradation. From the sustainability point of view,
the design principle associated with this project provides a very promising and
viable solution to the current challenges associated with the widespread usage
of non-degradable vinyl plastics. Hence, the developed methodology could be
utilized to build readily degradable plastics that are amenable to a circular
economy. This in turn could decrease demand for fossil fuels, such as oil, gas,
and coal, which are the raw materials for over 99% of plastic commodity
products. Since the refining of fossil fuels is intensive, a significant
reduction in the emission of greenhouse gas could also be achieved. This project
will provide training opportunities for students in a highly interdisciplinary
area that integrates cutting-edge physical organic chemistry, organic and
polymer synthesis, and mechanochemistry. The research will also ensure maximum
opportunity for integrating science and education based on new course
development, partnerships with high schools, and the involvement of
underrepresented groups. Outreach activities will focus on developing recruiting
relationships with Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in Ohio
and preparing an exhibition “Polymers and Life” in collaboration with Akron
Children’s Museum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the design
and synthesis of a class of polymers that can undergo a two-step degradation
fashion: mechanochemical activation followed by degradation. This degradation
mechanism will allow the degradation of the polymers to be controlled by
mechanical force and will improve overall polymer stability while retaining
optimal physical properties. In the first objective, the reactivity of the
mechanophores will be tuned through substituent effects, stereochemistry,
regiochemistry, and sidechain effects. This approach will provide
mechanochemical structure–activity relationships that can guide the design and
development of next-generation stimuli-responsive functional polymers. The
second objective will focus on diverse degradation responses, including multi-
stimuli responsive degradation, catalytic depolymerization, and chemically
amplified degradation. The obtained results will enable the system to be coupled
to a broad range of applications, such as controlled drug release, recyclable
materials, as well as responsive surface and interface. In the third objective,
the mechanically active degradation will be demonstrated in both solution-phase
and bulk materials, which will provide important insights into stress
distribution in polymers. Moreover, this design can be leveraged to convert
thermosets into thermoplastics through mechanically activated degradation. New
chemistries associated with this project have the potential to enable efficient
recycling/upcycling of plastics and advance understanding of polymer
mechanochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.