* 2204484
* EAR-PF: Reconstructing late Holocene hydroclimatic variability in western Central America using multi-proxy analyses of lacustrine sediments
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Derek Gibson, Gibson, Derek K
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 09/30/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Derek Gibson has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and education plans at Missouri University of Science and
Technology under the mentorship of Dr. Jonathan Obrist-Farmer. Hydroclimate
extremes, particularly droughts, have resulted in an unprecedented increase in
climate refugees from Central America over the past decade, creating a
humanitarian, economic, and national security crisis. Current climate models
predict that Central American precipitation will further decrease by the end of
the century. However, the models used to predict such changes rely on records of
past climate change and, at present, regional data that reflect how Central
American precipitation changed in the past are sparse. This project will use
sediment cores collected from Guatemala and southern Mexico to produce evidence
of past changes in Central American precipitation that spans the past 2,000
years. In turn, these new records will improve current predictive models of
Central American precipitation, which is critical to building a climate-
resilient future in Central America and reducing the extent of climate-driven
human migration over the upcoming decades. In addition to producing new climate
data, K-12 partnerships will extend the impact of this research by educating the
next generation of scientists on the mechanisms and impacts of climate change.
Educational activities and international collaborations will involve students
from elementary to graduate school and provide opportunities for historically
underserved students to contribute to solving one of the major climate science
questions of the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predictable precipitation
patterns are critical to the food security and economic stability of Central
America. However, inter-model heterogeneity among current climate models, due in
part to a paucity of high-resolution and local-scale paleoclimate records that
span the late Holocene, make reliable projections of future precipitation
difficult. The proposed research will utilize sediment cores from six watersheds
located across Guatemala and the Yucatán Peninsula in order to produce multi-
proxy reconstructions of local-scale hydroclimatic variability within the
context of the synoptic-scale climate changes that occurred during the Medieval
Climate Anomaly, Little Ice Age, and Current Warm Period. The proposed field
sites are situated such that sediment cores collected from these sites can be
used to investigate variability through time in the relative influences of the
Inter-tropical Convergence Zone, Caribbean Low-Level Jet, El Niño Southern
Oscillation, and topography. Specifically, stratigraphic variability of δ2H in
leaf-wax long chain (n-C27, n-C29, n-C31) n-alkanes preserved in the sediment
cores will be used as a proxy for regional hydroclimatic variability, while the
δ2H of short chain (n-C21, n C23) n-alkanes will be used to reconstruct
precipitation/evaporation balance at the local (water column to watershed)
scale. These data will be a critical component of predictive models used in the
Central American climate resilience and adaptation plans that must be
implemented before climate-driven human migration leads to further
suffering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.