* 2204149
* Modeling Long-Term Urban and Rural Settlement Dynamics
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Carla Klehm, Alders, Wolfgang
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 148,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the
SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Carla Klehm
at the University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist studying urban-rural dynamics. This project
investigates the social processes of urbanization within a regional settlement
system. It advances scientific knowledge on these aspects of human social and
organizational behavior through a long-term archaeological study. This research
contributes to general knowledge about rural and urban social change by
investigating the spatial settlement patterns of communities which
differentiated themselves from urban institutions and negotiated with the
centralization of power in urban centers. How small human groups related
socially to the emergence of urban formations has been an important
anthropological question with implications for understanding long-term
sustainability and resilience. However, most research has used examples from
primary centers of urban formation globally. In contrast, this research deepens
an understanding of urban-rural interaction through a consideration of large
urban centers over the long-term. The results of this research will inform
general understandings of human adaptations to social transformation and
political instability globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses
archaeological methods and geospatial analyses to understand the spatial and
material relationships between rural communities and large urban settlements,
from the 11th to 19th centuries CE. The extent to which urbanization meant the
(dis)integration or subordination of indigenous rural social networks is
unresolved, as are the ways rural communities related to the social world. This
research will refine models of global urbanism by investigating rural settlement
dynamics in relation to urban development over time. The project asks, to what
extent were rural communities entangled economically and materially with town
dwellers, and how did urban-rural settlement dynamics change from the
precolonial period, through colonial contact, and into the 19th century? This
project uses low-cost, high-resolution aerial and multispectral satellite
imagery to create a predictive model for rural site distribution, integrating
historical maps, textual sources, hydrological models, geological data, and
automated object-based image analysis of drone imagery to detect cultural
significant features. Next, the project uses this model to develop a targeted
survey of the urban hinterland. Finally, test excavations will be used to
compare material culture from rural hinterland sites with already excavated
collections from urban centers. This will enable an understanding of the spatial
and material patterns across time and in relation to urban
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.