* 2204109
* Gravitational Instantons, Mirror Symmetry, and Enumerative Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Yu-Shen Lin, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2025
* USD 157,604.00

Manifolds are mathematical spaces; examples include our three-dimensional world
and the four-dimensional space-time. Mirror symmetry is a mysterious duality
from string theory that links different fields of geometry on a manifold and its
mirror image. These geometries are a priori unrelated to each other.
Gravitational instantons are special four-dimensional manifolds that are the
building blocks of quantum gravity theory in theoretical physics and important
objects in different branches of mathematics. This project will mainly focus on
gravitational instantons, starting by investigating their differential geometric
aspects and then probing implications in enumerative geometry and algebraic
geometry via mirror symmetry. Furthermore, the project will study how these
implications feed back to differential geometry, aiming to unify the
understanding of mirror symmetry from different aspects in geometry. The
research will provide projects for undergraduate and graduate students. The PI
will continue to organize conferences and to illustrate practical applications
of mathematics for undergraduate students to increase the pool of next
generation geometers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to use the SYZ geometry
to bridge the connection between gravitational instantons, mirror symmetry, and
enumerative geometry. Utilizing the SYZ fibrations already constructed in
various gravitational instantons recently, the PI will investigate a full SYZ
mirror symmetry, simultaneously governing both A-side and B-side geometry and
coupled with the Landau-Ginzburg model. The PI will use it to understand the
relation between hyper-Kähler rotation with mirror symmetry. On the other hand,
the knowledge from the mirror symmetry will help to study the global metric
description of log Calabi-Yau surfaces and the compactification of gravitational
instantons, in return to the study of the moduli space of gravitational
instantons. The metric perspective of the gravitational instantons will lead to
explicit calculation of local open Gromov-Witten invariants in enumerative
geometry and concrete examples for comparing the family Floer mirrors and Gross-
Siebert/Gross-Hacking-Keel-Siebert mirror constructions. A byproduct of the
understanding of the metric description of the geometry is various new
constructions of minimal Lagrangians in Calabi-Yau manifolds. Some parts of the
techniques are expected to provide steppingstones for probing the Calabi-Yau
three-fold geometry with fibration structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.