* 2204743
* LSAMP BD: Florida International University FGLSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Andres Gil, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce by developing
highly competitive students from populations underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The goal of the LSAMP
Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to increase the quantity and quality of
STEM graduate students from underrepresented populations, with emphasis on PhD
matriculation and completion. BD programs implemented in the nation's
institutions of higher education contribute to addressing one of the objectives
of NSF's 2018-2022 Strategic Plan, namely to "foster the growth of a more
capable and diverse research workforce and advance the scientific and innovation
skills of the Nation." The vision of this grant is to provide a national model
to produce underrepresented scientists and engineers with doctoral degrees in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The performance site for this LSAMP BD Activity is
Florida International University (FIU), one of the fourteen colleges and
universities included in the Florida-Georgia Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (FGLSAMP). The project will recruit a cohort of 12 qualified LSAMP
fellows and support them financially, academically, and socially through their
graduate program using an innovative and flexible structure that is
individualized to the plans and needs of the fellow. In addition to providing
substantial financial support to enable students to focus full time on graduate-
level course work and research, the project offers a mentoring education and
training program to build diverse mentor-mentee alliances; a multi-tiered
Professional Development Program to create opportunities for learning,
professional socialization and peer support; and opportunities for STEM outreach
through Miami Dade College STEM Mia program as well as other FIU and community-
based initiatives. Through the national recruitment of LSAMP students and the
implementation of academic intervention strategies that have previously fostered
high levels of achievement among both undergraduates and graduate students, the
FGLSAMP BD activity at FIU will contribute to diversifying the US STEM workforce
and the training of the next generation of global leaders in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.