* 2204552
* ADVANCE Partnership: Strategic Partnership for Alignment of Community Engagement in STEM (SPACES)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Maya Trotz, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 07/31/2026
* USD 250,000.00

Although research using community-engaged research (CER) methods is funding by
several federal agencies, CER is still undervalued within the broader STEM
discipline culture and often it is classified as “service” during STEM faculty
annual review, tenure, and promotion processes. This project posits that this
systemic undervaluation of CER contributes to the attrition of many faculty that
identify as women and underrepresented racial and ethnic minority women (URMWF)
who frequently enter Environmental Engineering (EnvE) motivated to address
societally important problems. This ADVANCE Partnership project titled
“Strategic Partnership for Alignment of Community Engagement in STEM (SPACES)”
will work to enhance the understanding and awareness of rigorous CER research
and its value to the EnvE discipline and society, especially as conducted by
URMWF. This project is a collaborative effort among 11 academic institutions,
EnvE discipline’s primary professional societies (American Academy of
Environmental Engineers &amp; Scientists, American Association for Aerosol
Research, Association of Environmental Engineering &amp; Science Professors,
Water Environment Federation) and an NSF initiative focused on CER through the
National Research Traineeship program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SPACES will
leverage the strength of the SPACES partnership, gains made in gender
representation in EnvE, as well as the justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion
(JEDI) initiatives underway in EnvE and public health. The project aims to
produce a structural model, operationalized as an institutional scorecard, that
will result in greater faculty success and professional progress for those
conducting CER. The scorecard will incorporate factors that shape trends related
to the longevity and attrition of URMWF faculty in EnvE at the personal,
disciplinary, and societal levels. The scorecard has potential to be used in
other engineering disciplines. The project goals are to: (1) increase the
retention and promotion of URMWF in EnvE; (2) transform the climate and
infrastructure to support and value community-engaged research in the EnvE
academic community; and (3) enhance understanding and awareness of CER research
and its value to the EnvE discipline and society, especially as conducted by
URMWF. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster
gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Partnership" awards provide support for the
adaptation and adoption of evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit
institutions of higher education and non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.