* 2204374
* RESEARCH-PGR: Genomic Basis of Rice Ecosystem Adaptation
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2026
* Amelia Henry, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Kan Wang
* 10/31/2026
* USD 280,669.00

Populations of organisms are adapted to variations in environments, and local
adaptation ensures a population has high fitness in the site where it resides.
Crop varieties can also be locally adapted to growth in specific agricultural
environments that differ in temperature, water availability, and soil types. The
genomic basis of plant adaptation to specific ecosystems and habitats, however,
remain largely unknown. Oryza sativa ssp. indica (Asian rice), is one of the
most important food crops in the world, and varieties are adapted for growth in
irrigated (50% by area), rainfed lowland (25%) and rainfed upland (13%)
ecosystems. The adaptive and genomic response of rice to these specific
ecosystems, allowing the identification of genes and genomic variants that
affect gene expression differences associated with ecosystem adaptation, and
allow us to investigate the evolutionary and ecological forces that shape local
adaptation and the genomic changes that lead to crop diversification. This work
will also impact future crop breeding efforts by identifying genes whose
expression is associated with adaptation to specific rice ecosystems. Moreover,
the data on rice gene expression in the field can help provide key information
on gene function which can help advance plant genetics research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecological specialization through local adaptation is a
key aspect of evolutionary change, and is thought to play a role in speciation
and evolution to changing environments. A grand challenge in biology – to
understand organismal adaptation to habitat environments, and to provide causal
connections between genomic variation, gene expression, organismal phenotype and
ecology. The adaptive and genomic response of Oryza sativa ssp. indica (Asian
rice) to irrigated, rainfed lowland and upland environments will be investigated
within a systems genomics framework that encompasses plant systems biology,
evolutionary ecology, quantitative and population genomics. First, large-scale
gene-ecosystem and gene-environment association mapping will be employed to
identify genomic regions that may underlie environmental adaptation and recent
natural directional selection. Second, the genetic architecture of fitness
traits across different rice ecosystems will be examined using genome-wide
association studies (GWAS). Finally, phenotypic/genotypic selection analysis
will be used to determine the type and strength of natural selection on levels
of gene expression in rice in these three key ecosystems. In the end, the
results from the association mapping and population genomic analyses will be
integrated with gene expression selection analyses to dissect adaptive ecotype
differentiation in the rice genome. The proposed research will examine the
genomic basis of ecosystem adaptation in crop plants with an interdisciplinary
and multi-scale perspective – from genome to gene expression to organismal
traits (fitness) to ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.