* 2204361
* ADVANCE Partnership: Empowering scientists to transform workplace climate through the ADVANCEGeo community-based intervention program
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Asmeret Asefaw Berhe, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 08/31/2025
* USD 135,193.00

The ADVANCEGeo Partnership for transforming workplace climate aims to enact
interventions at the individual and collective level through behavior change
education and organizationally through implementation of ethical codes of
conduct that frame harassment, bullying, and discrimination as scientific
misconduct. The project will develop: (1) a workplace climate intervention
program for academic departments and future faculty training programs; (2) a
train-the-trainers’ certification and capacity-building program to engage and
activate a diverse team of STEM leaders; (3) online public scaffolded resources
for broader engagement in workplace climate interventions; and (4) a plan for
sustained national impact across STEM through our extended partnerships and new
collaborations. The project leverages collaborations with professional
associations for nationwide impact and builds on prior work (NSF 1725879) with
professional societies. The enhanced network of partners and collaborators aims
to engage and support a diverse cohort of trainers and expand the program’s
reach into multiple STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While hostile STEM
workplace environments have disproportionate impacts on individuals that are
members of historically excluded groups, everyone in STEM benefits from
thriving, inclusive, just, and equitable research and educational environment.
The strategic impacts of the project include: (1) Empowering STEM departments
and programs to intentionally reduce the prevalence and impact of hostile
workplace climates through community engagement and responsibility; (2)
Activating a broader community of faculty, staff and scientists in the work to
create thriving research and training environments; and (3) Increasing retention
of faculty in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to
foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Partnership" awards provide support for the
adaptation and adoption of evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit
institutions of higher education and non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.