* 2204494
* 2022 Unconventional Semiconductors and Their Applications GRC
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Jinsong Huang, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 03/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to support the 2022
Unconventional Semiconductors and Their Applications Gordon Research Conference
to be held June 12 â€“ 17, 2022. The conference will provide a forum to discuss
the state-of-the-art research into the synthesis, properties, and applications
of metal halide perovskites. The unique format of a Gordon Research Conference
will provide an opportunity to address evolving challenges that are critical to
current and future research efforts. The impact will be extended beyond
scientific or technological advancement to human resource development. The
conference will provide young and early career researchers travel support to
participate in the meeting, especially those from underrepresented backgrounds
in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal-
halide perovskites are a promising class of materials that first exhibited
outstanding performance in solar cells and have since shown promise for a range
of applications, such as light-emitting diodes and radiation detectors. Metal-
halide compounds have significant interest to fundamental materials research,
including the type of chemical bonds, formation of crystal lattices, and charge
transport dynamics. This Gordon Research Conference will provide an
interdisciplinary platform for researchers with a broad spectrum of expertise to
share timely research progress on semiconductor physics, chemistry and materials
science, as well as novel applications inspired and enabled by emerging
semiconductors. In addition to the oral presentations, poster sessions will
provide a forum for those attending to present their work to a community of
peers and experts and facilitate vibrant discussions. This Gordon Research
Conference will provide an interdisciplinary platform for researchers with a
broad spectrum of expertise to share timely research progress on semiconductor
physics, chemistry and materials science, as well as novel applications inspired
and enabled by emerging semiconductors. The unique format of a Gordon Research
Conference will provide the opportunity to address evolving challenges that are
critical to the current and future research efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.