* 2204632
* Structure and Evolution of Embryos to Crystals in Supercooled Metallic Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Paul Voyles, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2027
* USD 461,167.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;One of the most common ways metals and other
materials are produced is to first create a liquid mixture of the desired
elements, then cool the liquid until it freezes into a solid. Starting with a
liquid is helpful because it makes elements easy to mix, and the solid can be
made the right shape just by pouring the liquid into the right shape container.
Understanding how atoms move around in liquids, how they snap together to form a
solid, and why they form one kind of solid and not another is a significant
problem in materials science and engineering. The very earliest stages of the
process, when the solid involves only a few tens of atoms, is particularly hard
to study.&lt;br/&gt;Recent research on non-metallic materials has shown that
textbook models of the earliest stages of freezing can be improved. This project
tests whether a similar update is needed for freezing of metals. It uses a
nanometer-diameter beam of electrons to probe the arrangements of small groups
of atoms and one of the world’s fastest electron cameras to track the atom’s
motions as they freeze. Participants in this project are developing new ways to
track atoms and are using artificial intelligence to analyze the terabyte-sized
data sets produced by the project.&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to advance the
fundamental science of transforming metallic liquids into solids, which could
benefit metals manufacturing in the US. It also trains students in state-of-the-
art methods in materials science and introduces the general public to the
excitement of science through live imaging of atoms using powerful electron
microscopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Non-classical
nucleation is well-established for a variety of systems, including growth of
minerals in aqueous solution, growth of protein crystals, and the growth of
metal crystals from vapor precursors. This project studies possible non-
classical behavior in the nucleation of metal crystals from metallic liquids of
similar composition. The approach uses time-resolved coherent electron
nanodiffraction with one of the world’s fastest electron cameras. The
experiments characterize the structural evolution of crystal embryos through
nucleation and growth, other competing liquid structures which do not nucleate
crystals, and the influence of spatially heterogeneous dynamics in the liquid
state on nucleation kinetics. Approaches from machine learning and computer
vision are used to find structurally-relevant patterns in the large
nanodiffraction data sets.&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to enhance the
understanding of non-classical nucleation from metallic melts, with potential
impact on metals manufacturing including casting. Students involved in the
project are trained in advanced methods in structural characterization by
electron microscopy and in data science applied to materials characterization.
The project also brings the excitement of seeing atoms, the basic building
blocks of matter, to the general public via live demonstrations of atomic-
resolution electron microscopy during public outreach events like the University
of Wisconsin-Madison Engineering Expo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.