* 2204227
* NSF-ANR: Co-Dynamics of Contraction and Adhesion in Animal Morphogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Edwin Munro, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 02/28/2025
* USD 576,268.00

A central challenge in biology is to understand how groups of cells rapidly and
collectively deform themselves during early development. Actomyosin-based
contractile networks produce the forces that deform cells, while adhesion
networks transmit those forces across cell-cell contacts. These networks must
continuously remodel themselves as cells move, divide and exchange neighbors.
But how they do so, and how each shapes the organization and dynamics of the
other, remains poorly understood. We will address this challenge in nematode
worm embryos, combining advanced microscopy, genetic and biophysical
manipulations and mathematical modeling. In addition to providing new insight
into mechanisms that govern the rapid remodeling of early embryos. The project
will provide students with valuable cross-training at boundaries of biology,
physics and mathematics. The PI will incorporate concepts and methods emerging
from this work into undergraduate and graduate level courses in biological
dynamics, and into a new practical course in microscopy to be taught at the
MBL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this multidisciplinary collaborative
effort is to understand how the macroscopic dynamics of force transmission
emerge from the microscopic dynamics and coupling of contractile and adhesion
networks in early C. elegans embryos. We will leverage cutting edge microscopy
tools to characterize the microscopic dynamics of adhesion network assembly and
remodeling as new contacts form and grow. We will determine how the architecture
of adhesion networks are shaped by actin network architecture, contractility and
flow, and how in turn, patterns of contractility and flow are shaped by
anchorage of contractile networks at cell-cell contacts. Finally, we will use
physical theory and modeling, constrained by microscopic observations and
biophysical measurements, to understand how physical coupling between these two
networks controls the balance of frictional slippage and force transmission
across contacts. This work will yield fundamental new insights into how early
embryos can orchestrate rapid remodeling using the highly conserved molecular
machinery that governs contractility and adhesion. It will provide a unique
interdisciplinary training opportunity for both graduate and undergraduate
students, and the conceptual and methodological results from this work will
inform the development of new lectures and course modules for two quantitative
biology courses and a new hands-on microscopy course taught by the
PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/France project is supported by
the US National Science Foundation and the French Agence Nationale de la
Recherche, where NSF funds the US investigator and ANR funds the partners in
France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.