* 2204024
* Collaborative Research: CAS: Mechanistic Studies on Fe-Type Nitrile Hydration Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Richard Holz, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 208,879.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professors Brian Bennett and Adam Fiedler from Marquette University
and Professor Richard Holz from the Colorado School of Mines will investigate
the chemical function of the enzyme nitrile hydratase (NHase), which catalyzes
the reaction of nitrile compounds with water (hydration) to give the
corresponding amides. NHases hydrate a range of natural and synthetic nitriles
with strict selectivity under mild conditions. As such, these enzymes have
several industrial and pharmaceutical applications, including the removal of
chemicals and pesticides from the environment. To expand the biocatalytic
potential of NHases, a better understanding of the catalytic mechanism is
essential. Professors Bennett, Fiedler and Holz will employ a combination of
experimental and computational approaches to detect and probe intermediates
generated during the hydration reaction. In addition, the assembly of the enzyme
active site, which contains a cobalt or iron ion, will be examined. The project
will provide exceptional training for undergraduate and graduate-level
scientists. The emphasis on green chemistry and biophysical methods will serve
as the basis for community engagement activities. The award will also enhance
the research and educational infrastructures at both Marquette University and
the Colorado School of Mines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks
to gain molecular-level insights into NHase catalysis through a combination of
kinetic, spectroscopic, biochemical, computational, and X-ray crystallographic
methods. The studies will (i) test competing prevailing mechanistic hypotheses
and refine the catalytic mechanism by interrogating observed intermediates, (ii)
determine the catalytic function of proton transfer and the protonation states
of ionizable groups in the active site, and (iii) elucidate steps in the
maturation process of the metal-based (Fe or Co) active sites. The insights
gained from the studies are expected to aid in the development of green
catalytic approaches to hydrolytic reactions in nature and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.