* 2204238
* NSF-ANR: Collaborative Research: A mechanical atlas for embryogenesis at single-cell resolution
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Edwin Munro, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 04/30/2025
* USD 263,134.00

The scientific goal of this project is to deepen the understanding of how living
matter generates and controls mechanical forces to shape tissues, organs, and
organisms. The central technological innovation that motivates and guides the
proposed work is the construction of a Mechanical Atlas, describing the
measurement of mechanical stresses, in three dimensions, at single-cell
resolution and over time, in a living embryo as it sculpts itself. The
investigators will then build on this effort to determine the molecular
underpinnings of the observed patterns of stress, and discover rules by which
these stressors collectively ensure unique morphogenetic outcomes in ways that
are robust with respect to phenotypic and environmental variations. They expect
this work will reveal new mechanical design principles for embryonic
development, with direct impact on the fields of tissue engineering and organ
regeneration. The methodology and tools that will be developed will be shared as
open source through github; segmented embryos and the mechanical atlas will be
made available to the community through the morphonet
browser.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team of investigators propose to construct a
single-cell mechanical atlas, in 3D and in physical units, during the process of
gastrulation in the ascidian embryo. To do so, they will solve an inverse
problem, grounded in a new physical theory of multicellular aggregates, advanced
light-sheet based imaging, and biophysical measurements of material parameters.
They will use this mechanical atlas as a foundation to explore how dynamic
control of force generation by actomyosin, and dynamic coupling between
neighboring cells, encodes robust stereotyped morphogenetic trajectories. In
particular, the investigators will seek to determine 1) communication channels
between cells that contribute to the generating the patterns of mechanical
forces, 2) the molecular generator(s) of stress, 3) the roles that mechanical
forces play in altering how cells communicate, and 4) how the observed patterns
of mechanical stress sculpt the macroscopic shape of the organism. This
multifaceted research is made possible through a highly interdisciplinary
collaboration between 4 scientists with distinct and synergistic expertise in
developmental biology, physics, applied mathematics and computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/France project is supported
by the US National Science Foundation and the French Agence Nationale de la
Recherche, where NSF funds the US investigator and ANR funds the partners in
France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.