* 2204780
* CCF: Small: Paradox and Brain-inspired Computer Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* JoAnn Paul, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2025
* USD 402,690.00

In order to achieve true machine intelligence, the structural organization of
the brain must be understood in the context of its potential impacts on future
computer architecture. Current research in artificial intelligence and machine
learning are focused on creating complex programs that requires large datasets
for training and do not provide insight as to how the structure of the brain
achieves intelligence, utilizes massive amounts of parallelism, trades off
accuracy for real-time response, and creates new solutions from relatively few
experiences. The brain utilizes large amounts of structural parallelism that
current computer architecture cannot accommodate. It must also operate in real-
time and provide the best possible answers based upon relatively few prior
experiences. In order to utilize the vast structural parallelism in the brain,
the best possible answer must be drawn from a set of independent possible
answers, held simultaneously. But different answers result in conflict which may
be the foundation of intelligence but which is inconsistent with conventional
computer architecture. The brain is organized into a conscious and subconscious
mind, with the subconscious mind utilizing the greatest amount of parallelism.
Insight to how the brain achieves intelligence may lie in an examination of
conflict in the subconscious – the production, accommodation and resolution of
multiple, competing answers. Paradox is a logical result which produces a
simultaneous true and false result – something computer circuitry cannot
accommodate. While computer programs force such conflict resolution, the brain
likely holds multiple results without resolving them, instead holding and
developing multiple, conflicting models which continue to develop, over time,
and are selected on an as needed basis. Instead of resolving the conflict, the
brain picks and chooses, depending upon circumstances. Fundamentally, paradox
produces multiple, conflicting answers to the same question. While computer
programs operate on vast amounts of logic, they cannot accommodate paradox.
Instead of holding the conflict, they force an answer. By focusing on paradox,
the structural properties of the brain in the context computer architecture can
be examined. Thus, the significance of the structural organization of the brain
will be better understood, future computer architecture can utilize parallelism
towards the order of the brain, and true machine intelligence can be studied in
a new light. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By focusing on a striking property of the
brain, that of how the brain accommodates paradox, the brain likely functions as
an MISD (Multiple Instruction Single Datastream) computer. Machine Learning
results in algorithmic solutions, but does not provide insight into how the
structure of the brain achieves true intelligence, including creativity. At the
same time, conventional computer architecture has been unable to accommodate the
vast amount of parallelism and complexity found in the human brain. MISD models
of computing have been considered non-sensical because, like paradox, they
result in multiple conflicting results. However, because they produce different
results and do not need to converge, MISD computing can be the foundation of
nearly perfect parallelism, thus may hold the secret to how the brain
accommodates vast degrees of parallelism as well as accommodate conflict. The
brain must also operate in real-time, and thus likely holds different solutions
to the same set of inputs with some accommodating a quick answer, but not the
best overall, but one which is necessary to survival. This work will focus on
algorithm/processor pairs such as sort and speech recognition for which
different algorithms process the same set of inputs, producing different
results. The best result is then chosen as a tuple of time and quality, where
quality is sacrificed in the interest of time. For example, the spoken word
might be processed imprecisely at first, but in a better than nothing mode.
However, more thinking might result in a different answer. These two modes of
processing would process the same set of inputs, but be held in different parts
of the brain that operate in nearly perfect independence. In this way, novel
brain-inspired computer architecture can result in which the subconscious mind
contains vast amounts of MISD parallel algorithms that operate in nearly perfect
independence, and the conscious mind is viewed as a selector of the many
possible answers. Since creativity also requires conflict, this research may
also reveal how the brain’s structure results in creativity, which is required
for true machine intelligence. This project will conduct experiments to
demonstrate problems that have multiple possible algorithmic solutions with
varying degree of accuracy dependent upon time and resources. This will form the
basis of a high-level foundation for a new architecture that accommodates high
degrees of parallelism, accommodates time and quality trade-offs, resolves
conflict resolution and leads to an initial investigation of how the brain
creates. Experiments will be conducted to illustrate our approach and
generalization of the architecture and approach will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.