* 2204639
* CAS: Elucidating How Nanocrystal Structure Controls Electron Flow in Nanocrystal-Enzyme Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Gordana Dukovic, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 06/30/2025
* USD 499,660.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Gordana Dukovic of University of
Colorado Boulder is combining synthesis, advanced laser techniques, and high-
resolution microscopy to follow the flow of electrons in nanocrystal-enzyme
complexes capable of light-driven hydrogen production. To make hydrogen, the
nanocrystal is first excited by light, increasing the energy of its electrons.
These excited electrons must then hop from the nanocrystal to the enzyme, and
then make their way to the enzyme's reaction center by hopping from one site to
another, like crossing a stream by jumping from stone to stone. Each of these
electron hops is important for hydrogen production, but they are difficult to
observe and control. Professor Dukovic and her students will measure the times
of the critical electron hopping events, and how they depend on nanocrystal
structure, surface properties, and binding to the enzyme. Their discoveries
could lead to new ways to use sunlight to make chemicals, including solar fuels.
Additionally, the project is helping to foster the Nation's science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce by supporting career development
of junior faculty and scientists, as well as the undergraduate education of
students from a variety of backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
elucidate the electron pathways involved in photochemical H2 generation that
occurs when photoexcited semiconductor nanocrystals transfer electrons to the
adsorbed enzyme hydrogenase, which catalyzes proton reduction to H2. The project
will examine how properties of nanocrystalline quantum dots (QDs) such as
composition, diameter, and surface chemistry impact the QD binding with the
enzyme, the transfer of photoexcited electrons, and other critical processes for
H2 production, such as hole scavenging and back-electron transfer from the
enzyme. The outcome of the project will be an improved understanding of how
nanocrystals drive enzyme catalysis. This, in turn, will lead to design
principles for how to use the immense tunability of nanocrystal structure and
properties to adapt them to drive complex, multi-step light-driven
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.