* 2204587
* EAR-PF: A Multiscale Seismic Velocity Model for the Gulf of Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Evans Onyango, Onyango, Evans Awere
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 12/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Evans Onyango has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to conduct
research and education activities related to developing a multiscale seismic
velocity model for the Gulf of Alaska. This work will take place at the
University of Alaska Fairbanks under the mentorship of Dr. Carl Tape. The
surface of the Earth is divided into plates that are in constant motion and
collide, slide past, or pull away from each other along the boundaries between
plates. Plate interactions build mountains, cause volcanic activity, and produce
large earthquakes. Alaska hosts one of the world’s most seismically active plate
boundaries, which produced the 1964 magnitude 9.2 earthquake, the largest ever
recorded in the United States. Scientists rely on three-dimensional models of
Earth’s subsurface material to understand plate tectonic processes and to assess
geologic hazards. In order to better understand large earthquakes, scientists
must understand how seismic waves interact with Earth’s subsurface materials. A
primary limitation to modeling the seismic wavefield in southern Alaska is the
lack of a three-dimensional offshore model. Permanent seismic stations are on
land, far from offshore earthquakes, which makes it difficult to model ground
motion at coastal cities. This project seeks to build and test a three-
dimensional subsurface model for the Gulf of Alaska to better understand the
complex earthquake ground motion in coastal regions. The goal is to create a
comprehensive three-dimensional model by combining existing two-dimensional
models from previous studies. Computer simulations of seismic wave propagation
within this model will be performed to generate predicted seismograms that will
be compared with recorded seismograms from moderate earthquakes in the region.
The final model will be publicly accessible via the IRIS Earth Model
Collaboration, a public repository for Earth models. The project will involve
outreach to local coastal communities prone to seismic and tsunami
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Offshore regions at tectonically active margins,
such as southern Alaska or southern California, often exhibit extreme structural
complexity and produce a wide range of earthquakes in terms of magnitudes and
mechanisms. In southern Alaska, the active collision and accretion of the
Yakutat microplate beneath the North America plate and the structure of the
accretionary wedge at this active subduction zone are examples of factors
contributing to the complex structure of the region. Small-scale and large-scale
deployments of seismic instruments on land such as the EarthScope Transportable
Array have yielded numerous tomographic models of the mainland Alaska, most of
which include inherent smoothing that cannot capture the sharp interfaces of the
offshore setting. By comparison, the offshore region of the Gulf of Alaska has
only been studied with a sparse assortment of high-resolution 2D velocity models
derived from marine studies between the 1980s and 2000s. This project proposes
leveraging these existing images from the Gulf of Alaska to create a
comprehensive 3D velocity model that will have many uses such as modeling the
seismic wavefield, understanding active tectonics, and modeling geodynamics of
the subduction system. Synthetic waveforms calculated from the resultant 3D
model will be compared with seismograms recorded from moderate and large
earthquakes in the study area to validate the model. Seismogram misfit values
will also be compared with the performance of other available tomographic
models. This project will develop a 3D velocity model for the Gulf of Alaska
that will be publicly accessible via the IRIS Earth Model Collaboration, a
public repository for Earth models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.