* 2204738
* Research Initiation: Assessing the Impact of Digital Badging in Makerspaces on the Formation of Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Edward Berger, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 05/31/2024
* USD 199,958.00

Academic makerspaces provide engineering students with the means to prototype,
experiment, and collaborate, allowing students to gain experience with common
engineering tasks. Participation in these spaces can help students to feel
connected to the engineering profession and to build their engineering identity,
which can impact recruitment, retention, and persistence. However, makerspaces
do not always attract and retain diverse students, so students may benefit
unequally from participation in these spaces. In this study, a makerspace micro-
credentialing program, where students earn digital badges as they master making
skills such as digital design and 3D printing, will be explored as a strategy to
promote equitable student engagement in makerspaces. Digital badges make student
competencies visible, both to students who earn the credential and to their
peers and instructors, helping students gain recognition of their skills and
helping them feel more secure in their identity as engineers. This study will
explore how digital badging in makerspaces impacts identity development in
engineering students, exploring the potential of makerspaces to act as a
complementary pathway for students to become engineers. Additionally, new
strategies to promote equitable makerspace involvement resulting from this study
will help engineering educators support the development of an innovative and
inclusive engineering workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
evaluate digital badging in makerspaces as a pedagogical strategy to support
professional formation through the development of engineering identity and
belongingness. This research seeks to answer two critical research questions:
How do digital badges impact the development of students’ sense of belonging in
engineering and engineering identity?; and How do digital badges influence
students’ participation in makerspaces? To explore these questions, first-year
students in an engineering design course will earn digital badges in a
university makerspace. The study uses a mixed-methods approach, combining
quantitative survey measures of students’ engineering identity and sense of
belonging and inductive coding of student interviews to identify themes in
students’ experience with the makerspace and digital badging activities. The
study will provide: 1) Evaluation of the impact of digital badges on the types
and frequency of activities students undertake in makerspaces; 2) Increased
knowledge of student professional formation by exploring how credentialing in a
makerspace supports student identity formation for diverse populations; 3)
Exploration of how students’ perceptions of badge relevance affect their
engagement with badging activities and their resulting professional formation;
and 4) Deeper understanding of engineering identity development in first-year
engineering courses at a Hispanic-serving institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.