* 2204014
* Synthetic Biology Approaches to Selective Amino Acid Modification and Incorporation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Michelle Chang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 528,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division, Professor Michelle Chang from the University of California, Berkeley
will develop methods for the incorporation of non-canonical amino acids into
proteins. Although proteins carry out a broad range of functions in the cell,
they are ostensibly made up a limited set of 20 standard amino acids that
represent a limited range of chemical functionality compared to what can be
utilized by chemists. However, nature also provides many genetically-encoded
pathways to produce novel amino acids with unusual functionality that are
typically not incorporated into proteins. The proposed research will utilize a
pathway discovered by the Chang group that produces amino acids bearing halo,
terminal alkene, and terminal alkyne functionality and will develop methods for
the incorporation of these amino acids into proteins. The Chang group will
further focus on a new bioinformatic strategy to identify novel pathways for
biosynthesis of non-standard amino acids by using new marker enzymes known to
cluster with genes involved in the biosynthesis of the amino acid itself.
Further exploration of these new gene clusters can shed light on the role of
non-standard amino acids in metabolism while also providing a tool to expand the
diversity of proteins that can be made. This pursuit will allow graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows to be broadly trained at the interface of
chemistry and biology. This project will also be integrated with an outreach
program to introduce K-5 students to concepts at the interface of chemistry and
biology, with a focus on green chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project focuses on the development of a bioinformatic strategy to identify novel
pathways for biosynthesis of non-standard amino acids. Professor Michelle Chang
and her research team will use a resistance marker to identify a wide range of
gene clusters that seemingly encode the biosynthesis of new amino acids and
related natural products. These gene clusters and their products will be
characterized. The new knowledge will be used to expand the scope of non-
standard amino acids that can be produced enzymatically. Such an approach
promises to open up the possibility of introducing malleable new chemical
functionalities, including alkene and alkyne groups, into targeted positions in
tailored proteins. The study of the resistance enzymes will provide insight in
the recognition of non-standard amino acids and will be used to design tools for
residue-selective incorporation of the non-proteinogenic amino
acids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.