* 2204481
* ADVANCE Adaptation: University of Wisconsin Oshkosh - Three Campuses, One Institution
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jennifer Christus, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 07/31/2025
* USD 999,674.00

The project is designed to address gender inequities in STEM departments at a
recently integrated, restructured, multi-campus, comprehensive University, which
is a unique context for an ADVANCE grant to be implemented. In 2018, the
University of Wisconsin (UW) System underwent a restructuring process. As one of
the largest systems of public higher education in the nation, with ~165,000
students and 39,000 faculty and staff, the impacts were wide-reaching. The goals
of the University of Wisconsin Oshkosh (UWO) ADVANCE project include: developing
a web-based dashboard for tracking progress and transparency on the three
campuses; creating awareness of and training to address the climate issues
uncovered in the 2021 Climate Survey; conducting an equity review of STEM
departmental tenure, renewal, and promotion (TRP) policies; establishing
roadmaps for TRP for faculty and instructional staff; and aiding departments in
creating new/revised, equitable policies and procedures to improve department
climates. The project will use several strategies from NSF ADVANCE awardees,
StratEGIC Toolkit, the ADVANCEGeo Transforming the Workplace Project, as well as
targeted best practices outlined in the Chancellor’s Study on Work/Life
Balance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will add to the knowledge base on how
to monitor and advance intersectional gender equity in STEM by transforming
departmental climates and policies in an organization that has experienced
budget cuts, increasing teaching loads, dropping enrollment, tuition freezes,
and restructuring. The project results will be strategically disseminated within
the UW system which includes similarly situated institutions. In addition,
results will be shared through peer-reviewed journals and relevant conference
presentations, and to the community, state, and national stakeholders. The
proposed activities are intended to address existing inequities in policies and
procedures to retain and eventually recruit a higher proportion of diverse STEM
faculty and instructors. This is especially urgent work given the anticipation
that 25% of tenured STEM faculty will likely retire from UWO within 10-15
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender
equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of organizational
barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of diverse faculty
in academic institutions.  Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist
in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate. 
ADVANCE "Adaptation" awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of
evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit institutions of higher
education as well as non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.