* 2204901
* RAPID: Science Teachers as Public Health Educators: How Has the COVID-19 Pandemic Reshaped the Roles and Experiences of K-12 Science Teachers?
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Patrick Smith, Horizon Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 01/31/2024
* USD 185,731.00

When a global health crisis emerges, students at all levels turn to their
science teachers for information and, at times, reassurance, according to
researchers at Horizon Research, Inc. (HRI). Science teachers serve a critically
important public health function and become an important part of the nation’s
response efforts. Since 2020, tens of thousands of science teachers in the
United States have helped students grapple with the reality of SARS-COV-2 and
COVID-19. This includes not only supporting the emergent scientific learning
opportunities, but also functioning as public health educators and advocates in
the midst of the global pandemic. HRI explored the early role of science
teachers during the pandemic with a prior RAPID project, which demonstrated that
science teachers were engaged in a wide variety of educational activities with
students related to the pandemic and public health education. However, now
nearly two years into the global pandemic, there are a number of new topics that
have arisen to explore with respect to science education, including vaccines and
long-term immunity that were not able to be assessed early in the pandemic. This
study will further the field's understanding of the role that science teachers
play in adapting their instruction during a public health crisis, how they
address emergent ideas throughout the unfolding of the pandemic, and the impacts
that the pandemic has had on science teachers themselves.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will build on the prior RAPID award (2027397)
and return to the sample of science teachers studied in that context. HRI will
collect survey data to explore the following questions: (1) How does the
pandemic continue to influence teachers’ science instruction (for example,
instructional time, instructional strategies), and how has that influence
shifted? (2) How has teaching about COVID evolved? What new topics (for example,
vaccines) have they taken up in the&lt;br/&gt;context of COVID? (3) What factors
now exert the greatest influence on science teachers’ teaching about COVID, and
how do those differ from the factors at play in the spring of 2020? (4) What are
the impacts of the pandemic on science teachers themselves, including
manageability of workload, opportunities for professional growth/development,
physical/mental wellness, and job satisfaction? Using the Theory of Planned
Behavior, the survey will be constructed to identify factors that predict
whether teachers take up the topic. The survey will also collect data about how
teachers address the virus and its transmission with their students. HRI will
disaggregate survey data by school-, class-, student-, and teacher-level
variables to identify patterns in student opportunities. Survey data will be
supplemented by interviews with 50 survey respondents to gather more in-depth
information related to the constructs of interest. Study findings will be
immediately shared through a preliminary report that focuses on the survey data;
presentations and dissemination through practitioner and research organizations;
and policy briefs to the CDC and NIH to acknowledge the role of science teachers
as public health advocates and encouraging those agencies to make resources
available to science teachers to support this role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
RAPID award is made by the DRK-12 program in the Division of Research on
Learning. The Discovery Research PreK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly
enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics by preK-12 students and teachers, through the research and
development of new innovations and approaches. Projects in the DRK-12 program
build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for the
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.