* 2204520
* ADVANCE Partnership: Engineering Deans’ Gender Equity Initiative: Aligning Systems to Ensure Inclusion and Equity in Advancement of Faculty
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Sarah Rajala, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2027
* USD 999,967.00

Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines are better
able to solve complicated global problems when diverse expertise is welcomed,
supported, and retained. STEM cultures, however, result from systems that were,
and are, predominately male, white, heterosexual, and able-bodied, which results
in explicit and implicit practices that keep STEM spaces largely homogenous
despite changes in the workforce and national norms. The loss of diverse talent
results in the narrowing of disciplinary excellence and capacity for problem
solving, innovation, and resilience in times of stress. Heightened demands for
innovation, coupled with demographic shifts, and, most recently, the impacts of
the COVID 19 pandemic and the racial violence, resulted in gendered and
racialized workforce outcomes. These impacts create an urgent need to ensure
that academic engineering environments are inclusive and equitable for diverse
women faculty so that all talent is available to address current and future
complex global problems requiring engineering expertise. This need will not be
met unless engineering systems, (e.g., academic colleges, engineering
accrediting bodies, professional societies) identify and address structures,
policies, and practices that keep sexism and racism in place. Currently,
academic engineering systems are loosely aligned and sometimes disconnected.
Aligning these engineering systems and integrating evidence-based policies and
practices that support inclusive organizational change will enable the
availability of more abundant and diverse engineering talent as well as STEM
system reform.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; This initiative will extend the work of
the American Society of Engineering Education’s (ASEE’s) ADVANCE Adaptation
Engineering Deans Gender Equity (EDGE) Initiative, which provided resources, and
exemplars, for successful adaptation of social science-based evidence to
academic engineering practice. The goals of the KnowlEDGE Initiative are 1) to
align systems of academic engineering colleges and departments focused on
promotion and tenure to increase the success of diverse women engineering
faculty; 2) to align and make transparent the systems of accreditation
governance within professional societies and ABET, and to increase the number of
diverse women ABET Program Evaluators and Commissioners to diversify the
accreditation decision-making bodies and increase leadership accountability; and
3) ultimately, to support diverse talent and equitable success of diverse women
future engineers. The KnowlEDGE change model will be piloted and deployed on
eight campuses within a diverse community of practice. Outcomes will be
disseminated through partner networks, ASEE’s Engineering Deans Council, social
media, and scientific publications. This work is aligned with the NSF ADVANCE
program, which is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic
institutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Organizational barriers that inhibit equity
may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational culture and
climate. ADVANCE "Partnership" awards provide support for the adaptation and
adoption of evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit institutions of
higher education, and non-academic non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.