* 2204942
* SCH: Detecting and mapping stress patterns across space and time: Multimodal modeling of individuals in real-world physical and social work environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Shrikanth Narayanan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Rogers
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,099,995.00

Stress has been identified as the health epidemic of the 21st century, and
office-related work is a significant driver of stress among Americans due to
long hours, rapid deadlines, heavy workload, and job insecurity. Yet, office
workers are often entirely unaware of the impact of stress until they notice
symptoms of declining physical or mental health or well-being, such as
musculoskeletal discomfort, headaches, poor sleep, or lack of motivation. Even
more problematic, most individuals do not know how their work activities and the
physical and social work environments are related to stress and other health
outcomes. While stress is almost always treated as unfavorable, stress can be
positive. Opportunities exist to better understand how to promote eustress that
is energizing and essential for productivity, and minimize distress that leads
to negative emotions, disturbed bodily states, strain, and burnout. Thus, this
project aims to generate new analytic models to uncover and map the patterns and
pathways that influence work-related stress to understand the primary
contributing factors to stress across space and time. The project will develop
methods for integrating different types of data from the environment, the
person, and other existing technologies to identify patterns that inform
personalized solutions for improving self-awareness and management of work-
related health and well-being. By developing a deeper individualized
understanding and detection of eustress and distress, this project will impact
and advance workplace health and wellness. The project will serve as a
foundation for the development of sensing systems embedded within smart
workplaces to automate environmental supports or provide behavioral feedback.
These impacts will not only lead to improved worker health and well-being but
can support decreased worker absenteeism and improved productivity. Thus, the
project has the potential to change the way health and well-being are promoted
and achieved in the office by engaging the worker in their health and wellness
and ultimately reducing social and financial losses due to stress. The work will
also have broader impacts regarding several criteria of NSF interest. It will
promote awareness of the effects of the built, social, and work environments on
health and well-being to encourage K-12 students to pursue careers in science
and engineering. It will enhance the infrastructure for research and education
by incorporating findings into the curriculum across multiple disciplines and
disseminating findings via publications, presentations, and other media.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a stakeholder-engaged, transactional
approach to describe individualized experiences of stress and develop multimodal
models using a wide range of bio-behavioral, environmental, and activity
engagement sensing technologies to identify the most valuable combinations of
data that inform personalized, automated, or technology-supported intervention
approaches to stress management as workers engage in their daily work. To build
an individually contextualized understanding of stress among office workers,
machine learning methods that can operate with heterogeneous and noisy
multimodal data streams at multiple temporal resolutions, including enabling
unsupervised discovery of behavioral routines will be developed. Individual
interviews and ecological momentary assessment (EMA) surveys will be used to
characterize each participant, their work, and how they understand the concepts
of stress (i.e., distress and eustress), particularly related to their work.
Mobile and wearable technologies will be evaluated to understand stress
experiences as workers engage in different workspaces (e.g., home, formal,
public) across time. Sensing methods that could be embedded within the formal
workspace to obtain alternative, complementary, or additional data useful in
determining experiences of worker stress will be evaluated for differentiating
worker distress from eustress. Specifically, the contribution of the physical
environment, task engagement, posture, and worker emotive states to the
understanding of stress will be examined. Additionally, through focus groups
that will elicit user insights, feedback, and preferences, the work will advance
our knowledge about acceptance of technology for health in work settings, and
how that interacts with stress/health self-management including privacy,
trustworthiness, acceptance, preferred/appropriate methods for feedback or
automation. Novel machine learning methods will be developed and employed to
predict positive and negative stress from multimodal data that include reference
assessments of behavioral traits and baseline states–including those related to
stress, affect, and the job–that serve as constructs for
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.