* 2204021
* Investigating the cognitive mechanisms underlying children's question asking
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Emily Liquin, Liquin, Emily G
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Todd Gureckis
and Dr. Marjorie Rhodes at New York University, this postdoctoral fellowship
award supports an early career scientist investigating the cognitive mechanisms
that enable children to ask effective questions. Question asking is a key tool
for learning, especially in childhood, but coming up with an informative
question—one that will elicit new and useful information—is often difficult.
Studying how children ask informative questions will advance scientific
understanding of how humans guide their own learning. This will have
implications in educational settings, where students often fail to ask effective
questions. Moreover, by understanding how humans guide their own learning,
researchers will be better able to desig machines that do the same—an important
problem for Artificial Intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present project
will develop and test a new account of question asking, inspired by recent
research on decision making and problem solving. This account delineates
multiple routes a learner might take to generate candidate questions and
adjudicate between them, with a tradeoff between the informativeness of the
question that is ultimately asked and the computational costs (e.g., time,
cognitive effort) associated with generating and selecting this question. Using
a multi-method approach, this research will test (1) whether there is evidence
for these multiple routes to question asking in 2- to 10-year-old children, and
(2) how children navigate the tradeoff between question informativeness and
computational cost. In particular, this research will analyze an existing corpus
of naturalistic parent-child conversation to test how children’s questions are
shaped by their parents’ previous questions and answers, and it will develop new
experimental paradigms to investigate how and when children innovate novel,
informative questions. The results from this research will shed new light on how
parents' questions and answers, children's conceptual knowledge, and
computational considerations inform children’s question asking in a range of
settings. As a result, this project will take a significant step towards an
understanding of the complex cognitive mechanisms that underlie question
asking—a skill that exemplifies human intelligence and creativity and makes
important contributions to learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.