* 2204228
* Collaborative Research: Chemical Biology of  DNA repair
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sheila David, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 456,735.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Division of
Chemistry, Sheila David from the University of California, Davis, and Martin
Horvath from the University of Utah are collaborating to study the repair of
DNA. DNA is constantly damaged, and DNA repair is essential for life. It is now
well understood that base excision repair (BER) glycosylases are the front-line
enzymes that competently find rare DNA bases with subtle damage and initiate
repair of these bases. However, it is unclear how these remarkable enzymes work
at the molecular and chemical level. The project will apply a chemical biology
approach to reveal insight into the mechanisms of the DNA repair enzymes MutY,
OGG1 and endonuclease III (EndoIII), BER glycosylases that share structural
similarity and a common ancestral protein. The discoveries obtained through this
project has implications for and potential applications in biotechnology and
medicine. The research activities will provide training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students with the intention to contribute to the
development of an inclusive and diverse STEM (science, technology, engineering
and mathematics) workforce. The project will be integrated into education
programs at both universities to provide an authentic science research
experience. Further broad impacts will include outreach programs with project
participants acting as Science Ambassadors who connect scientists and
nonscientists and rebuild trust in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant
element of this work is the use of transition state (TS) mimics to provide
insight into chemical mechanisms and the ways in which damaged substrate
identification is coupled to base excision. Specifically, the collaborative UC-
Davis/Utah team will develop new TS mimics to test the idea that the
evolutionarily-related BER glycosylases MutY, Endo III and hOGG1 use similar
catalytic strategies. The Davis/Horvath team will also delineate motifs in MutY
that are critical for distinct facets of its search and rescue mechanism by
creating new high-throughput assays to test large, diverse sets of MutY
variants. Lastly, further development of these innovative methods will be
leveraged to create new chemical biology tools based on BER glycosylases to
manipulate DNA in living organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.