* 2204193
* Interrogating the Impact of Biocompatible Ionic Liquids on the Nanoaggregation of Linear-dendritic Block Copolymers
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Eden Tanner, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2025
* USD 509,442.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Dr. Eden E. L. Tanner of the University of
Mississippi will study a novel class of polymers that consist of a linear
hydrophobic section connected to a highly branched hydrophilic block. This
distinct structural configuration bestows interesting properties on the polymer
that can potentially be exploited for use as in drug delivery or related
molecular transport applications. The Tanner Lab aims to gain a better
understanding of the properties of this class of polymers, in particular the
nature and strength of interactions that control the self-assembly of the
polymers into uniform nano-size aggregates. The fundamental physical chemistry
and polymer chemistry knowledge to be gained from this research may provide
guiding principles for the rational design of polymers for biomedical or
pharmaceutical applications. Dr. Tanner strives to recruit and retain Black and
African-American scholars, aiming to improve STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) participation among underrepresented minority
students in Mississippi. In addition to providing interdisciplinary research
training opportunities for students at the University of Mississippi, the Tanner
Lab will host students from regional HBCUs over the summer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tanner Lab will interrogate the non-covalent
interactions of linear-dendritic block copolymers (LDBCs) with biocompatible
ionic liquids (BILs) and explore using BILs to help control LDBC self-assembly
into monodisperse nanostructures. Biocompatible ionic liquids (BILs) are
comprised of biocompatible bulky cations and anions and are liquids at room
temperature. To understand the role that BILs play in the nano-assembly of
LDBCs, Dr. Tanner and her team will investigate the nature and strength of
interactions between the LDBCs and the BILs, both in pure BILs and in the
presence of water, post-aggregation. They will analyze the BIL/LDBC nano-
aggregates with a battery of physical and chemical techniques to gain insight on
their nanoscopic composition. In addition, they will measure the thermodynamics
and kinetics of degradation of the aggregates and the LDBCs themselves and
quantify the impact of BILs, with the aim of relating degradation profiles to
the strength of interactions between the LDBCs and
BILs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.