* 2204433
* EAR-PF: Quantifying evaporation in Mono Basin: Bridging the gap between hydrologic modeling and paleoclimate records using triple oxygen and clumped isotope geochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Anne Fetrow, Fetrow, Anne C
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 05/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Freshwater in the Western United States will become an increasingly precious
resource and its allocation will become even more contentious as climate change
accelerates and human populations expand. To be able to assist the policymakers
and communities who are making water resource management decisions, we must be
able to more accurately predict how freshwater resources in watersheds will
fluctuate in the future. The Mono Basin watershed in eastern California is one
of the main water sources for approximately 11 million people in Los Angeles and
presents an important example of the need for timely and science-informed water
management strategies. This project aims to improve our understanding of a
critical, but commonly poorly constrained, aspect of the Mono Basin hydrologic
system: the amount of water lost due to evaporation from its iconic terminal
lake, Mono Lake. Misestimation of water lost to evaporation can lead to the
over-allocation of existing and future water resources. This project will
combine powerful geochemical and hydrologic modeling tools to better quantify
evaporation in the Mono Lake watershed and extend our understanding of the
variability of regional hydrology and climate in recent history. This research
will provide urgently needed information to inform water allocation and
conservation decisions and improve the understanding of how critical Sierra
Nevadan water resources have been affected by human activity and will likely
vary in the future due to the changing global climate. The research team will
work closely with the outreach and education staff of the Mono Lake Committee, a
key conservation group in the region, to develop citizen-science sampling
opportunities and Mono Basin-focused curriculum modules for 6-12th graders to
increase community engagement in issues of water resource management and build a
stronger understanding of the important role that hydroclimate research can play
in policy decisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While hydrologic mass balance
modeling provides a powerful tool in estimating hydrologic variability of
critical watersheds, there are key parameters that remain poorly constrained,
such as amount of water lost to evaporation. The lack of an accurate estimate of
evaporative water loss from major reservoirs creates large uncertainties for
hydrologic models and hinders the accuracy of predicting future variability of
important water resources. In the face of climate change, Mono Lake and its
surrounding watershed in eastern California are emblematic of the increasingly
serious issues of water management and conservation. This project aims to
address the need for a more accurate estimate of modern and historic evaporative
water loss in Mono Basin by combining triple oxygen isotope geochemistry,
hydrologic mass balance modeling, and in-situ weather and environmental (e.g.,
temperature, relative humidity) data collection. The first objective of this
study is to quantify the spatial and temporal variability of isotopic
composition of various water reservoirs in the modern Mono Basin. These isotope
datasets will be then used to assess the accuracy of an isotopically enabled
mass balance model in predicting the evaporative water loss from Mono Lake and
evolution of water isotope compositions in the basin. Additionally, this project
aims to understand how the effects of weather and environmental conditions,
known from ~100 years of historic instrumental data, are recorded in the Mono
Lake sediment record through the generation of stable isotope proxy data from
carbonate-rich sediments. From these lake sediment records, it will be possible
to estimate the amount of evaporation and lake water temperature of Mono Lake
varied in the last ~500 years. An anticipated outcome of this research is
improvement of model simulations of future hydroclimate scenarios for the Sierra
Nevada region and our understanding of how stable isotope proxies capture
climate signals from arid basins. Additionally, the project will provide an
interpretive framework for hydroclimate signals in lacustrine sediment records
for use in climate modeling, paleoclimate, and paleoecology
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.