* 2204223
* Combined Single-Molecule Raman and Conductance Spectroscopies for Understanding Electric Field-Controlled Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,08/31/2022
* Joshua Hihath, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2022
* USD 445,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program and partial
co-funding from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms - B (CSDM-B)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Joshua Hihath and his research team at the
University of California, Davis aim to understand the effects of applied
external electric fields on molecular switching processes. As electric fields
are emerging as “smart reagents” that can selectively catalyze reactions,
understanding their role in chemical reactions is critical. The Hihath group is
working to develop a novel and powerful approach for simultaneously applying an
electric field and quantitatively measuring the effect of this field before,
during, and after a chemical process. Their approach leverages a recently
developed system for performing single-molecule Raman spectroscopy and
conductance measurements simultaneously. The ability to track the effects of
electrical and optical fields, charge transfer, and heating on individual
molecules will impact a broad range of fields where controlling chemical
processes is important. The project is providing research opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate researchers, including individuals actively recruited
from groups underrepresented in STEM (science, technology, engineering and
mathematics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination of Raman spectroscopy with
single-molecule electrical measurements provides detailed information about the
configuration, binding energy, mechanical strain, vibrational modes, and local
effective temperature in a single molecule bound between two electrodes. This
multidimensional information allows resolution of electric field, mechanical,
charge transfer, and heating effects on chemical processes occurring within the
molecule. This project sets out to probe the mechanisms by which two distinctive
single-molecule photoswitches undergo conformational changes in an applied
field. The study will provide information about how the electrical field enables
bypassing orbital symmetry selection rules, and how these processes differ from
photochemical switching processes. Specific objectives include i) in situ
identification of electrically controlled isomerization processes in single-
molecule systems from the Raman signature of a molecule bound to two electrodes;
ii) improved understanding of the effects of electric field orientation and
magnitude on bond reorganization and transition states during electrical
isomerization processes; iii) determination of the interplay between applied
field and mechanical strain on isomerization processes; and iv) disambiguation
between current-driven and field-driven isomerization
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.