* 2204475
* Collaborative Research: EAGER--Novel Sampling and Isotopic Characterization of Upper Strato- to Mesospheric Photochemistry
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* David Johnston, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 03/31/2024
* USD 36,071.00

Isotopes in the atmosphere, such as 17O, 18O and others, can be used as tracers
to track the movement of the atmosphere and understand the chemical reactions
producing them. Obtaining measurements of such isotopes is difficult in the
mesosphere which is too high to be reached by balloons. This project will
experiment with a novel rocket technology to obtain air samples in the
mesosphere and use state of the art mass spectrometers to analyze isotopes in
the samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team plans to deploy a novel, zero-carbon
emission rocket that will enable atmospheric sample collection at 37 km and 70
km altitude in the atmosphere. This will provide proof-of-concept for a clean,
inexpensive, and efficient rocket sampler capable of atmospheric exploration
well beyond the current altitude limit of conventional balloons (30 km). This
rocket technology and platform will facilitate direct sampling of the upper
atmosphere, especially the mesosphere on a scale that is currently economically
and environmentally infeasible. Four atmospheric samples (2 launches at 37 km, 2
at 70 km) will be isotopically characterized using state of the art mass
spectrometers at both UCSD and Harvard. The target atmospheric gasses are O2,
CO2 and N2, which have either never been, or are severely under-sampled at these
altitudes, limiting our understanding of mesospheric contributions to the
stratosphere and troposphere. Isotopic analyses will also extend to the trace
oxygen isotope – 17O – and isotopic ‘clumping’ in both O2 and CO2. The
measurements will be compared to new laboratory experiments on the CO2-O2-O3
photochemical system, which aim to better constrain the characteristic isotope
effects and physical chemistry of Mesosphere/Stratosphere O3 photolysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new rocket borne sampling technology is more flexible
in terms of altitude targets, cheap relative to other sampling platforms, and
environmentally responsible. It will open up new opportunities for sampling the
atmosphere, most notably the mesosphere, and enable direct insight into
atmospheric photochemistry, specially that related to ozone cycle, and better
insight into this chemistry in situ and as it relates to airmasses being
delivered to the strato- and troposphere&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.