* 2204123
* Expanding the supramolecular chemistry of carbon  nanohoops
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Ramesh Jasti, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2025
* USD 420,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Ramesh Jasti at the University
of Oregon is developing general methods to use nanohoop molecules as building
blocks to self-assemble into precise nanoscale materials with controlled shape
and function. Two forms of structures are envisioned: interlocked structures and
ring-in-ring structures. Novel synthetic approaches are to be explored to
achieve these objectives. The desired products are expected to have unique size-
dependent optoelectronic properties and shape persistent pores. The products
being targeted are of potential use in broad ranging fields from gas adsorption,
filtration and mass transport to molecular electronics, switching, and sensing.
Students involved in the project will be trained in an interdisciplinary
environment and acquire experience in organic synthesis, supramolecular
chemistry, and nanoscience. A partnership with the University of Oregon Summer
Science Program provides hands-on science experience to groups of students who
have been underserved in the state of Oregon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The assembly
of molecular building blocks into precise nanoscale materials with novel
function is a grand challenge at the nexus of materials science, supramolecular
chemistry, and synthesis. While synthetic approaches for the preparation of
nanohoops have been developed in the last decade, the self-assembly of these
nanohoops into nanoscale materials with controlled shape and function is
relatively unexplored. In the first aim of the project, the Jasti group will
explore nitrogen-doped nanohoop analogues and metal-coordination strategies to
prepare catenane structures, which would represent simple versions of molecular
machines. The Jasti group will probe these new catenane structures for novel
properties such as optoelectronic communication through the mechanical bond or
ultra-low friction motion on the nanoscale. In the second aim of this project,
the Jasti research team plans to use the hydrophobic effect to drive the
formation of ring-in-ring nanohoop complexes. These structures are molecular
analogues to double-walled carbon nanotubes and are predicted to have unique
optoelectronic properties and dynamics due to the supramolecular assembly of the
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.