* 2204899
* RUI: Demonstrating Control Over State-Mixing Interactions in Rydberg Excitation Near Förster Resonance
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Paula Turner, Kenyon College
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 07/31/2025
* USD 61,255.00

The field of quantum information is poised to revolutionize computation, data
security, and our understanding of fundamental science. In quantum computers,
individual units of information, or bits, are stored in single quantum objects.
Atoms are often used because they are electrically neutral and interact very
weakly, so fragile quantum states can remain undisturbed. However, to use atoms
to do a computation, they must be made to interact at the right time, and in the
right way. The key to solving this problem is the Rydberg excitation blockade,
which results when atoms are cooled to extremely low temperatures, and the
outermost electrons are excited to very large orbits. These highly excited atoms
interact, and the interactions can lead to a suppression of excitation into
high-lying states. This “blocking” of excitation has led to many important
breakthroughs in the pursuit of neutral atom quantum technologies. In this
project, the PI and coworkers will study a process that makes the blockade break
down: state-mixing interactions. When one tries to excite atoms to a particular
Rydberg state near an interaction resonance, the atoms can be mixed into other,
unwanted states with high probability. This grant will focus on developing tools
to control these state-mixing interactions, so their effect on the blockade can
be minimized. The PI and co-PI will also develop a research-based training
program for the lead tutors at Kenyon’s Math and Science Skills Center. The
training will focus on using metacognition, or thinking about one’s own
cognitive processes, when the tutors interact with students. The PIs hope to
increase students’ sense of self-efficacy in STEM courses, and enhance
persistence rates across STEM disciplines at Kenyon
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rydberg excitation blockade, or the
suppression of laser excitation due to strong interactions, is the key to using
neutral atoms to implement quantum information protocols. State-mixing
interactions, which result from couplings among multi-particle Rydberg states
near Förster resonance, can compromise this suppression under otherwise
favorable conditions. In recent work, the PI and his students showed that the
mechanism that causes large rates of state mixing depends sensitively on
experimental conditions. In the present project they will exploit this
sensitivity to develop a broad toolbox for control over state-mixing
interactions. This toolbox includes pulse duration, Rabi frequency, atom
separation, principal quantum number, and applied electric field. They will
compare their measurements with different theoretical models, characterized by
either two or three interacting particles. Finally, they will design a training
program in metacognition for lead tutors at Kenyon’s Math and Science Skills
Center, as a way to encourage cognitively efficient, but correct reasoning. They
will use research-validated instruments to measure changes in students’ self-
efficacy. Improved self-efficacy has been linked to a broad range of positive
outcomes, including persistence in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.