* 2204986
* Static Verification for Fearless GPU programming
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Tiago Cogumbreiro, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 05/31/2025
* USD 546,610.00

Programming Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) is an art currently reserved to
a&lt;br/&gt;select few experts, as unlocking the full potential of these devices
requires&lt;br/&gt;mastering an intricate hardware architecture and execution
model. Scientists and&lt;br/&gt;domain experts need to adapt their algorithms to
a programming model where&lt;br/&gt;simply changing the order in which data is
accessed can have a 10Ã— performance&lt;br/&gt;overhead, and off-by-one errors
can silently corrupt their data. The intent of&lt;br/&gt;this project is to
develop an infrastructure of complementary code analysis&lt;br/&gt;techniques
that include bug prevention, performance profiling, and bug&lt;br/&gt;repairing.
The project's novelties are in developing a holistic understanding
of&lt;br/&gt;performance and safety bugs, which considers the interactions
between various&lt;br/&gt;classes of bugs. The project's impacts are on making
GPU programming more&lt;br/&gt;accessible, by providing tools to all programmers
that simplify understanding&lt;br/&gt;parallel programming and hardware
architectures, thus enabling algorithm&lt;br/&gt;correctness and more in depth
performance analysis. An outcome of this project&lt;br/&gt;is improved developer
productivity and software sustainability, as the project&lt;br/&gt;aids in
writing correct and highly efficient GPU programs without
sacrificing&lt;br/&gt;either objectives. There is an expectation of interest
from industry (e.g., autonomous&lt;br/&gt;mobility, artificial intelligence
applications) as well as from academia and&lt;br/&gt;national laboratories. The
research lowers the barrier to entry of GPU&lt;br/&gt;programming, so it is
expected to widen the suitability of GPUs to more fields. The&lt;br/&gt;tools
that result from this project can empower students to understand bugs
in&lt;br/&gt;their code autonomously, leading to a more focused pedagogical
experience&lt;br/&gt;between the instructor and the
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the state of the art of
static verification for GPUs and&lt;br/&gt;other accelerator architectures, both
in terms of correctness and performance&lt;br/&gt;analysis. Static verification
aims to assess the requirements of software&lt;br/&gt;without executing the
program. Existing solutions suffer from a high rate of&lt;br/&gt;false alarms,
cannot handle large codes, or are unsound. Most importantly,&lt;br/&gt;existing
approaches either address performance or safety, but not both at
once.&lt;br/&gt;A key aspect of this project is an underlying static
verification&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure, a collection of analysis backed by
theoretical results, that&lt;br/&gt;enables novel and efficient tools that
better our understanding of existing&lt;br/&gt;software. Such verification
infrastructure is built around a novel and general&lt;br/&gt;intermediate
representation based on behavioral type theory, which
codifies,&lt;br/&gt;structures, and enforces the meaning of parallel programs.
The project expands&lt;br/&gt;our formal understanding of GPU programming
models, by introducing safety&lt;br/&gt;properties, semantics preserving
transformations, and behavioral equivalences,&lt;br/&gt;all fully mechanized
using a proof assistant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.