* 2204135
* Investigating the Importance of Bone Marrow Consumption in Human Evolution
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Michael Pante, Yezzi Woodley, Katrina E
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 05/31/2024
* USD 143,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Michael Pante
at the Department of Anthropology and Geography of Colorado State University,
this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist
investigating the importance of bone marrow to the evolution of our human
ancestors and the rise of hunting large animals for food. New technology will be
applied to analyze bone breakage patterns related to marrow procurement from
modern collections of broken animal bones as well as several zooarchaeological
collections that are important for our understanding of human origins.
Subsistence underpins human economics, and both the introduction of large
animals as a food resource and hunting represent dramatic shifts in subsistence
that had profound implications for human social behavior such as cooperation,
conflict, and cognition, and thus, major impacts on our evolutionary
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to test the role of
bone marrow as the avenue by which early humans began using large animal food
resources and its influence on the rise of the Human Predatory Pattern. Among
primates, the Human Predatory Pattern (HPP) is the uniquely human behavior of
hunting animals that are of equal or larger body size. Evolution of the HPP
involves two key innovations: active hunting and exploitation of large animal
food resources (LAFRs). The inclusion of LAFRs in the human diet and the HPP may
have set the stage for humans to become super-predators, and even precipitated
the origin of our genus, Homo. Yet, the mechanism through which this behavioral
pattern evolved is unclear. This project will leverage new technological
advances in 3D scanning, digital characterization, and machine learning,
combined with traditional methods, to analyze bone breakage patterns and test
the recently proposed hypothesis that the HPP derived from scavenging large
animals for in-bone nutrients. This hypothesis predicts that early humans were
breaking bones for marrow prior to other forms of butchery. This hypothesis will
be tested by taking a diachronic approach that compares signatures of bone
modifications made by early humans. Should the evidence confirm a transition in
human exploitation of LAFRs through time, this would support the hypothesis,
indicating that the rise of the genus Homo must be interpreted through the lens
of scavenging for in-bone nutrients as the precursor to the HPP. This project
comprises substantial intellectual merit, both within archaeological sciences
but also more broadly in any field where 3D object shape is used in research.
First, it will advance our understanding of human evolution by testing a major
hypothesis associated with the assembly of modern human behaviors. Second, it
will advance knowledge of human-carnivore interactions between 3.6 Ma (Late
Pliocene), 1.8 Ma and 0.9 Ma (Pleistocene), the earlier time period having
received little attention in this regard. Third, this project will develop
methods of data extraction using 3D models that are effective for machine
learning applications and broadly applicable to many other archaeological and
paleontological assemblages. Fourth, this work extends collaborations among
mathematicians, computer and data scientists, and paleoanthropologists to create
innovative technological tools to enable researchers (within and beyond
anthropology) to easily integrate their expertise with reliable and replicable
mathematical approaches to research on objects. Finally, this project will
create an extensive open-access database of research-quality 3D models and
datasets that will facilitate future research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.