* 2204272
* Syntactic Regulation and Adaptation in Bidialectal and Heritage Bilingual Speakers
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Sibylla Leon Guerrero, Leon Guerrero, Sibylla
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) and Linguistics
programs. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career
doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Julie Washington at the University of
California, Irvine this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist studying linguistic and cognitive processing adaptations among
speakers of dialectal varieties and heritage languages. Children’s brains are
famously plastic when exposed to multiple languages, with dramatic consequences
for the adult mind and brain in language and cognition. However, the benefits of
multilingual experience are most commonly studied in bilingual speakers of
English and other national European languages. In contrast, even proficient
speakers of highly prevalent minoritized language varieties, such as African
American English and Spanish-influenced English in the U.S., have largely been
evaluated from a deficit perspective in comparison to speakers of monodialectal,
monolingual General American English. As a result, we know little about how
proficient multidialectal speakers adapt to diverse language experience and
whether children who are exposed to early linguistic diversity at the dialect
level later accrue bilingual-like benefits in adolescence and young adulthood.
To better understand the nature and consequences of proficient, multidialectal
language experience, this research will examine reading behaviors and
corresponding brain activity with highly competent adult speakers of African
American and Spanish influenced English. By demonstrating the linguistic
competencies and highlighting the cognitive strengths of multidialectal
speakers, this project will contribute to a strengths-based understanding of two
of the largest minoritized language communities in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Differences in bilingual and monolingual written
sentence processing have been demonstrated in prior research using eye movement
as well as electroencephalographic (EEG) responses to index early word access
and expectations for meaning in response to incongruent or unexpected
grammatical elements. Although these indices of language understanding have
classically been used to characterize native-like language, little is known
about how highly proficient dialectal and heritage language speakers process
grammatical variation and how skilled language comprehension may be supported by
variations in processing that arises from diversity in early language
experience. To address this gap, the proposed research will examine eye
movements and EEG (N400 and P600) responses to verb forms characteristic of
dialectal and heritage syntax in African American English (AAE) and heritage
Spanish speakers, as well as the association of these responses with childhood
and concurrent language use and exposure. This research is the first systematic
neurolinguistic investigation of brain and behavior in written sentence
processing by bidialectal and heritage bilingual speakers and will make a unique
contribution to emerging knowledge that seeks to characterize the complexity and
interrelationship of diverse forms and timing of linguistic diversity with
language processing and comprehension. Further, by investigating bidialectal and
heritage language processing in their own right rather than in comparison to
monodialectal, monolingual English speakers, the proposed research contributes
to the recognition of the value of minoritized language forms and of
bidialectals’ and bilinguals’ unique linguistic and cognitive adaptations for
successful communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.