* 2204190
* Controlling Vibrationally-mediated Spin Dynamics Using Metal Nanostructure
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Kenneth Knappenberger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 05/31/2025
* USD 458,519.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Kenneth Knappenberger of
Pennsylvania State University is combining advanced laser techniques with
magnetic fields to study how the structure of metal nanoclusters and the motion
of their atoms affects the spin of their electrons. Electron spin plays an
important role in many emerging technologies but is difficult to study because
the vibrational motion of the nanocluster atoms results in rapid relaxation of
the electron spin. Professor Knappenberger and his students will address this
challenge by correlating electron spin lifetimes to interactions with specific
vibrational modes. An iterative process of magnetic-field laser spectroscopy and
metal nanocluster synthesis will be employed to understand electron spin
properties of metals. These fundamental studies could impact the advancement of
quantum-based technologies, as well as lead to more efficient catalysts, new
materials for reducing greenhouse gases, and the development of magnetic
materials and optical switches. The project will educate graduate and
undergraduate students in advanced experimental methods, as well as impact high
school students by providing research opportunities and career development
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal monolayer-protected nanoclusters
allow the synthesis of structurally well-defined metals that exhibit a diverse
range of tunable physical properties. This project is developing novel ligand-
exchange strategies in order to understand state-selective spin-vibrational
coupling in metal nanoclusters. Transient electronic spin states will be
characterized using variable-temperature magneto-photoluminescence spectroscopy,
as well as develop a Fourier transform magneto-photoluminescence technique for
measuring spin lifetimes and spin vibrational coupling. Experiments performed on
metal nanoclusters ranging in size from just a few atoms up to several hundred
will show the evolution of spin properties from the molecular to metallic
levels. Structural analysis will be accomplished using mass spectrometry, Raman
spectroscopy, UV-Visible absorption and circular dichroism spectroscopies, as
well as X-ray diffraction. The structural specificity of the metals is expected
to result in accurate structure-property correlations for spin dynamics in
nanoscale metals, which is necessary to accelerate progress in catalyst design
and quantum information sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.