* 2204825
* SBIR Phase I:  High-performance, ultra-compact 3D sensor enabled by metasurface flat optics
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Mikhail Shalaginov, 2PI INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 11/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project lies in the development of a lightweight, ultra-compact 3D sensor
offering enhanced performance compared to the current state-of-the-art. Existing
sensors on consumer electronic devices, such as those on augmented/virtual
reality headsets, are limited in their perception accuracy and detection range
resulting in a poor user experience, which has limited their implementation. The
technology developed in this project seeks to address these issues to create a
truly seamless and immersive interaction experience for users. The technology
may also improve the adoption of augmented/virtual reality technologies in
fields such as education, telecommuting, healthcare, industrial design, virtual
meetings, entertainment, and many others. The technology has the potential to
create new jobs in these fields, enhance human-to-machine interactions, and
improve connections within and between communities. This effort also supports
domestic photonics manufacturing and assembly
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will seeks to develop
a novel 3D sensor design that promises performance enhancement over state-of-
the-art devices. Building on a proprietary flat optics technology, the project
may lead to a 3D sensor module featuring panoramic vision, significant spatial
resolution improvements, enhanced signal-to-noise ratio, and a compact,
lightweight architecture amenable to low-cost manufacturing and assembly. The
project has two main goals: 1) demonstration of a 3D sensor prototype and
experimental validation of its performance and 2) development of scalable
manufacturing routes for fabrication of flat optics components leveraging
standard microfabrication technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.