* 2204729
* THE GENETIC BASIS OF LOCAL ADAPTATION ACROSS AN ISLAND ADAPTIVE RADIATION
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2026
* Elizabeth Stacy, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2026
* USD 1,184,175.00

Many species originate in dramatic bursts called adaptive radiations. How
adaptive radiations generate spectacular numbers of species over short time
periods is a fundamental question in evolutionary biology. Adaptive radiations
in remote islands are especially fascinating, given that such radiations
originate from founder populations with limited genetic variation, which is the
raw material for evolution. Understanding the genetic basis of adaptive
radiations on remote islands allows insight into not only the origin of species
(and, hence, biodiversity), but also how species will respond to rapid climate
change. This project will uncover the genetic basis of adaptation to extreme
water availability (drought and flooding) in Metrosideros, an adaptive radiation
of woody species that dominate Hawaii’s forests. The results will reveal how
often recurring adaptation to very wet and very dry environments relies on the
recycling of ancient genes present in the founder population versus new genes
arising through mutation. Repeated adaptation through the recycling of ancient
genes would help to explain how adaptive radiations occur and would suggest that
species are able to adapt to rapid climate change. In particular, this project
will reveal insights into how trees will cope with the increased drought and
flooding expected with climate change. The project will also train one
technician, 2 Ph.D. students, and several undergraduates in cutting-edge
technologies and analyses, provide bioinformatics training to federal and state
agency staff and students, faculty, and staff at two Minority-Serving
Institutions, and develop G6-12 curriculum related to plant adaptation and
response to climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
apply an evolutionary systems biology approach to Hawaii’s landscape-dominant
woody genus, Metrosideros, to characterize the genetic basis of local adaptation
to water availability across an island adaptive radiation. The project will take
advantage of the relatively small genome size and high-quality chromosome-level
reference genome; parental, F1, and F2 lines; and population-level resequencing
data available for Metrosideros to accomplish 3 aims: Aim 1) contrast seedling
physiology and patterns of gene expression between replicate dry- and wet-
adapted taxa in response to drought and water-logging, Aim 2) identify
phenotypic traits and quantitative trait loci (QTL) for resistance to drought or
water-logging and identify QTL that colocalize with differentially expressed
genes (DEGs), and Aim 3) examine the evolution of the colocalized DEG-QTL
regions (and non-intersecting, but significant QTL) across the Hawaiian
Metrosideros adaptive radiation to test the prediction that recurring adaptation
to parallel environments involves recurring selection on shared genomic regions
of predominantly ancestral origin. By investigating the genetic basis of local
adaptation across an island adaptive radiation, this project will help to solve
the long-standing evolutionary problem of how spectacular phenotypic and
ecological diversity can arise from founder populations with limited genetic
variation. Specifically, results will reveal the degree to which recurring
adaptation to parallel environments draws on the same genomic regions in
different taxa and the relative importance of shared ancestral variation,
introgression, and de novo mutations for parallel evolution within an isolated
radiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.