* 2204933
* Collaborative Research: Research Initiation: Complementary affordances of virtual and physical laboratories for developing engineering epistemic practices
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Jeffrey Nason, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,990.00

In addition to being able to competently perform engineering calculations,
professional engineers must be prepared to work effectively in teams, consider
problems in context, make evidence-based decisions, and persist and learn from
failure. Laboratory work provides an important tool for professional formation,
allowing university engineering students to develop these skills. Successful
laboratory task designs should provide rich opportunities to develop these
skills but also must fit into the constraints of the educational setting. This
study will investigate the ways that a virtual (simulation-based) and physical
(hands-on) laboratory based on the same realistic engineering process prepares
students for the profession. In particular, we will investigate if the virtual
and physical laboratory modes develop different but complementary skills. The
knowledge gained will better position engineering educators to design and employ
virtual and physical laboratories, including cases where students are place-
bound and may not have access to physical equipment. While this study will focus
on a process specific to environmental engineering, the knowledge gained has the
potential to broadly impact teaching and learning practices across all
engineering and science disciplines that rely on laboratory investigation in the
curriculum. The knowledge gained will also contribute to increased access to
STEM disciplines by supporting on-line courses and degree programs. Finally, we
will develop increased capacity in engineering education research through the
intentional mentoring of one university faculty member and the training and
development of two graduate students.

Through a microgenetic analysis of the activity of four student teams engaging
in both the virtual and physical versions of the same laboratory, we will
develop transferrable knowledge of how laboratory mode and instructional design
influence students’ participation in epistemic practices. Epistemic practices
are the socially organized and interactionally accomplished ways that members of
a group propose, communicate, justify, assess, and legitimize knowledge claims.
Specifically, in this PFE:RIEF project, research and mentoring activity will be
organized around the investigation of a laboratory in the environmental
engineering discipline – the Jar Test Laboratory for Water Treatment. Jar
testing is a laboratory procedure commonly used by design engineers and drinking
water treatment plant operators to optimize physical and chemical conditions for
the effective coagulation, flocculation and settling of particulate contaminants
from water. The central hypothesis of this work is that physical laboratories
foreground social and material epistemic practices while virtual laboratories
foreground social and conceptual epistemic practices. We will employ three
primary data sources: (1) video records and researcher observation of the teams
as they complete the laboratory; (2) semi-structured stimulated recall
interviews of the students and laboratory instructors; and, (3) student work
products. We will use discourse analysis from the student recordings and coding
of the stimulated recall interviews to answer the following research questions:
(1) In what ways and to what extent does conducting an experiment in a physical
mode to develop a process recommendation influence students’ engineering
epistemic practices? (2) In what ways and to what extent does conducting an
experiment in a virtual mode to develop a process recommendation influence
students’ engineering epistemic practices? (3) How do students in each
laboratory mode respond to being “stuck”? Do students’ views on the iterative
nature of science/engineering and their tolerance for mistakes depend on the
instructional design afforded by the laboratory mode?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.