* 2204308
* EAR-PF: Detecting dynamic topography in interglacial Caribbean sea level
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Samuel Goldberg, Goldberg, Samuel L
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 12/31/2022
* USD 41,255.00

The warm period ~120,000 years ago was the last time that Earth’s global climate
was warmer than the present and is an example of what the Earth might look like
in a warmer future. During this time, ice sheets were smaller than today,
causing higher mean sea levels. Geologic evidence for higher sea levels includes
the fossil coral reefs that make up the Florida Keys, and similar features
throughout the Caribbean region and elsewhere. However, these geologic records
indicate that the maximum sea level reached during this warm period was
different in different places around the world. This study aims to unravel the
various contributing factors to the spatial variability in sea level during this
time. In particular, this research seeks to identify the influence of mantle
dynamic topography, the deformation of Earth’s surface by the flow of Earth’s
mantle, on sea level. By better constraining the different factors affecting sea
level, this research will improve scientists’ understanding of spatial patterns
of sea-level change and the sensitivity of ice sheets to climate change. These
advances will help scientists better predict future sea levels under a warming
climate. More broadly, this research will illuminate the conditions under which
the South Florida landscape was formed under shallow marine conditions during
the warm period 120,000 years ago, and the risks it faces from ongoing and
future sea-level rise. This project includes an educational component to raise
awareness of the geologic history and future climate risks the densely populated
Miami region where this research will be performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sea-
level rise is a globally pressing concern, but substantial uncertainty exists
with both the sensitivity of ice sheets to warming and in the patterns of
spatially variable sea-level change. Both components can be constrained by the
study of past sea-level change. This project seeks to constrain the influence of
mantle dynamic topography on spatio-temporal variations in sea level in the
greater Caribbean region during the last interglacial period, ~120,000 years
ago. This was the most recent time that global mean sea level was higher than
present, and thus can inform scientists’ understanding of how sea level might
change on a future warmer earth. However, past and future sea level are
influenced by spatially variable solid earth deformation, including the dynamic
topography resulting from mantle flow. To improve scientific understanding of
this process, this project will combine numerical modeling with geologic sea-
level data. The first component of the project is the development of high-
resolution global models of mantle flow, which predict the magnitude and rate of
change of dynamic topography across the greater Caribbean region. The second
component is the compilation of a regionally comprehensive dataset of
interglacial sea level indicators to reveal spatial trends in sea level across
the region. By combining these data with modeling results and published glacial
isostatic adjustment predictions in a statistical inversion, this project will
estimate the dynamic topography change and its contribution to spatial
variability in sea level across the region and global mean sea level at the last
interglacial. These results will improve scientists’ understanding both of
spatial variability in sea-level change and of the sensitivity of ice sheets and
global mean sea level to changes in climate. This project also includes a public
education campaign to increase awareness of the marine origins of the populous
South Florida landscape, formed during the last interglacial period, and of the
hazards of sea-level rise in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.