* 2204746
* LSAMP BD:  Northeastern University Nominated by the Northeast Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation  GROWING the Northeastern LSAMP BD STARS Fellowship Pathway
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Sara Wadia-Fascetti, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,074,840.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts to significantly increase the number of students successfully completing
high-quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences supporting groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines:
African-Americans, Alaska Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The Bridge to the Doctorate (BD)
Activity supports postbaccalaureate studies in STEM programs leading to the STEM
doctoral degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northeastern University (NU) is the host
site for the 2022-2024 BD program for the Northeast Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (NE-LSAMP) under the leadership of the University of
Connecticut. NU will support the second cohort of Strategic Advancement of
Rising Scholars(STARS), an LSAMP-supported postbaccalaureate program consisting
of a student cohort of 12 STEM undergraduate alumni recruited from LSAMP
campuses across the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STARS program incorporates
a six Rs model of recruitment, reflection, resources, recourse, retention, and
rise. Students receive rigorous academic and experiential research training that
supports the completion of the STEM Ph.D. and the transition to a competitive
career in academia and industry. Faculty STEM mentor training and development,
along with culturally relevant STEM mentoring and evaluation, are prominent
features of the program that includes linkages to the National Mentoring
Research Network (NMRN), the Louis Stokes Midwest Regional Center of Excellence,
and Indiana LSAMP projects. A multi-disciplinary cohort will be recruited.
However, the project also leverages programming from a recently-funded NSF
INCLUDES project that increases diversity in the engineering
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formative and summative evaluation activities
include evaluation and assessment of the project's implementation and student
outcomes. Project results and annual evaluation reports will be disseminated
through the Northeast Alliance and NU's website and at STEM professional
conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term impact of the BD activity is
reflected in America's STEM workforce, both in academia and in industrial
research and development. The value added by nurturing future STEM leaders is
seen in the visibility of underrepresented groups in science and engineering,
increasing representation, and providing role models and STEM leadership for the
next generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.