* 2204658
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Initial Landscape Peopling
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Anne Parfitt, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 21,265.00

Little is known of the adaptive strategies used by modern humans who initially
populated early unfamiliar landscapes, or how much variation existed in these
strategies – processes that can be revealed through archaeology. This doctoral
dissertation project will investigate the strategies used by the first people to
settle such a region. It was covered in glacial ice, meaning the early sites
here are likely not far removed from the first expansion of people into the
area, making it an ideal region in which to study adaptations to an unknown
land. The results of this study will help illuminate the adaptive processes used
by pioneering groups in the Americas and will have relevance to other peopling
processes in human history. This project will contribute as well by using
previously excavated archaeological collections: many archaeological sites are
excavated but then never thoroughly analyzed, leading to a loss of research
potential and money spent excavating and housing site collections, especially as
available museum storage space declines. The use of museum collections is
especially important in this case, as they may include rare examples of a
fundamental process of human history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate the
adaptive strategies of the early populations in this region, research will focus
on six sites found across the study area. These sites are part of a group of
unique, large basecamp sites with complex spatial patterning that occur
throughout the region. While these base camps must have been occupied soon after
the region was populated, their exact relationship to the broader peopling
process is still unclear. Stone tool raw material source representation and
procurement patterns, as inferred from macroscopic source analyses and
geochemical source analyses, will provide information on landscape familiarity
and mobility patterns. Stone tool technological analyses, including tool and
projectile point morphology, tool diversity, and tool use diversity, will be
used to infer mobility patterns, site activities, and technological strategies
meant to mitigate risk, with the assumption that risk minimization strategies
will be more pronounced at sites in which people were less familiar with the
surrounding landscape. By examining patterns and variation among these six
sites, the researchers will be able to investigate the adaptive strategies of
populations in a new landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.