* 2204440
* EAR-PF: Experimental Constraints on Dating Ductile Deformation with Titanite
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Amy Moser, Moser, Amy Catherine
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 12/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Plate tectonics - the theory that the outermost later of Earth is divided into
rigid plates that move - is the fundamental theory that explains nearly all
Earth processes. The motion of these tectonic plates causes rocks to break and
change shape. This breaking and shape change (also known as deformation) of
rocks deep within the Earth builds mountains and produces earthquakes. To better
understand how and why mountains are built and earthquakes occur, Earth
scientists must be able to pinpoint when and how fast these processes happen.
Doing so requires a method or tool that Earth scientists can use to date
deformation (i.e., to determine when deformation has occurred in the past).
Despite its importance, there is no straightforward way to date deformation. The
goal of this project is to develop a tool to date deformation using laboratory
experiments on a mineral called titanite. Earth scientists will be able to apply
the results of this project to rocks in nature to determine when and how fast
deformation has happened in the past, thereby filling a fundamental knowledge
gap in Earth science research. In addition, as the Earth sciences are among the
least diverse STEM fields, this work also aims to improve the diversity, equity,
and inclusion of this scientific subdiscipline through outreach activities with
K–12 students and by mentoring undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups in research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the fundamentals
of tectonic processes, including plate boundary initiation, deformation
feedbacks at all crustal levels, and strain partitioning, relies in part on
constraining the timing, duration, and rates of crustal deformation. Despite its
significance, the ability to directly date ductile deformation remains an
outstanding challenge in Earth science research. The mineral titanite (chemical
formula CaTiSiO5) is well-suited to date crustal deformation. However, the
multitude of processes that recrystallize titanite in shear zones makes it
challenging to assess how to tie dates to deformation using natural rocks. The
goal of this project is to use high-pressure, high-temperature titanite
deformation experiments to develop a new tool to date high-temperature (i.e.,
&gt;400 °C) deformation. The products of the deformation experiments will be
characterized using various electron microscopy techniques, including electron
backscatter diffraction (to quantify deformation microstructures and determine
the deformation mechanisms that accommodated strain) and X-ray mapping (to
determine compositional zoning that developed during experiments). The
relationship among these features and U-Pb dates (evaluated using a combination
of secondary ion mass spectrometry and atom probe tomography) will reveal how
the development of deformation microstructures affects the U-Pb system in
titanite. These integrated datasets will inform the best practices for dating
crustal deformation with titanite in naturally deformed rocks, thereby providing
a transformative advancement in Earth science research. The broader impacts of
this work will focus on improving the diversity, equity, and inclusion of the
Earth sciences through outreach activities with youth-facing organizations and
by mentoring undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.