* 2204667
* Charge State Conversion, Dynamics, and Single Photon Emission from Diamond using High Voltage Nanosecond Pulse Discharge
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Stephen Cronin, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2025
* USD 460,000.00

Single photon emission (SPE) is important for quantum communication and quantum
information processing. While SPE from diamond has been studied extensively over
the past 20 years, most of these studies have been all-optical (using external
pulsed lasers), and there have been relatively few on their electro-optic or
optoelectronic effects (excluding microwave excitation). In order to utilize
these quantum emitters in real systems for quantum communication and quantum
information processes, some form of electron-based modulation will likely be
needed. This project uses high voltage nanosecond pulses (&gt;5kV and &lt;50
nsec) to control the charge state of these defects, which opens up new
parameters in the design of practical quantum communication systems. For
example, the ability to modulate the emission wavelength of a single quantum
emitter can provide an important capability in the optical read-out of these
quantum emitters and for encoding quantum information. Also, there are several
key difficulties in producing efficient electrically-driven light emission from
diamond, which have greatly limited their potential use in practical
applications. These challenges include difficulty injecting charge carriers due
to the large Schottky barrier associated with these wide bandgap semiconductors.
This project explores several strategies for overcoming these challenges. Once
these challenges have been overcome, diamond pn-junctions may provide a good
platform for producing electrically-driven single
photons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore novel mechanisms of
light emission from diamond using high voltage nanosecond pulses (&gt;5kV and
&lt;50 nsec). This approach can selectively produce emission from the negatively
charged state of silicon-vacancy defects in diamond (i.e., SiVâ€“), which exhibits
narrow (FWHM = 4 nm at room temperature) emission at 738 nm, as distinct from
the charge neutral state (i.e., SiV0) which emits around 946 nm. This project
explores lower defect densities (i.e., single defect emission) than were
previously studied, measuring charge-spin coupling (via ODMR), lifetimes and
dynamics, and time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) measurements. The
project will also explore electroluminescence from diamond pn-junctions,
coupling to photonic crystal cavities and waveguides, and scaling these devices
down to smaller sizes that operate at lower voltages. High voltage nanosecond
pulse discharges enable extremely high peak fields to be achieved with
negligible heating, providing an additional degree of freedom in the
manipulation of this well-studied quantum emitter. While manipulation of spin
states can be attained easily through magnetic resonance excitation (i.e.,
electron spin resonance and ODMR), charge state manipulation is not well-
established, and techniques for manipulating this important quantum number are
lacking. By mapping the luminescence of these devices systematically over a wide
range of diamond substrates and voltage pulse parameters, a fundamental
understanding of both classical and quantum light emission can be developed, in
order to answer several open questions regarding this voltage-induced modulation
of the charge state and the emission of Si-vacancy defects in diamond. The
project will provide quantum information science education at various grade
levels from elementary school to high school students. In addition, a module
devoted to nanoscale classical and quantum optoelectronics will be developed for
a new nanoscience course, and the research accomplishments under this grant will
be discussed in class and integrated into the
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.