* 2204990
* RAPID: Citizen Perspectives on Peace, Security and Human Rights in a Post-Conflict Environment
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Charli Carpenter, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 01/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

NSF AWARD ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;RAPID: Citizen Perspectives on Peace, Security,
and Human Rights in a Post-Conflict Environment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
international community often struggles with the dilemma of how to manage
relations with new regimes that come to power by force. On the one hand,
policies that sanction and isolate these new regimes can lead to deprivation for
civilians. On the other hand, the provision of economic and humanitarian aid to
vulnerable civilians can stabilize such regimes. This project will gather and
analyze new survey data on public opinion regarding these dilemmas of peace,
security, and human rights in a post-conflict environment. The project will
examine potential differences in public attitudes on peacebuilding and human
rights by gender and ethnicity. The findings of this project will be of
practical use to US national security policymakers in guiding a strategic
approach to relations with new regimes in post-conflict countries. Additionally,
the new surveys will help fill a data vacuum on the preferences of conflict-
affected civilians, especially women, regarding international support and how to
best address dilemmas of stabilization and peacebuilding in conflict-affected
countries.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will field three public opinion
surveys in a post-conflict country, using novel random domain intercept
technology to collect random, secure, anonymous samples of public opinion of
internet users. The multi-wave surveys will enable the testing of hypotheses in
real-time on a) whether public views on human rights and peace and security
differ between men and women and across different ethnic groups and geographical
regions, and b) how attitudes shift as the domestic and international security
situation evolves. The findings of this research will contribute to the
scientific literatures on gender and security, public opinion on national
security in developing countries, and domestic sources of support for human
rights (including women’s rights) and peacebuilding in post-conflict
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.