* 2204206
* CAS:Rigidochromism in Polynuclear Metal-azole Macrocycles and Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Alexander Wei, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program B,
Professor Alexander Wei at Purdue University will develop new luminescent
(light-emitting) molecules. Advances in organic light-emitting devices (OLEDs)
depend on chemically stable materials that emit at red, green and especially
blue wavelengths. This research focuses on the synthesis and luminescent
properties of rigid, saddle-shaped molecules which are held together with copper
ions. One important question is why these molecules are rigid. Some of these
light-emitting copper complexes can also switch colors in response to changes in
their environment and may beapplied as chemical sensors. Grant activities are
aimed at understanding the relationships between molecular structure and
photophysical properties. This research has the potential to facilitate advances
in the design of flexible solid-state lighting and displays through innovative
experiments that can convey these relationships to students and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research activities in this project will include:
(i) correlating azole structure with rigidochromic behavior of the corresponding
copper complexes; (ii) developing orthogonal approaches for tuning molecular
energy band levels of solid-state emitters; (iii) designing metal‒organic
frameworks (MOFs) that align excited-state dipoles for uniaxial emission. All
objectives have important ramifications for the design of emissive materials
with potential applications in the development of efficient OLEDs. These
objectives are rooted in fundamental materials research based on the principles
of supramolecular chemistry. In addition, these colorful complexes offer
educational opportunities to demonstrate important chemical concepts to students
and the public at large. As part of a K-12 outreach activity in association with
the Purdue Department of Chemistry, Professor Wei and his team will design
luminescent test strips that can produce green light when heated, and blue light
when exposed to volatile hydrocarbons such as gasoline
vapor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.