* 2204339
* Rigidity and Boundaries in Non-Positive Curvature
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Emily Stark, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2025
* USD 211,013.00

As long as mathematics has been studied, people have sought to understand the
relationship between geometry and symmetry. The Euclidean plane is most
familiar, closely followed by the sphere. It has long been known that one cannot
periodically tile the plane using the same arrangement of shapes as one would
the sphere. This can be understood mathematically through the geometric notion
of curvature: the plane is flat while the sphere is positively curved. This
project concerns the vast universe of non-Euclidean geometries with non-positive
curvature. The PI will investigate asymptotic invariants and rigidity phenomena
in this setting, while supporting student involvement and broadened
participation in mathematics via mentoring and community outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research concerns finitely generated
groups and their large-scale geometry. The first project investigates graphical
discreteness, a notion that unifies two distinct programs of study: rigidity
phenomena and classifying lattice envelopes. The former has been a central
problem in geometric group theory, while the latter was initiated with Mostow--
Prasad Rigidity, which characterized Lie group envelopes of hyperbolic manifold
groups. The PI will consider a diverse family of examples, including hyperbolic
groups with Menger curve boundary and groups that split as graphs of groups. The
second project focuses on hyperbolic groups with Menger compacta visual
boundaries and will build techniques to study the quasi-conformal structures on
these spaces. The third project aims to study relatively hyperbolic groups and
their boundaries via analytic methods and quasi-conformal
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.