* 2204045
* Tuning the Thermodynamics and Kinetics of H+ and e- Transfer in Nanoconfined Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Mark Lipke, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 488,730.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Mark Lipke of Rutgers, The State University of
New Jersey will design and study the chemical properties of hollow molecular
cages. This project aims to provide detailed insights into how the acidity and
electron-transfer properties of chemical species are altered when confined in
nanometer-sized cavities. This fundamental knowledge is important for the
development of chemical processes and catalytic materials for applications in
advanced manufacturing. Alongside these efforts, the PI and his students will
give talks at local high schools to illustrate how high school level chemical
concepts are useful in cutting edge research. Dr. Lipke will also provide
research internships for high school students and will develop new teaching
materials for undergraduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be
carried out using modular porphyrin nanocages that provide control over
solvation and noncovalent interactions in nanoconfined environments to probe how
these variables influence the thermodynamics and kinetics of H+ and e− transfer
processes, including proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) processes that are
essential to many electrochemical transformations. This work has three aims. Aim
I will develop robust, redox-active nanocages of different sizes, shapes, and
H-bonding abilities that are well-suited to systematic chemical and
electrochemical studies. Aim II will systematically measure how the pKa values
and reduction potentials of encapsulated guests are affected by low relative
permittivity nanocavities. Aim III will examine how the kinetics of H+ and e–
transport to guest molecules bound in the nanocages can be controlled. The
nanocages that will be employed in these studies can be characterized in both
solution and the solid state, enabling detailed solution-phase mechanistic
experiments to be performed on nanoporous structures that can be characterized
with atomic resolution in the solid state. This research will make significant
contributions to the mechanistic understanding of H+ and e− transfer processes
in nanoconfined spaces, which in turn, will be useful for informing the rational
design of porous structures with tunable properties for these important chemical
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.