* 2204538
* ADVANCE Partnership: Assessing Differential Faculty Contributions and Aligning Faculty Advancement with Mission Values
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jodi O'Brien, Seattle University
* Continuing Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 663,820.00

The three partner institutions, Gonzaga University, Saint Louis University, and
Seattle University propose to revise faculty advancement processes to be more
comprehensive and aligned with their shared Jesuit mission. The project will
increase recognition by faculty and administrators of a broader, more inclusive
range of faculty contributions, develop a toolkit for assigning merit to and
evaluating these activities and provide intentional faculty development to align
with the newly recognized range of faculty career pathways. This project builds
on the Participatory Action Research (PAR) Model used by Seattle University in a
prior ADVANCE Institutional Transformation award (NSF 1629875). That project
resulted in revised guidelines for promotion that explicitly incorporated under-
valued activities that are essential and beneficial to students, universities,
and communities yet are not traditionally considered during STEM faculty tenure
and promotion processes. This project initiates similar structural changes
within the two partnering institutions while also developing a toolkit to
evaluate these under-valued activities done by faculty. A long-term goal of the
project is to encourage this type of cultural change across the twenty-eight
institutional members of the Association of Jesuit Colleges and Universities
(AJCU). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project activities will result in a toolkit for
assigning merit to and evaluating traditionally under-valued faculty activities,
which can be adapted by other types of institutions, including minority-serving
institutions and other similar comprehensive institutions. There is a widespread
need in higher education for STEM faculty evaluation measures that align with
the full range of activities institutions need to complete to meet their
educational, research, and community missions. Aligned evaluation measures are
essential since many of these activities are often done by faculty identifying
as women, members of a racial or ethnic group that is underrepresented in STEM,
or both.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster
gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Partnership" awards provide support for the
adaptation and adoption of evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit
institutions of higher education and non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.