* 2204543
* EAR-PF: Dynamic flow channeling through complex fracture networks under multi-frequency oscillatory flow conditions: A fully-coupled hydromechanical approach
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Jeremy Patterson, Patterson, Jeremy R
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 09/30/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Jeremy R. Patterson has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
research flow channeling through complex rock fracture networks at Rice
University with Dr. Jonathan Ajo-Franklin in collaboration with Dr. Matthew W.
Becker at California State University – Long Beach. The deep subsurface
represents an important and increasingly utilized resource where hot water can
be extracted for energy and carbon can be sequestered. However, these strategies
require a thorough knowledge of how fluids move through the deep subsurface,
which is complicated by the presence of fractures – a common feature in most
deep rocks –limiting our ability to predict the behavior of these deep rock
formations in response to fluid extraction or injection. These fractures
frequently form inter-connected networks of fast flow pathways that can focus
subsurface fluid flows; however, existing testing methods limit our ability to
understand how subsurface flows are concentrated through these networks of
fractures. The purpose of this project is to further develop new methods aimed
at better understanding how complex, inter-connected networks of rock fractures
channelize fluid flow throughout the subsurface. Further, this project seeks to
expose students in the Houston Independent School District, a majority-minority
school district, to the importance of groundwater resources and the impact of
fractures on groundwater flows through the building of a highly portable, hands-
on educational tool and companion video production that can be easily
distributed to classrooms throughout the school
district.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural rock fractures comprise a very small
fraction of deep groundwater systems, yet they dominate subsurface flows by
concentrating fluids in a channelized manner along highly transmissive
fractures, commonly referred to as a hydraulic backbone. This proposal will
investigate the formation and evolution of this hydraulic backbone with
variations in the temporal scale of hydraulic testing using a fully-coupled,
hydromechanical modeling approach to analyze previously collected data at Mirror
Lake Fractured Rock Experimental Site. The results of this research will provide
a temporal analysis that shows this hydraulic backbone is not a static, but
rather a dynamic structure that changes with the timescale of hydraulic testing,
resulting in significant changes to subsurface flow and transport. Combined with
dynamic fracture displacement measurements, the work in this proposal represents
the first use of multi-frequency oscillatory flow testing to explore the dynamic
nature of flow concentration along a hydraulic backbone through complex fracture
networks under a fully-coupled hydromechanical framework. The results of the
proposed research will provide a framework that improves fracture flow and
transport modeling simulations, reducing the risk of anomalous breakthrough
locations observed in fractured groundwater systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.