* 2204209
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Early Prehistoric Human Ecology
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Lauren Pratt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2024
* USD 25,200.00

More so than any other animal, humans are able to adapt their behaviors to meet
the challenges of a wide range of environments. They also alter their
environments to better suit their needs. By investigating human-environment
interactions across diverse ecological settings and throughout time,
archaeologists are able to identify and study precise ways in which human groups
exhibit resilience in the face of change. In this project a doctoral candidate
at the University of Michigan, will collaborate with colleagues and local
stakeholders to investigate the relationship between early humans and their
prehistoric environments at a mountain - rainforest intersection. The results of
this research will contribute important new information to scientists’
understanding of how humans and later developed native agricultural systems
which remain important today. This project also represents an international
collaboration among women in STEM, providing opportunities for publication and
career advancement. Finally, by hiring from descendant communities and engaging
in community outreach, the project will engage local indigenous groups in the
preservation and caretaking of their own cultural
heritage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although humans have come to occupy nearly every
terrestrial habitat on the planet, archaeologists have long believed that some
places are more attractive than others, particularly for prehistoric hunter-
gatherers who drew their daily resources for survival directly from their
surroundings. Places that present the most obstacles and afford the fewest
opportunities are generally referred to as “marginal,” and are epitomized by
arctic tundra and tropical deserts. Archaeologists have long debated whether
tropical rainforests belong in this group because much of the superabundant life
there—the tremendous richness and diversity of plants and animals—is either
inedible or inaccessible to humans. However, determining rainforests’ actual
suitability to humans is difficult because very few hunter-gatherer sites have
been found in such regions. This project will address that shortfall by
investigating potential hunter-gatherer sites in a cloud forest,. Caves across
two valleys will be excavated in order to locate sites of interest. By analyzing
the stone tools, plant and animal remains, and other kinds of archaeological
evidence uncovered, this project will evaluate whether this environment was as
challenging to early humans as is widely believed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.