* 2204565
* EAR PF: Examining paleoclimatic influences underlying Pleistocene-Holocene mammalian dietary ecology and trophic positioning in mainland Southeast Asia
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Alliya Akhtar, Akhtar, Alliya
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Alliya Akhtar has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and education plans at Princeton University and William Paterson
University. As global climate, hydrology and human land uses continue to change,
the full extent of the impact on biodiversity and ecosystems is a topic of great
interest. Today, mainland southeast Asia is one of the world’s most vulnerable
regions to climate change. For example, even slight changes in the intensity and
timing of the monsoon rainfall can significantly impact the billions of people
who live in this region, by affecting water supplies for human use, agriculture,
and faunal assemblages. This research aims to better understand the interplay
between these aspects in the present day, and the possible impact on future
ecosystems, by looking at the geological record. The end-Pleistocene (11,700
years ago) to mid-Holocene (5,000 years ago) period of mainland Southeast Asia
represents a critical interval in the co-evolution of climate, natural
ecosystems, and human societies. This period includes the termination of the
last great ice age ∼ 10,000 years ago and a dynamic and variable Asian monsoon.
Associated increases in temperature and precipitation likely influenced the
biotic resources of the region. In addition, changes in land use by human
populations at this time likely resulted in landscape changes from new agrarian
and subsistence-based practices (including forest clearance) that could have
further impacted faunal assemblages and affected regional climate and hydrology.
The development of a comprehensive, multi-proxy record will aid in understanding
the role of paleoenvironment on faunal food-web dynamics and evolution of human
behavior. Dr. Akhtar will also involve students from historically
underrepresented minority affiliations (especially undergraduates from William
Paterson University, a designated Hispanic-serving institution) in every aspect
of the research project through summer research experiences and mentorship
through senior thesis and capstone projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Akhtar’s
research agenda will follow three themes. First, exploring the utility of novel
geochemical proxies (including stable isotopes of calcium, magnesium and zinc)
for trophic level dynamics in modern mammalian taxa with known foraging
behaviors. Second, leveraging the results of this multi-proxy survey to help to
guide the interpretation of similar studies conducted across a variety of
terrestrial faunal materials, including late-Pleistocene and Holocene aged
fossil tooth assemblages from southeast Asia. Third, conducting trace-element
uptake experiments to study the incorporation of uranium (U) and other rare
earth elements (REEs) in hopes to refine models of diffusive uranium
incorporation and U-series dating protocols for accurate and precise age
determination. Together, these three nodes constitute an important foundation
for testing the impact of changing regional and local hydroclimate on megafaunal
trophic level and food web dynamics in southeast Asian from the Late Pleistocene
to mid-Holocene, and have profound implications for projecting ecosystem
behavior in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.