* 2204077
* New advances in cyclopentadiene based materials
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Javier Read de Alaniz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 495,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Read de Alaniz of University of
California at Santa Barbara will construct polymers capable of self-healing and
de-polymerizing using “click” chemistry that leverages non-toxic, metal-free,
and inexpensive building blocks. To translate this chemistry for biological
utility an aqueous soluble photo-click platform will be developed. The
successful realization of this goal will provide the high-resolution spatial
control over chemical functionalization required to pattern biomaterials for
applications in 3D printing and tissue engineering. Simultaneously this project
aims to provide outstanding educational opportunities for students at multiple
levels, with a particular focus on those from underrepresented groups. A key
broader impact aspect of the proposed research will be the highly
interdisciplinary nature of this project that will train and educate the next-
generation scientists with broad multidisciplinary skills in organic and polymer
synthesis and characterization. Outreach activities leveraging virtual/hybrid
educational science talks and lessons for 1st and 2nd grade students will also
be developed. The structure will allow young students to meet scientists and
provide graduate students an opportunity to communicate their work to a broader
audience.

While the value of Diels–Alder “click” chemistry in material synthesis is well-
established, exploration of the strategy for constructing homopolymers using a
single-component monomer system is almost completely unknown. Through the
proposed studies, access to telechelic cyclopentadiene monomers that are
otherwise impossible to prepare will become accessible. Furthermore, the
development of the proposed reactions will broadly increase our fundamental
understanding of this new approach that have important applications in many
fields of chemistry. By developing a light-triggered approach to access
cyclopentadiene, the new strategy will also provide the high-resolution spatial
control over chemical functionalization required to pattern biomaterials and
move beyond current state of the art. Altogether, the one- and two-component
cyclopentadiene based materials will address a long-standing challenge of
preparing homopolymers with a single component telechelic monomer, and serve as
a valuable new addition to the arsenal of available Diels–Alder “click”
reactions for preparing functional biomaterials with spatial and temporal
control. To accomplish this work, the following specific aims will be pursued:
(1) utilize on-demand, metal-free deprotection of norbornadiene with tetrazine
to access and isolate cyclopentadiene based monomers for single-component
Diels–Alder-based polymerization and (2) develop a photo-click platform based on
photolabile norbornadiene–cyclopentadienone adducts for spatiotemporal
introduction of cyclopentadiene in materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.