* 2204959
* Research Initiation: Explore student virtual collaborations to prepare for future digital education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Dong Zhao, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 216,000.00

Collaboration skills in the virtual environment are critical to the future
workforce in the architecture, construction, and engineering industry since
virtual design and construction is becoming a work style and culture for
construction projects in the United States. In addition, the ongoing trend of
digital education (e-learning) provides a great potential to foster engineering
students' virtual collaboration skills. A wide range of disciplines including
civil engineering programs have started to offer students e-learning
opportunities. Since 2010, more than 5,000 online courses have emerged and this
number is growing. Many institutions have changed their instructional modality
to include online or hybrid approaches and the trend of e-learning is expected
to continue in the post-pandemic era. Thus, there is a critical and urgent need
to investigate the collaboration characteristics and processes of engineering
students in the virtual environment. This project will prepare the engineering
education community to better foster students’ professional skills in the future
era of digital education. Specifically, this project will improve strategies for
the design and execution of digital courses or modules that benefit engineering
faculty, administrators, and practitioners who are involved in leading,
developing, or managing e-learning programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;E-learning
refers to the use of digital technology for learning purposes such as online
learning, virtual learning, distance education, and mobile learning. The goal of
this initiation project is to explore student collaboration in the virtual
environment. The specific objectives of this project include: to describe
student collaboration characteristics; to identify student collaboration
processes and influences on learning; and to improve the PI’s methodological
skills and experiences in engineering education research. The focus of this
project will be on student collaboration with a scope of project-based learning.
The project will apply a treatment and control research design which is built
upon the theory of network for collaboration and the theory of the zone of
proximal development for student learning and development. Both quantitative
data and qualitative data will be collected, analyzed, and compared using
network approaches to provide a holistic interpretation of students’ virtual
collaboration. The outcomes of this project will advance the understanding of
how construction and civil engineering students collaborate in the virtual
environment, and why. The findings will include empirical data and case studies
that contribute to the e-learning literature, network theory, and the student
learning literature. The findings will lay the groundwork for engineering
educators and scholars to better foster engineering students' virtual
collaboration skills that are underlined by both accreditation requirements and
the AEC industry demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.