* 2204540
* NSF ADVANCE Catalyst: Tracking Recognition and Engagement of Women in Low-Prestige/High-Workload Service Activities at Kent State University
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Susan Fisk, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Counting is a powerful tool for achieving gender equity because it: (1)
motivates organizational change; (2) dispels myths that “gender bias doesn’t
happen here”; (3) identifies institutional change targets; (4) creates
accountability; and (5) documents the efficacy of change efforts. Our goal is to
build upon previous ADVANCE initiatives by transparently quantifying self-
identified intersecting gender and racial/ethnic identities (IGRE identities) to
track STEM women faculty’s retention and promotion at Kent State University
(KSU). Women complete more high-workload/low-status service tasks, which can be
an obstacle to their upward mobility in academia. Therefore, transparently
quantifying disparities in service workload is imperative. Relative to men,
women are disproportionately more likely to hold service positions with little
visibility or prestige. We have empirical evidence that women engage in more
service work than men at KSU: A 2017 KSU climate survey found more women (47%)
than men (34%) faculty reported feeling burdened by service responsibilities,
and women disproportionately comprise undergraduate research mentors. Our
proposed online dashboard will aggregate service burden by NSF-recognized STEM
fields, rank, and IGREs. We will measure subjective perceptions of the prestige,
workload, and fulfillment associated with faculty members’ service activities to
identify those STEM fields with the greatest service workload inequities. We
will analyze exit interview data collected across the last decade from faculty
who separated from the university to determine whether/how their IGRE identities
and service burdens contributed to their departure decision. Finally, we will
establish a STEM Women’s Support Network to promote community building and
mentorship pertaining to service workloads. A key strength of our project is its
focus on making institutional change to remedy structural inequities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our project addresses service burden, a specific upstream
cause of gender inequity, to improve retention and advancement of STEM women
faculty at KSU. The specific aim of our project is to transparently quantify
inequities in service commitments by intersecting gender and racial/ethnic
identities (IGRE identities) while maintaining faculty anonymity. Our approach
builds on previous NSF ADVANCE work (NSF Grant #1463898) reporting such
transparency is an efficacious intervention for reducing gender disparities in
service. The timing is perfect for our project, which will involve quantitative
(i.e., online anonymous surveys about service commitments and perceptions) as
well as qualitative research methodology (e.g., secondary data analyses of exit
interview responses and merit review materials), because it dovetails with KSU's
recently released strategic DEI plan. KSU, an eight-campus, doctoral-granting
public institution with ~42,000 students, which was recently granted the highest
research Carnegie Classification (i.e., R1), is an ideal ADVANCE award
recipient. Our diverse research team has strong institutional support. Our
central repository of KSU STEM faculty service data will transparently track
service commitments by self-identified IGRE identities to improve upward
mobility of women STEM faculty through tenure/administration ranks, chipping
away at macro-level gender inequalities in the STEM professoriate. Moreover, our
approach can be readily adapted to address IGRE inequalities in university and
institutional contexts across the world. Other broader impacts include continued
transparency in record-keeping beyond the “life” of the grant, amplification of
women’s voices, and interdisciplinary research training and dissemination
opportunities for trainees at various career stages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards
provide support for institutional equity assessments and the development of
five-year faculty equity strategic plans at academic, non-profit institutions of
higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.