* 2204937
* Research Initiation: Investigating the Connection Among Undergraduate Engineering Students Data Proficiency, Motivation, and Engineering Identity
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,11/30/2022
* Stephen Gent, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 11/30/2022
* USD 199,286.00

Data and data analysis are increasingly pervasive in all engineering fields. It
is critical for engineering students to retain and improve their data skills and
to learn advanced techniques to be competent in the job market today and in the
future. Engineering students and practitioners need to generate, interpret, and
manipulate data in nearly all their professional activities. Data skills are
defined as the ability to interpret data, make connections, and turn data into
meanings to solve a problem ranging from foundational methods for refactoring
data to advanced techniques such as machine learning and artificial
intelligence. In developing data proficiency, students build the ability to
contextualize, interpret, and manipulate data to meet stakeholder needs. Data,
data skills, and data proficiency are critical for engineering students because
data-enabled technologies are in high demand as they will continue to transform
the engineering workplace and are instrumental in the ongoing radical shift of
jobs replaced and augmented by automation. However, to date, the connection
between the experiences building data proficiency and engineering identity and
motivation has not been investigated and established. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this research initiation project is to employ a mixed-
methods research approach to discovering how the development of data proficiency
is linked with motivation and engineering identity throughout the undergraduate
engineering curriculum. The research questions that guide this project, viewed
through motivation theory and engineering identity theory are (1) How does the
development of data proficiency support the professional formation of
undergraduate engineering students? (2) How do facets of student motivation and
personal identities influence the development of data proficiency and
engineering identity for undergraduate engineering students at a rural land
grant university? To answer these questions, we propose a two-phase mixed
methods research design. The qualitative phase will interview student cohorts
twice over the two years of the grant to understand how engagement with data
skills and the development of data proficiency is built and interacts with
engineering identity and motivation. These findings will influence the adaption
of existing survey instruments to understand potential connections between data
proficiency, engineering identity, and motivation more
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.