* 2204702
* Collaborative Research: Collapse, Rogue Waves, and their Applications: From Theory to Computation and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Panayotis Kevrekidis, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 08/31/2025
* USD 219,298.00

The project aims to further the understanding of collapse-type phenomena and
rogue waves in systems that are modeled by nonlinear ordinary, partial, and
lattice differential equations. Collapse-type phenomena are mathematically
described by solutions that remain self-similar as some of their attributes
become unbounded in finite time. Self-similarity refers to preservation of shape
when an appropriate scaling of space and time and solution amplitude is
employed. Collapse phenomena are relevant to the focusing of light beams in
optics and to atomic matter waves. Rogue waves have a characteristic length or
time scale and extreme amplitudes; they are important in subjects such as
hydrodynamics, nonlinear optics, and atomic and plasma physics. Using dynamical
systems and computational techniques, this project aims to reformulate the
underlying models and provide a unified approach to studying both collapse
phenomena and rogue waves by treating the relevant patterns as self-similar
solutions. The project is expected to provide insights on the mechanisms and
reduced mathematical descriptions of collapse phenomena in some of the
prototypical mathematical models that feature these potentially catastrophic
focusing events, as well as on the formation, prediction, and analysis of
extreme waves in both continuum and spatially discrete systems. The project will
offer research training opportunities for students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will explore a recently derived normal form for the study of self-
focusing waves of the central dispersive wave model of the nonlinear Schrödinger
equation and will seek generalizations for related models (such as the Korteweg-
de Vries equation). Stability analysis of such collapsing waves is expected to
shed light on the spectral properties and potential instabilities of such
systems, their connection to symmetries, their implications for the dynamics in
different settings (supercritical, critical, and subcritical), and their
reinterpretation in the original "non-exploding'' frame. A second focus of the
project will be the study of rogue waves from a dynamical systems viewpoint,
including characterization of stability via limits of time-periodic solutions
and rogue waves in higher-order dispersion settings. The theoretical analysis
will be corroborated by numerical simulations involving deflation-based fixed-
point techniques and pseudo-arclength continuation, as well as state-of-the-art
contour integral-based eigenvalue solvers. Collaboration with experimental
groups performing laboratory experiments will also be
sought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.