* 2204226
* CDS&amp;E: AI-RHEO: Learning coarse-graining of complex fluids
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* George Biros, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2025
* USD 405,278.00

Stokesian complex fluid flows describe transport phenomena at small scales.
Examples include flows inside biological cells, blood flow in capillaries and
microfluidic devices, DNA hydrodynamics, lab-on-a-chip industrial and medical
devices, bacterial flows, and polymer flows. Understanding and predicting the
behavior of Stokesian complex fluids using numerical simulations is fundamental
in understanding mechano-biological mechanisms, design of microfluidic devices,
medical robotics, and many other applications. Complex fluid flows are
challenging to simulate because they involve solid-fluid interaction, moving
interfaces and complex geometries, non-local and multiscale couplings in both
space and time, and highly nonlinear and often chaotic dynamics. This project
focuses on the development of methods that will significantly advance the state-
of-the-art of complex fluid simulation technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goals of this project include the following. (A) The design of high-
performance computing (HPC) algorithms that integrate dimension reduction and
deep learning methods with integral equation methods and result in orders-of-
magnitude speedups of predictive simulations of Stokesian complex fluid flows.
(B) The design and deployment of HPC software infrastructure that automates
configuration sampling, operator splitting, deep network training, and inference
for a large class of complex fluids. (C) Evaluation of the proposed methodology
on three problems: calculation of effective properties, parameter estimation,
and shape optimization of microfluidic devices. The complex fluid solvers
developed in this project, will impact a broad spectrum of disciplines in
sciences and engineering that involve problems with moving interfaces and
microstructure evolution. Furthermore, the project aims to engage a number of
graduate and undergraduate students at the interface of HPC, machine and deep
learning, integral equations, and complex fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.