* 2204447
* Platelets on Chip: Studies of Mechanobiology of Platelet-Mediated Thrombosis Enabled by Molecular Fluorescence Sensors Grafted inside Microfluidic Chips
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Long Que, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 12/31/2025
* USD 492,076.00

The WHO estimates nearly 25 million CVD deaths worldwide in 2020. Thrombosis is
the most common pathology causing life-threatening CVDs such as ischemic heart
disease, stroke, and venous thromboembolism. Thrombosis is mediated by platelets
which are small blood cells normally mediating hemostasis, a process of stopping
bleeding. However, during thrombosis, platelets can abnormally adhere on blood
vessel walls and aggregate with fibrin to form blood clots that cause heart
attacks, strokes, and peripheral vascular disease. Such abnormal platelet
adhesion can be initiated by the ruptured cholesterol plaques in blood vessels
or by disturbed blood flow at stenoses. Because the local blood flow and shear
conditions are important mechanical factors initiating platelet adhesion and
activation, studying platelet functions under controllable flow conditions and
under controllable pharmacological agents’ treatment is critical for the
understanding of the mechanisms of thrombus formation and therapeutics. This
award supports fundamental research to develop blood vessel chips, mimicking the
microvasculature in human body, that can provide a way to monitor the behaviors
of single platelets under tunable fluid flowing profiles with submicron
resolution and high sensitivity. This chip also can allow simultaneous studies
of the effects of multiple pharmacological agents and their combinations on the
platelets, facilitating the drug screen and discovery for thrombus related
diseases. Hence, the outcomes from this research will benefit the U.S. society.
This research involves several disciplines including microelectromechanical
system, microfluidics, biomedical engineering, and biomechanics, allowing
broaden participation of women and underrepresented minority students in
research, and thus resulting in a positive impact on engineering and science
education.&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to develop blood vessel mimicking
platforms with quantitative flow control (both flow rate and flow direction),
quantitative treatment control of pharmacological agents on platelets, and the
ability of monitoring the behaviors of platelets at single cell level. Toward
these goals, first, an experimental-theoretical methodology will be established
to determine the influence of shear rates and identify the integrin tension
sensors with suitable strengths for monitoring the behaviors of platelets.
Second, the effects of the in vivo shear rates and the effects of pulsatile flow
on platelets will be studied. Finally, the effects of the pharmacological agents
and their combinations with varied doses on the platelets will be studied. This
research will fill the technical knowledge gap on how to develop a platform
suitable for studying the behaviors of platelets in vitro under tunable shearing
stresses and pharmacological agents’ treatment in a controlled manner on a
chip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.