* 2204754
* I-Corps:  Novel File Exchange Software Platform to Increase Patient Volume and Hospital System Efficiency
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Patrick Ha, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of referral processing software to increase hospital system workflow
efficiency without compromising patient volume. New patient appointments are
important healthcare performance metrics because they are a significant revenue
source and critical for strategic growth for all healthcare systems. The
referral market is estimated at 2.3 billion dollars annually. In the United
States, 1 out of 3 patients are referred to see a specialist every year.
However, as many as 50% of these patient referrals are never completed –
resulting in an estimated annual loss of $370 billion in revenue.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
software platform to process patient referrals to provide a more transparent
closed-loop solution towards exchanging medical documents between two different
hospital systems. The proposed technology employs machine learning algorithms to
provide data analytics and insight into operational efficiency for hospital
leadership. In addition, this information may be used to provide practice and
behavioral recommendations to meet performance metrics defined by the
institution. In doing so, the proposed technology addresses the major
contributor to new patient scheduling delays and increases revenue for
healthcare systems. It also may decrease delays in patient care and avoid
repeating unneeded procedures and tests because of incomplete medical
records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.