* 2204247
* Conference: Support for a Thompson Field Forum on the elevation history of the Sierra Nevada
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Craig Jones, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2022
* USD 23,500.00

This proposal provides support for the participation of fourteen students and
early career scientists in a Geological Society of America 2022 Thompson Field
Forum on the “Elevation history of the Sierra Nevada.” The forum will bring
together 42 scientists to discuss the topographic history of the Sierra from the
Cretaceous to the present. The goal to promote the next generation of research
on this subject, which is of broad interest both to the scientific community and
the general public. The goal of the forum is to debate whether the range is old,
with minimal erosion through most of the Cenozoic, or relatively young having
risen from the debris of an earlier range. Both end-member models These end-
member conceptualizations have important implications that extend well beyond
the Sierra as the disagreements carry implications for the application of
techniques used to identify orogenic surface uplift and they have profound
implications for geodynamic models and the interpretations of several, globally
applied paleoelevation proxies. The conference is timely in that the community
needs to examine and evaluate the evidence firsthand and develop better
integrated methodologies to test these and other debates. There has been
considerable interest in what seems to be like an old subject, but recent
scientific advances have provoked controversy and new ideas regarding the age
and formation of the Sierra Nevada. The students and early career professionals
who will be supported by this activity are actively involved in Sierran research
and hence will be knowledgeable and receptive to the nuances of the discussions.
They will also get a chance to present their new work for the general
discussions. The exposure they will get to high level integrative science will
be potentially transformative for their careers. Society benefits from this
activity include contributions to STEM education and educator development;
development of a diverse, globally competitive workforce; and contributions to
the broadening of participation of underrepresented groups in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.