* 2204376
* EAR-PF: Testing if the SPICE is right - disentangling diagenesis, seawater chemistry, and ecological change across Cambrian trilobite extinctions using Ca and Mg isotope ratios
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Preston Kemeny, Kemeny, Preston Cosslett
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Preston Cosslett Kemeny has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out research, professional development, and outreach
activities at the University of Chicago under the mentorship of Dr. Clara
Bl√§ttler. In this project, Dr. Kemeny will investigate the relationship between
trilobite extinction and seawater chemistry during the Cambrian Period
(approximately 540 to 485 million years ago). This work has broad implications
for establishing robust environmental and ecological policy in the coming
decades because understanding the interwoven nature of ancient life and climate
provides fundamental context for predicting and responding to anthropogenic
climate change. Previously, many interpretations of chemical variability in
rocks implicated causal linkages between the global carbon cycle and ecological
turnover. However, recent developments in the study of sedimentary processes
have suggested that extinction and diversification may only weakly relate to
environmental perturbations. The Cambrian Period offers unique opportunities for
testing connections between ecology and seawater chemistry because it contains
multiple trilobite extinction and diversification intervals associated with
chemical anomalies. In this work, Dr. Kemeny will perform geochemical
measurements on Cambrian rocks and fossils, and synthesize those observations
within a numerical model, to better understand the relationship between
extinction and the global carbon cycle. In addition, Dr. Kemeny will continue
efforts to create an inclusive community through research, teaching, mentorship,
and service activities that increase diversity, equity, inclusivity, and
accessibility in the geosciences. These activities will include mentoring
undergraduate and graduate students, training in effective and inclusive
pedagogy, and working with local teachers to develop publicly available lesson
plans on the global carbon cycle and paleontology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will study the coevolution of life with climate by quantifying
connections between the global carbon cycle and trilobite extinction during the
Cambrian Period. Dr. Kemeny will (1) measure calcium and magnesium isotope
ratios in drill core samples from the Missouri basin to determine whether the
Cambrian Steptoean Positive Carbon Isotope Excursion (SPICE) reflects a shift in
the marine 13C/12C ratio or a shift in either the style of post-depositional
alteration or mineralogy, (2) test existing hypotheses of marine anoxia during
the SPICE event using sulfur and uranium isotope ratios, (3) evaluate trilobite
fossils as a novel proxy for diagenetic modification and seawater chemistry, and
(4) reproduce the isotopic observations within a box model of the ocean-
atmosphere system and numerically constrain the temporal and spatial scales over
which diagenesis can produce carbon isotope excursions. By disentangling
biodiversity change from environmental change during the SPICE event, this
project will take concrete steps towards understanding the coevolution of life
with climate. Furthermore, by exploring a trilobite-based proxy for diagenetic
alteration, the proposed work may provide a new tool to the geochemical
community for reconstructing marine chemistry and for studying connections
between the global carbon cycle and ecological turnover throughout the
Paleozoic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.