* 2204537
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Creating a Destination of Choice at Missouri University of Science &amp; Technology
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Colin Potts, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Missouri University of Science &amp; Technology (S&amp;T) ADVANCE Adaptation
project aims to increase the representation of women, especially women from
underrepresented racial-ethnic groups, across faculty ranks and leadership
positions at Missouri S&amp;T. The university’s considerable output of
engineering graduates influences the diversity of the national engineering
workforce. Increasing the representation of women faculty at Missouri S&amp;T
has the potential to transform what it means to become an engineer to citizens
in the region and make Missouri S&amp;T a true destination of choice for all.
The specific goals of the project are to address underlying barriers to women’s
recruitment and advancement identified in a self-study, namely: (1) cultivate an
inclusive climate, (2) interrupt and address gender bias, and (3) facilitate
equitable access to and distribution of resources and opportunities. The project
aims to achieve these goals by adapting evidence-based strategies from prior
ADVANCE projects to the unique STEM-focused and rural context of Missouri
S&amp;T. It will apply an intersectional lens by adapting activities and
measuring outcomes in ways that consider the gender, race-ethnicity, and rank of
program participants and beneficiaries. These adaptions will allow tests of the
generalizability of prior ADVANCE strategies to unique contexts and diverse
identities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Missouri University of Science &amp;
Technology (S&amp;T) ADVANCE Adaptation project will adapt three primary
evidence-based strategies from prior ADVANCE projects to achieve its goals. The
first strategy is to provide education and leadership development to engage
current and aspiring leaders as equity-minded cultural change agents. Approaches
to execute this strategy includes: implementing a distinguished lecture series
with nationally recognized experts in diversity, climate, and gender issues;
revising bias training for search committees; providing leadership workshops to
equip campus leaders with knowledge and tools for cultivating inclusive climates
and improving equity; and giving mentoring workshops for mid-career faculty. The
second strategy is to provide targeted support to individual units through
Department Enhancement Grants. These grants will empower departments to develop
their own strategies to address equity-related problems of their own choosing
while receiving support, consultation, and resources to do so effectively. The
third strategy is to transform institutional structures, policies, and
practices, emphasizing accountability. This strategy will be achieved by:
implementing a Faculty Fellows program that provides aspiring leaders
administrative placements to work on projects that will develop and enhance
campus policies and resources; infusing accountability into leadership
practices; reviewing and revising promotion, tenure, and workload policies; and
creating an Ombud position in the Provost’s Office to amplify faculty concerns.
The project is expected to improve climate, change key policies and practices,
and ultimately improve women faculty representation, experiences, and outcomes,
especially women from historically underrepresented racial-ethnic
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster
gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation" awards provide support for the
adaptation and adoption of evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit
institution of higher education as well as non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.