* 2204957
* Collaborative Research: Research Initiation: Assessing Global Engagement Interventions to Advance Global Engineering Competence for Engineering Formation
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Homero Murzi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2025
* USD 23,973.00

Engineering students live and work in an increasing global environment.
Graduates with experience in understanding, interacting with and valuing
differing cultures have advantages in the workplace compared with those who will
need to learn those skills post-graduation. This underlying global learner
mindset is a key ingredient in cultivating a global engineering competency. Most
intercultural competence research and associated global engineering education is
focused on developing the global engineering skillset of students through long-
term travel experiences such as study abroad programs. These programs can be
expensive, requiring a significant investment of time and money, limiting the
participation to more privileged members of a community, and are not scalable to
support participation from large numbers of engineering students. The proposed
work will fill a gap in the research by focusing on the development of the
students’ global learner mindset without requiring extensive international
travel. Specifically, the project will investigate how four different global
engagement interventions (the use of engineering case studies, the intentional
formation of multi-national student teams, a Collaborative Online International
Learning (COIL) research project, and a community engaged project within a short
course) can develop a global learner mindset. Four engineering educators who are
new to the field of engineering formation research will be trained by social
science and engineering education researchers in research methods in order to
assess the global engagement interventions that will be developed and
implemented in this study. This process aligns with the program’s goals of
initiating new researchers into engineering formation research, and is
instrumental in developing a holistic global engineering education approach.
This work will foster global competence in undergraduate engineering students in
order to meet the current and future needs of the engineering profession.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, four global engagement interventions will
be grounded in the Global Engineering Competency (GEC) theoretical framework and
assessed for their ability to foster a global learner mindset in engineering
students. A mixed-methods approach will be used to measure students’ cultural
humility, global citizenship, and critical reflection as the key elements of the
global learner mindset. The specific research questions to be answered are: 1)
To what extent can global competence be developed in engineering students
through the use of the proposed global engagement interventions; and 2) what are
the relative strengths of each of the proposed global engagement interventions
in developing global engineering competence? The specific assessment tools used
to answer these research questions include the Global Engagement Survey (GES)
and specific questions developed by the researchers to evaluate improvements in
the participating students’ global engineering skillset. Combined, these
research measures will provide not only an accurate picture of how each global
engagement intervention impacts the formation of a global learner mindset in
engineering education, but also its associated ability to develop and/or improve
global engineering skills. The outcomes of this study will generate valuable
knowledge to understand how each global engagement intervention impacts the
formation of global engineering competence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.