* 2204096
* New Catalysts by Cofactor Modulation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Steven Rokita, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2025
* USD 510,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Steven Rokita from Johns Hopkins University is
studying the development of new catalysts based on proteins containing synthetic
analogues of natural cofactors. Complexes between proteins and their cofactors
are highly efficient at promoting reactions that are fundamental to our own
metabolism. However, their exquisite specificity precludes their widespread
application for industry. Proteins can often be engineered to enhance their
catalytic repertoire for such applications. Cofactor engineering offers a
powerful alternative to protein engineering but has received little attention to
date. This project will use organic chemistry to synthesize new cofactors that,
in combination with their protein scaffolds, may be applied to green chemistry
and bioremediation. The project will provide advanced training, spanning
chemistry and biochemistry, and will provide students with a foundation for
future contributions to enzyme optimization and application in biocatalytic
process chemistry, an emerging area in sustainable chemistry. The power of
chemistry to manipulate biological systems will also be introduced into new
courses associated with the creation of a biochemistry major through a
collaboration between the Departments of Chemistry, Biophysics, and Biology at
Johns Hopkins University.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Enzymes of the flavin-dependent
nitroreductase superfamily promote a wide range of chemical transformations with
promise for deployment in industrial biocatalytic processes. Still, the search
for natural variants and the construction of enzyme libraries has yet to produce
satisfactory candidates from the best characterized subgroups of nitroreductases
and iodotyrosine deiodinases. Under this project, research in the Rokita
laboratory will instead focus on controlling specificity and chemistry by
modifying the cofactors necessary to promote catalysis. Only minor changes to
the flavin structure can engender large changes in catalytic chemistry as
illustrated by examples of 5-deazaflavin and 6-carboxyflavin. The reducing power
of native flavin is not sufficient to drive the full reduction of nitroaromatics
to their amine products, but a nitroreductase containing 5-deazaflavin should
have sufficient reducing capacity to produce the amines, for example. In a
complementary aim, the ability of 6-carboxyflavin to form a more stable
semiquinone intermediate than the native cofactor will be integrated into
biocatalyst development for reductive dehalogenation
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.