* 2204758
* Patterns and Bifurcations in Multiple Timescale Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Paul Carter, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 14,430.00

The project aims to further the theoretical understanding of the behavior of
natural systems that have multiple scales, meaning that the system separates
into components which operate on slower or faster timescales or over shorter or
longer distances. Scale separation occurs ubiquitously in nature and is tied to
a variety of phenomena; important examples from mathematical ecology and biology
include the formation of vegetation patterns in water-limited ecosystems, the
propagation of impulses along nerve fibers, and periodic bursting rhythms in
neurons. Mathematically, these systems are frequently modeled by dynamical
systems in the form of singularly perturbed ordinary, partial, or lattice
differential equations. This project contributes to the theory of singular
perturbations through the development of broadly applicable techniques to study
these phenomena, their robustness under variation in model parameters, and their
stability to perturbation. Part of the project includes research experience
opportunities for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
research goals are organized into three parts inspired by the different
application areas. The common thread through these applications is that they are
conceptually described by singularly perturbed differential equations where a
delicate interplay occurs between local singular bifurcation phenomena and the
global behavior of solutions. The first part concerns the formation and
resilience of vegetation stripe patterns on sloped terrain in semiarid regions.
This process is modeled by reaction-diffusion-advection equations, and the focus
is on existence and stability analysis of patterns in the limit when the
advection dominates. The second part is concerned with periodic traveling waves
in lattice differential equations that model impulse propagation in myelinated
nerve fibers, of which the spatially discrete FitzHugh-Nagumo equation is a
prototypical example. This necessitates the extension of techniques used in the
study of ordinary differential equations where loss of normal hyperbolicity
occurs to the infinite dimensional setting of lattice differential equations.
The third part is concerned with spike-adding transitions between bursting
solutions in models of neuroendocrine cells. The construction of these
transitions involves accounting for both hyperbolic and nonhyperbolic dynamics
and linking local and global behavior of solutions, providing a framework in
which complex bifurcations can be understood in other systems. The project goals
require extensions to existing theoretical methods in the areas of geometric
singular perturbation theory, geometric desingularization, and
homoclinic/heteroclinic bifurcation theory. Part of the project includes
research experience opportunities for undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.