* 2204590
* EAR-PF: Investigating Redox-Related Preservation of Organic-Walled Microfossils in Proterozoic Shales: a Multi-Scale Approach.
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Christina Woltz, Woltz, Christina Rose
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 03/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Christina Woltz has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and education plans at Stanford University. Before the widespread
appearance of animals around 550 million years ago, life on Earth was almost
entirely microscopic. Eukaryotes—the domain of life that includes animals,
plants, and a great diversity of single-celled organisms—first appear in the
fossil record around 1650 million years ago as microscopic organic structures
compressed in fine-grained rock. Although their fossil record documents large-
scale changes in diversity through time, it can also be influenced by changes in
the environmental conditions that control fossilization. In particular, the
presence of oxygen is thought to increase the degradation of organic matter, but
the effects of oxygen on the quality of the early eukaryotic fossil record have
not been examined comprehensively. The goal of this project is to explore how
the presence of oxygen in the burial environment might have influenced the
preservational quality of microfossil assemblages. By understanding the
relationship between microfossil preservation and oxygen, this project will
assess if certain time intervals of fluctuating oxygen concentrations have
biased our current understanding of early eukaryotic evolution. This project
will also develop teaching modules that connect undergraduate students to
current research topics using a large open-access geochemistry database
(available through the Sedimentary Geochemistry and Paleoenvironments Project).
These teaching modules will expose students to applications of Earth science,
which increases student engagement, and equips them with skills in data
management to support their continued involvement in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is a long-held assumption that local ocean anoxia is
necessary for the fossilization of organic remains. Although this relationship
is well-documented in the Phanerozoic record of soft-tissue animal fossils, it
is unclear if the same conditions apply to the record of Proterozoic organic-
walled microfossils. Here, the preservational quality of microfossil assemblages
will be compared to several redox proxies—including iron speciation, and uranium
and molybdenum abundances—measured from a suite of shale samples that span mid
to late Proterozoic time. Since redox conditions can vary significantly over
short time intervals, redox proxies (including iron species) will be measured at
ultra-high resolution on select samples using synchrotron-based x-ray
spectroscopy. By quantifying the relationship between fossil preservation and
paleoredox conditions, this project lays the groundwork for detecting largescale
changes in preservation potential within the Proterozoic fossil record. For
example, the first appearance of eukaryotes in the fossil record (around 1650
Ma) occurs much later than is predicted by molecular clock estimates and the
complexity of the first eukaryotic fossils. It is possible that the appearance
of eukaryotes at this time marks the onset of more favorable preservational
conditions. Additionally, this project develops teaching modules aimed towards
engaging a diverse undergraduate community in Earth science research. Laboratory
modules will develop skills related to the management and analysis of large
datasets, which are necessary yet underdeveloped skills in the undergraduate
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.