* 2204584
* EAR-PF: Quantifying methane reactivity and turnover in the subterranean estuary: combined in-situ and ex-situ isotope tracer approaches
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Stephanie Wilson, Wilson, Stephanie J
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 04/30/2025
* USD 0.00

At the interface of land and sea, subterranean estuaries (STEs) serve as
subsurface transition zones. STEs can support a variety of biogeochemical
reactions that influence concentrations and transport of nutrients and carbon.
High concentrations of methane (CH4), an important greenhouse gas and major
player in the global carbon cycle, has been observed in the coastal subsurface.
However, the way that this CH4 pool is transformed and transported within STEs
remains unconstrained. This study will provide a novel understanding of how CH4
is cycled in the subsurface, specifically its turnover time and the
transformations controlling concentration and fate, just prior to release to
surface waters. These research products represent fundamental constraints, which
are critical to determining fluxes of CH4 from the subsurface and the role of
STEs in the global carbon cycle. Dr. Stephanie Wilson will build upon previous
work conducted by multiple research groups along the east coast, to further
scientific understanding of CH4 cycling and exchanges between the subsurface and
the overlying water or atmosphere. The results of this study will be directly
applicable to ongoing research and modeling efforts, providing fundamental
information about CH4 to inform calculations of fluxes and emissions from the
subsurface, with implications beyond the fields of groundwater hydrology and
geochemistry. Moreover, the project is designed to optimize the reach of its
findings and develop human capital. Results will be disseminated at conferences,
departmental seminars, and published in scientific journals. Dr. Wilson will
incorporate undergraduate students in both field and lab research efforts with
the goal of creating an inclusive environment that promotes personal growth and
scientific learning. Research findings will be made available to the public via
several avenues designed to engage K-12 students, educators, the local
community, and the larger public via a variety of engagement
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Subterranean estuaries (STEs) are important
transition zones within the subsurface that host a variety of biogeochemical
reactions. They are dynamic systems influenced by both watershed and tidal
drivers. Within the STE, biogeochemical reactions control the speciation and
concentration of subsurface nutrients and carbon, therefore, they determine the
fate of these analytes when they are released to the overlying water and/or the
atmosphere. There is a growing body of literature reporting high concentrations
of methane (CH4) in the subsurface along coastal margins; however, the
mechanisms of transformation and transport of this pool remain unknown. There
is, therefore, a limited understanding of how this subsurface CH4 pool exchanges
with the overlying water and/or atmosphere. The STE may act as a passive
interface whereby CH4 generated within the aquifer moves through the STE
conservatively, or CH4 inventories may be modified via consumption or production
within the STE on timescales faster than net transport. The lack of context and
defined constraints controlling the STE CH4 pool represents a knowledge gap
essential to determining fluxes of CH4 from the subsurface and the role STEs
play in the global carbon cycle. The project includes examination of the
transformations and transport of CH4 in STEs using a three-pronged approach that
combines in situ and ex situ stable isotope labeled tracer experiments with the
characterization of subsurface geochemical gradients. The work addresses rates
and mechanisms. Tracer experiments will be conducted in several STEs along the
east coast of the US parsed into the two dominant coastal STE types, wetland and
sandy, and spanning a spectrum of hydrologic forcings. Results from this study
will provide a novel understanding of how CH4 is cycled in the subsurface,
specifically its turnover time and the transformations controlling concentration
and fate, just prior to release to surface waters. Specifically, this work will
provide information regarding the CH4 pool rate of turnover, transformation, and
transport. These products represent fundamental constraints, which are critical
to determining fluxes of CH4 from the subsurface and the role of STEs in the
global carbon cycle. This novel information will be directly applicable to
ongoing research determining the role of transition zones in greenhouse gas
dynamics and global climate change. Research products will provide fundamental
information, which will reach beyond the fields of groundwater hydrology and
geochemistry. Results will provide fundamental constraints on modeling
atmospheric fluxes of CH4 meditated by the STE and the project is designed to
optimize the reach of its findings and develop human
capital.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.