* 2204402
* Optogenetic interrogation of B. subtilis stress-response network dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2026
* Oleg Igoshin, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 04/30/2026
* USD 641,988.00

Bacteria must survive environmental stresses such as starvation and antibiotic
exposure. These stress-invoking conditions lead to profound changes in bacterial
behavior and physiology. Some of these changes have economic and health
implications, as stress responses have been linked to the formation of stress-
resistant biofilms, virulence, antibiotic tolerance/resistance and persistence.
This project focuses on the regulatory pathways that control stress responses in
bacteria. The results will shed new light into how bacteria survive stresses,
and could lead to new technological advances in synthetic biology and to sorely-
needed antimicrobial drugs. A new educational module will be developed for high-
school students across the country. This educational module will teach students
about bacterial stress responses and why they are important across
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gene regulatory networks (GRNs) control
the fundamental biological process of cell-fate decision-making. It is now clear
that GRNs utilize dynamical transcription factor activity patterns as a
fundamental regulatory strategy. However, the mechanisms by which GRNs decode
dynamical transcription factor signals are generally not understood. This
project will use a new optogenetic method to reveal how two model B. subtilis
stress-response networks decode time-varying activity patterns of their major
transcription factor regulators. It will reveal new mechanisms by which these
pathways function and generate new insights into how bacteria survive stresses.
The results should also provide new genetic design principles that may underlie
cell-fate decisions in higher organisms. As dynamical GRN signaling is conserved
to humans, this work will facilitate a new understanding of the rules by which
life operates. This project will create a new “Sporograph” educational module to
teach students how cells make decisions. An experimental module will be based on
an inexpensive version of the laboratory B. subtilis optogenetics system
developed here, and allow students to induce visible sporulation and biofilm
reporter proteins on bacterial agar plates by applying constant or oscillatory
light inputs. The Sporograph module will reach thousands of students during this
project, and be setup to expand further in future
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.