* 2204589
* EAR-PF: Present and future flood mitigation services of wetland infrastructure across scales
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Jason Sauer, Sauer, Jason Robert
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Flooding during intense storms has become a major concern in cities. Cities may
experience this kind of flooding due to increasing amounts of pavement and
roofs, an increased frequency of storms, more intense storms, or an assortment
of these features of the city and climate. In many cities across the globe, and
particularly in the U.S., flooding from extreme rainfall may especially harm
people who are already financially stressed, racial and ethnic minorities, and
people who fit in both of these categories. Cities are trying to reduce the
threat of flooding caused by intense storms by changing how cities are built.
Many cities in the U.S. and across the world are considering constructing
wetlands or including natural wetlands in order to trap and move water safely
away from people in the city. However, these ideas and practices are new, and
there is much more that cities need to understand about if and how wetlands in
cities can reduce flood risk. Also, cities do not understand whether and how
well wetlands might prevent flooding in cities as the local and global climate
changes. In this study, two cities with abundant wetlands (Gresham, OR, USA and
Valdivia, Región de los Ríos, Chile) will be studied and modeled in order to
understand how cities with wetlands respond to storms in the present day and in
the future. By collecting data on and modeling three primary ways by which
wetlands may reduce flood risk—storing water on the surface, allowing water to
seep through the ground, and having plants consume water—this study will present
a holistic picture of the impacts of inland urban wetlands on pluvial flood
risk. Researchers involved in this study will work directly with communities
impacted by flooding to identify areas of high past flood risk and educate
stakeholders about their future flood risk. Lessons learned through this work
will be incorporated in flood risk plans for each city through engagement with
flood risk managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pluvial flooding, which is flooding
that occurs when rates of precipitation exceed rates of removal by natural and
engineered drainage systems, has become a major concern in cities with
increasing impermeable surface cover, recurring intense storms, increasingly
intense storms, or an assortment of these characteristics. Pluvial flooding may
cause substantial monetary damage to cities and lead to loss of life. In many
cities across the globe, particularly in the U.S., pluvial flooding
disproportionately impacts marginalized groups and racial and ethnic minorities.
As pluvial flood risk and impacts worsen, cities are looking to new forms of
development that include restoring or constructing wetlands, or incorporating
so-called remnant wetlands into the urban fabric. However, whether and how
inland wetlands in urban areas can reduce pluvial flood risk is inchoate, and
studies normally do not examine the cumulative flood risk reduction effect of
wetlands at the appropriate scale: the city. Nor do studies typically examine
pluvial flood risk under future climate conditions, instead only examining risk
2 to 10 years into the future. In this study, the effects of wetland storage,
infiltration, and evapotranspiration on pluvial flood risk will be scaled-up to
the whole city in Gresham, Oregon, USA, and Valdivia, Región de los Ríos, Chile,
which both feature extensive wetland coverage. Data collection will be
accomplished through continuous monitoring of surface storage and synoptic
surveys of soil storage and plant transpiration. These data will serve to
reconstruct key hydrologic functions of urban wetlands in a stormwater
management model, which will in turn be used to estimate stormwater management
system performance during typical (10-year) and more extreme (100-year) storms.
Such storms are predicted to become more frequent in these study cities by the
year 2100. By considering three primary hydrologic mechanisms by which wetlands
may provide pluvial flood risk reduction—retention, infiltration, and
transpiration—the results of this study will present a holistic picture of the
impacts of inland urban wetlands on pluvial flood risk. By working directly with
communities impacted by flooding in each city, researchers involved in this
study will identify areas of high past flood risk and educate communities about
their future flood risk. By working directly with flood risk managers in the
study cities, the salient lessons this work will be incorporated in flood risk
plans for each city. Furthermore, this will be one of few studies to attempt to
scale up the effects of green infrastructure, particularly wetlands, to the city
scale. This will be the first study to scale up transpiration in green
infrastructure to the city scale. This will all be accomplished using a mixed
methodology that has not yet been pursued by other researchers or
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.