* 2204581
* EAR-PF: Mantle Convection Modeling as a Test of Pacific Absolute Plate Motion
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Daniel Woodworth, Woodworth, Daniel
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Daniel Woodworth has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
conduct research and education projects at the University of Houston under the
mentorship of Dr. Jonny Wu. The study will evaluate models of the motion of the
lithosphere, Earth’s outermost strong layer, consisting of the entire crust plus
the upper mantle, in the Pacific Ocean basin. The lithosphere is divided into
plates – segments that move as single units. The Pacific Plate, which underlies
much of the Pacific Ocean, is the largest of these. But because it is covered by
ocean, reconstructing its movement relative to the rest of Earth is challenging.
Several competing models have been developed. Dr. Woodworth will compare the
structure of the mantle with that predicted by each model of plate motion.
Distinguishing between models of Pacific Plate motion will allow scientists to
better understand how and why tectonic plates move. The accompanying educational
plan will focus on STEM outreach to the Hispanic community, including developing
Spanish-English bilingual active learning modules that introduce geophysical
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will test models of Pacific Plate
motion before and after the formation of the ~60° Hawaiian-Emperor Bend (HEB)
between the north-northwest trending Emperor Seamount Chain and the west-
northwest trending Hawaiian Chain in the track of the Hawaiian Hotspot.
Prominent early Pacific absolute plate motion (APM) models attributed the HEB to
a change in plate motion relative to a stationary hotspot, consistent with the
fixed-hotspot approximation, which had been used to define an approximate
absolute reference frame. However, more recent analyses have argued that the HEB
instead reflects a change in hotspot motion without a large change in plate
motion, suggesting rapid hotspot motion. This project will use these endmember
APMs to drive whole-mantle circulation models using the parallel forward
convection code TERRA and compare the predicted mantle structures, synthetic
geoids, and dynamic topography to observations. The objectives of this study are
to determine (1) whether constant or changing Pacific Plate motion at the time
of HEB better explains present observations and thus (2) whether the
characteristic temporal scales of hotspot and plate motion are sufficiently
different such that hotspot motion may be considered negligible relative to
plate motion. Further, by examining the predictions of global mantle convection
models driven by local plate motion it explores the relationship between
processes operating at the scale of the local lithosphere and processes at the
scale of the mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.