* 2204359
* Collaborative Research: NSF-BSF: Equivariant Symplectic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Susan Tolman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2025
* USD 322,321.00

Symplectic geometry is an area of mathematics that has roots in the mathematical
framework for classical mechanics. Many physical systems exhibit a great deal of
symmetry. For example, the dynamics of a top that is spinning on a flat table is
not affected by the position of the table in the room; changes in the table's
position amount to a symmetry of the system. The momentum map translates the
symmetries of a physical system into discrete data. The research supported by
this award uses the momentum map to address questions about symmetries and
invariants in symplectic geometry. This research program is largely driven by
the interplay between deeply probing examples and advancing more general and
abstract theory. The key is to find examples simple enough to be tractable and
complex enough to exhibit complicated phenomena. Through their work, the
investigators will create and strengthen bridges between symplectic geometry and
other areas such as algebraic geometry, equivariant topology, and mathematical
physics. Continuing their strong mentoring record, the investigators will advise
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows from all over the world, both as
supervisors in their institutions, and in informal research settings during
visits to other institutions and at the conferences they organize and attend.
More broadly, the activities supported by this award will lead to new projects
for students and postdocs. Traveling between their institutions will enrich the
students' and postdocs' experiences and advance their future careers: they will
learn new methods, their mathematical perspective will broaden, and they will
make valuable connections with different mathematical communities. Finally, the
investigators have all been engaged in and plan to continue the outreach to K-12
and college students, with particular attention to students from underserved
groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Hamiltonian group actions give rise to the
momentum map. This allows for the construction of the symplectic reduction,
which can also be described algebraically using geometric invariant theory. The
research funded here uses the momentum map to address questions about group
actions and invariants in symplectic geometry, focusing on: the equivariant
geometry of symplectic four-manifolds; applications of equivariant theory to
symplectic topology; complexity one Hamiltonian torus actions; completely
integrable systems; and the geometry and topology of momentum maps. Each of the
investigators is an outstanding communicator and has been invited to lecture at
top conferences in symplectic geometry and many related fields, including
algebraic geometry, mathematical physics, and combinatorics. They build bridges
between their work in symplectic geometry and foundational questions in these
related fields. Through this research, Holm, Karshon, Kessler, and Tolman will
achieve a deeper understanding of the relationship between the geometry of a
Hamiltonian system and the combinatorics of the momentum image. The supported
activities will advance our knowledge in the fields of symplectic geometry and
combinatorics, with applications to algebraic geometry, algebraic topology and
mathematical physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.