* 2204046
* CAS: Photochemistry of spatially confined organic molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Vaidhyanathan Ramamurthy, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 455,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Prof. Vaidhyanathan Ramamurthy of University of
Miami, taking the cue from nature, aims to find ways to control the behavior of
light activated molecules by confining them in cavities that are just slightly
larger than them. With the current emphasis on sustainability and safety, his
undertaking will use light as the energy source and water as the solvent. The
long term goal is to find efficient ways to capture and store the inexhaustible
solar energy into chemical energy. This interdisciplinary research project,
which involves US and international collaborations, provides a unique platform
for training graduate students on different aspects of light activated
chemistry. Recognizing the importance of making the young researchers aware of
the pathways involved in developing new science, Prof. Ramamurthy will present
lectures in an open forum titled ‘Being a Scientist’ that include information on
the roles of a discoverer and the time-line of the discoveries along with
contextual placement of the concepts. He will continue to organize weekly online
informal lecturers by active research scientists that have already proven to be
of great value to students and young researchers working at smaller and
underprivileged Institutions all over the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
goal of this research project is to find ways to perform useful and selective
reactions under sustainable conditions without involving toxic reagents and
solvents. This study employing light as the energy source and water as the
solvent integrates supramolecular principles. Water-soluble synthetic hosts with
cavity dimensions of a few angstroms will be utilized as reaction containers for
organic molecules that are not water-soluble. The overarching goal of this
program is to finding conditions under which light activated reactions that
would yield high-value products could be carried out in a selective, sustainable
and catalytic fashion. The reactions to be explored would include synthetically
useful and mechanistically interesting addition, electron- and proton transfer
initiated transformations, fragmentation reactions, oxidations etc. To get an
insight into the above processes mechanistic studies that include ultrafast
spectroscopic experiments and theoretical calculations will be
performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.