* 2204571
* EAR-PF: Integrating scale-dependency of geomicrobial controls on soil C dynamics in predictive models
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Katherine Shek, Shek, Katherine L
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 09/30/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Katherine Shek has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to carry
out research and education plans at the University of New Hampshire under the
mentorship of Dr. Adam Wymore. This study will improve our understanding of soil
carbon dynamics under global change through identifying patterns in microbial
composition and function. Current models aiming to predict soil carbon dynamics
do not effectively represent the small-scale processes controlling emergent
large-scale processes such as CO2 gas flux and organic carbon storage, because
the small-scale processes are performed by complex microbial communities that
can change across environmental gradients. Dr. Shek will address this
discrepancy through a synthesis of large datasets available through ecological
and Earth system monitoring networks describing geomicrobiome structure and
emergent functions related to the carbon cycle. From this data synthesis, cross-
scale patterns in geomicrobial processes will be integrated to improve the
predictive power of carbon dynamics in Earth Systems Models. Better
understanding of cross-scale interactions between geomicrobiome variability and
carbon cycle processes will connect several research programs and disciplines
addressing urgent challenges under climate change. For instance, characterizing
general patterns linking geomicrobial processes with carbon cycling under
different environmental contexts could inform policy makers, land managers and
scientists aiming to predict the consequences of climate variability and change
on carbon dynamics. Dr. Shek’s research and professional development plan
includes application of machine learning techniques and training in
biogeochemistry and data science, while presenting findings and communicating
science with diverse audiences including both nonscientists and fellow
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions between ecosystem structure and
climate are difficult to characterize across environmental gradients due to the
scale-dependency of ecological processes governing emergent biogeochemical
outcomes, especially those acting on the micro scale. Earth’s largest
terrestrial carbon pool is in soils, where diverse consortia of microorganisms
control the turnover and stability of organic carbon through micro scale
differences in metabolic activity, directly influencing Earth’s climate. Despite
geomicrobial controls determining shifts in soil organic carbon distribution and
stability, Earth Systems Models (ESMs) aiming to predict soil carbon dynamics
under global change do not adequately represent these fine scale processes.
Building an understanding of cross-scale interactions among factors controlling
macro scale differences in soil carbon dynamics requires process-based modeling
of geomicrobial functional profiles and how they change across environmental
gradients. This project will leverage the robust microbial metagenomic and
environmental datasets available through programs such as NEON, LTER and CZnet
to build process-based microbial models that will improve our ability to predict
soil carbon under global change. Dr. Shek will use machine learning algorithms
to distill complex cross-scale geomicrobial and environmental patterns to
characterize geomicrobiome-soil carbon dynamics across environmental gradients,
and then integrate these patterns to improve soil carbon projections in process-
based ESMs. This fellowship will enable Dr. Shek to synthesize an open-source,
cross-network database linking biogeochemical measurements with metagenomic data
for fellow Earth system and ecological researchers to utilize in future studies.
This research contributes broadly to society’s general ability to project the
stability and behavior of Earth’s ecosystems under global change by directly
improving ESMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Critical-Zone Collaborative Network Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.