* 2204364
* Ricci Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Richard Bamler, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2026
* USD 182,340.00

A Ricci flow is a geometric process that can be used to improve a given geometry
towards a more homogeneous one. Ricci flows have gained increasing interest, as
they have been used to prove various longstanding conjectures, such as the
Poincaré and Geometrization Conjectures, as well as the Generalized Smale
Conjecture in dimension 3. The general expectation is that a Ricci flow produces
a geometry in the limit that is in some sense inherent to the topology, that is,
the loose makeup, of the underlying space. However, usually a Ricci flow incurs
complicated singularities in finite time. In dimension 3, these singularities
can be removed manually by a so-called surgery construction and the flow can be
continued beyond them. The long-term goal of this project is to generalize this
surgery construction to dimension 4, and possibly higher. To achieve this, the
PI will study the singularity formation of higher dimensional Ricci flows, using
a new theory he recently found. A successful construction in dimension 4 may
have interesting topological and geometric applications. The PI will also
further study Ricci flows with surgery, and the closely related "Ricci flows
through singularities," in dimension 3 and find further geometric and
topological applications. The award provides funds for graduate students to
engage in research related to the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
project is split into two parts. The first project is a continuation of the PI's
recently obtained compactness and partial regularity theory for Ricci flows in
higher dimensions. The goal of the project is to use this new theory to
construct a "Ricci flow with surgery'" or "Ricci flow through singularities" in
dimension 4, generalizing the analogous construction in dimension 3. The
strategy for achieving this is to deduce spatial asymptotic estimates on blow-up
limits and use these to obtain a qualitative picture of the singularity
formation. Based on this picture, the next step is to remove singularities via
cylindrical and conical surgery constructions. The project also aims to
characterize the long-time asymptotics of the flow. A successful construction
and analysis may lead to several interesting topological and geometric
applications. The second project continues work of the PI and collaborator on
the uniqueness and continuous dependence of 3-dimensional singular Ricci flows
through singularities. Previous work used this continuous dependence to resolve
the Generalized Smale Conjecture (which classifies diffeomorphism groups of
certain 3-manifolds up to homotopy) and a conjecture regarding the space of
metrics with positive scalar curvature on 3-manifolds. This project will study
more deeply the techniques used in these proofs, which have the potential to
produce further results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.