* 2204203
* Menaquinone Biosynthesis via the Futalosine Pathway
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Tadhg Begley, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 566,966.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Tadhg Begley from Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU) is
studying the enzymes involves in the biosynthesis of menaquinone. In humans and
other mammals, menaquinone is an essential vitamin (vitamin K) involved in blood
clotting and bone formation. Vitamin K deficiency leads to prolonged clotting
time and hemorrhaging. These studies will broaden our understanding of nature's
repertoire of reaction chemistry, provide the basic science needed for the
design and screening of new antibiotics against several human pathogens and make
available a set of enzymes that can be used for the development of new
strategies to produce menaquinone by fermentation. The broader impacts include
the mentoring of an assistant professor at Texas A&amp;M University Prairie
View, the hosting of a set of biological chemistry demos for the TAMU Chemistry
open house, the training of undergraduate and graduate students in biological
chemistry research and the development of the TAMU introductory organic
chemistry course required for numerous biological science majors.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will complete the mechanistic characterization
of the remaining four enzymes on the futalosine-dependent menaquinone pathway
(MqnP, MqnM, MqnL, MqnG). These enzymes catalyze the conversion of chorismate to
1,4-dihydroxy-6-naphthoic acid. The reconstitution and mechanistic
characterization of the last four steps of the biosynthesis is the focus of this
grant application. These studies will complete the functional assignment and
mechanistic characterization of all the enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of
menaquinone by the futalosine-dependent pathway. Aim 1 will study the
reconstitution of the four enzymes in vivo in Escherichia coli. Aim 2 will focus
on the in vitro reconstitution of the MqnP-catalyzed prenyl transfer to
1,4-dihydroxy-6-naphthoic acid and determine if MqnP is the key enzyme
controlling the length of the attached prenyl&lt;br/&gt;group. Aim 3 describes
studies on the mechanism of the electrophilic-flavin-cofactor-mediated
decarboxylation of the membrane bound prenylated naphthoic acid intermediate.
Overall, the major questions to be addressed are how MqnP controls the length of
the vitaminâ€™s prenyl substituent, how electrophilic-flavin mediates the
decarboxylation of aryl carboxylic acids, and how MqnK carries out a radical-
mediated methylation of menaquinone. These questions will be answered using a
combination of structural, spectroscopic and substrate analogue
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.