* 2204659
* Characterizing the Physical, Chemical, and Toxicological Properties of Secondhand Aerosols Generated from Electronic Nicotine Delivery Systems in Indoor Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Yue-Wern Huang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2023
* USD 420,000.00

In 2019, 10.9 million American adults used Electronic Nicotine Delivery Systems
(ENDS) such as e-cigarettes, e-hookahs, and vape pens. According to the National
Youth Tobacco Survey in 2020, 33.8% of U.S. middle and high school students
report that they have been exposed to secondhand ENDS aerosols in indoor spaces.
Despite extensive studies on aerosols directly generated from the ENDS
mouthpieces, the properties of secondhand ENDS aerosols are insufficiently
understood because these aerosols need to be generated by human subjects using
ENDS devices. The use of human subjects is very limited, introduces uncertainty
due to uncontrolled other variables (e.g., existing diseases, lung functions,
and smoking habits), and raises ethical concerns. The knowledge gaps caused by
this lack of data lead to confusion and potential delays in regulating ENDS
usage in indoor environments. This research aims to examine the physical,
chemical, and toxicological properties of secondhand ENDS aerosols generated
from a simulated respiratory system recently developed by the research team. The
successful completion of this project will benefit society through the
development of new knowledge in understanding the environmental and health
impact of secondhand ENDS aerosols. Further benefits to society will be achieved
through student education, training, and public outreach. STEM training will be
enhanced through integration of research findings into course modules,
participation of researchers in K-12 summer science camps, and a partnership
with local public library to disseminate the project findings to the public.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Due to the limited data on the properties of secondhand
ENDS aerosols, several fundamental questions are still not answered: 1) What are
the typical size distributions of secondhand ENDS aerosols, and how do they
evolve under controlled environmental factors? 2) Will secondhand ENDS aerosols
in actual indoor environments induce oxidative stress and cytotoxicity? 3) What
are the roles of metals and flavorings in determining the size distribution and
toxic effect of secondhand ENDS aerosols? This project proposes to answer these
questions by conducting experiments in a walk-in environmental chamber and an
experimental house to relate measurements to real-world indoor environments. An
array of online and offline measurement and modeling techniques will be deployed
in this study to examine the physical, chemical, and toxicological properties of
secondhand ENDS aerosols in realistic indoor environments. The collected data
will be used to establish an aerosol dynamics model to predict the evolution of
secondhand ENDS aerosols under the influence of evaporation, coagulation, wall
deposition, and ventilation. This work has the potential to produce a
transformative understanding of the behavior and control of indoor secondhand
ENDS aerosols. Furthermore, it eliminates the need for human subject studies and
creates an environment that effectively controls other potential variables in
order to isolate underlying causes of secondhand ENDS aerosol
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.