* 2204102
* EAR-PF: Are large earthquakes like small earthquakes? Using synthetic earthquakes to resolve discrepancies in observations of earthquake stress drop magnitude-invariance
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* James Neely, Neely, James Scott
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. James Neely has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to assess
whether small and large earthquakes release energy in the same way. This work
will be conducted at the University of Chicago in collaboration with Dr. Sunny
Park and Dr. Annemarie Baltay of the U.S. Geological Survey. Larger earthquakes
release more energy than smaller earthquakes, but how earthquakes release that
energy is not as well understood, despite having important implications for
seismologists’ understanding of earthquake processes and, crucially, the seismic
hazards that earthquakes pose. Specifically, the way that a given earthquake
releases energy determines, at least in part, how strong the shaking will be
(which should, in turn, inform building safety standards, etc.). Using computer
simulations, Dr. Neely will examine assumptions about how earthquakes release
energy and assess whether insights from small earthquakes can help us better
understand the hazards posed by rarer, large earthquakes. Additionally, Dr.
Neely will work on an initiative to foster knowledge-sharing relationships
between Illinois state legislators and researchers within the
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Dr. Neely will examine the question
of whether earthquake stress drop—the decrease in stress along a fault due to an
earthquake—is magnitude-invariant. Earthquake stress drop is thought to control
the levels of high-frequency shaking that damages buildings, and it may provide
insight into earthquake rupture dynamics. Some studies suggest that earthquake
stress drop is constant with earthquake magnitude, while others indicate that it
varies systematically with magnitude. Because seismologists cannot directly
measure stress drop, they cannot compare estimates to the true value, so it is
not known which methods are most accurate. Dr. Neely will overcome this issue by
generating a large dataset of synthetic earthquakes with known stress drops and
then apply four commonly used stress drop estimation methods to this dataset. To
simulate real earthquake data, Dr. Neely will generate earthquakes that differ
from the simple earthquake models assumed by the stress drop methods and examine
how well the stress drop estimates match the true values. Dr. Neely will
identity which stress drop method is most accurate and then examine a large
dataset of real earthquakes to determine whether stress drop is or is not
magnitude-invariant. If stress drop magnitude-invariance is true, seismologists
can measure the stress drops of a region’s past small earthquakes to gain
insight into the stress drops, and potential shaking levels, of future large
earthquakes. But if stress drop magnitude-invariance is false, then
seismological models—and as a result policy preparations, including building
codes—for this future shaking may be wrong and need major revisions. In addition
to this stress drop analysis, Dr. Neely will work to expand the Science One-
Pager Initiative (SOPI), an Illinois-based program where graduate students and
post-doctoral researchers provide short analyses of scientific topics to state
legislators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.