* 2204838
* Catalyst Project: Culturally Responsive and Backward-Design-based Bimodal Units and Assessments as Learning Tools in College Physics
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Akshaya Kumar, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,937.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. Tuskegee University
seeks to develop bimodal teachable units based on backward design that will
allow seamless switching between online and in-person teaching modes, to be
implemented in selected undergraduate physics courses to help achieve equity and
promote student learning outcomes regardless of gender, race, and economic
background.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be driven by two overarching
questions: (1) How can teachable units and materials be structured for a
seamless switch between in-person and online instruction and culturally tailored
to a) reduce misconceptions in science and technology subjects, and b) improve
student motivation to pursue Physics and other science majors at Historically
Black Institutions? (2) Do culturally tailored bimodal teachable units with
diversity components enhance a) students’ ability to connect concepts, b)
confidence in tackling science problems, and c) the faculty’s adaptation of
scientific teaching methodologies? The project will be implemented in three
different physics lectures and their corresponding laboratories in two phases.
In phase I, teachable units will be implemented in a hybrid setup. During phase
II, diverse assessments will be used as a learning tool. The teachable units
rooted in scientific teaching principles will provide feedback to instructors
and students about learning, design activities, and assessments to help diverse
students create and achieve learning goals representing the nature of science.
The instructional materials and activities, including characters from
underrepresented communities and familiar examples, are expected to motivate the
students to pursue physics and other fundamental science majors. The assessment
and survey data from this research will contribute to a deeper understanding of
the delivery and assessment types that maximize knowledge retention among
diverse students. The project will create awareness and foster self-examination
among instructors regarding the need to include culturally relevant and diverse
instructional materials during course content creation for student
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.