* 2204684
* Geometry, Arithmetic, and Groups.
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Cameron Gordon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2024
* USD 49,938.00

A conference on Geometry, Arithmetic, and Groups organized by researchers from
across the United States will be held at the University of Texas, Austin, June
20-24, 2022. This conference will feature a diverse mix of speakers whose work
connects the topics listed in the title in crucial and important ways. The goal
of the conference is to expose the inter-connectivity of these topics to a wide
range of researchers whose work may not necessarily touch each of the areas,
including researchers from underrepresented groups, early career researchers,
and researchers from liberal arts and R2 universities. The format for the
conference includes one hour plenary research talks, multiple lightning-talk
sessions, and dedicated time for informal mathematical discussions. This event
will provide the impetus for new collaborations between researchers from diverse
mathematical fields and institutions, and from a wide variety of career
stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will focus on the interactions
between geometric topology, geometric group theory, number theory,
representation theory, and spectral geometry. At the heart of this interplay is
the theory of Lie groups and their discrete subgroups, where one can produce
manifolds via the actions of discrete groups on associated homogeneous spaces.
Of particular interest are discrete groups acting isometrically on hyperbolic
space. These actions play a fundamental role in low dimensional geometry and
topology via geometrization, and have provided the impetus for much current
research in geometric group theory and the deformation theory of geometric
structures. Among the discrete subgroups of simple Lie groups more generally,
arithmetic lattices play a central role, utilizing technology from
algebraic/analytic number theory and the theory of algebraic groups. These
interactions provide deep and important connections between the geometry of the
associated spaces and the algebra of the arithmetic lattices. All these
interactions have driven mathematical research for more than one hundred years,
and this conference will bring together researchers from these areas and closely
related fields to search for new and exciting connections for the future. The
website for the conference is at https://sites.google.com/view/awr-
conference/home&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.