* 2204701
* Unmasking Stellar Variability: Hierarchical Bayesian methods for characterization of low-mass planets with EPRV spectroscopy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Eric Ford, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2025
* USD 511,163.00

Exoplanets are planets that orbit stars other than the Sun. One approach for
detecting exoplanets looks for a wobble of a star due to the gravitational pull
of any orbiting planets. The motion of the star causes changes in the observed
color of starlight. The signal of Earth-like exoplanets is very small and can be
obscured by or confused with other variations in the star. This challenge is
problematic when seeking the signal of an exoplanet. The investigators will
characterize the changes that occur due to variations in the star by analyzing
starlight. The results will provide a new approach to differentiate the signals
of rocky planets from stellar variability. If successful, these new methods will
contribute to the detection of potentially Earth-like planets. This research
serves our national interest by promoting the progress of science and developing
new methods for finding planets. Increasing the reliability of planet detections
has the potential to increase public trust in science. The methods and tools
developed will be available for researchers and teachers of college-level
courses.&lt;br/&gt;The detection of low-mass exoplanets is challenging due to
the very small signal that low-mass exoplanets induce on the time series of
stellar spectra. Another issue is that the effects of stellar activity on the
spectra are not sufficiently understood and may hide or mimic a planetary
signal. In recent years, progress has been made thanks to the improvements in
quality of spectra from new extreme precision radial velocity (EPRV)
spectrometers. The increased stability, resolution and/or wavelength coverage of
these instruments provides new opportunities for addressing the profound effect
that stellar activity plays in obscuring planetary signals or, perhaps worse,
mimicking a planetary signal which can lead to false exoplanet detections.
Changes in the shapes of spectral lines contain information about stellar
activity relevant for disentangling the effects of stellar activity from true
Doppler shifts due to low-mass exoplanets. The investigators aim to develop
statistical methods that specifically enhance the ability to detect small
Doppler shifts and line shape changes, so as to improve the understanding of the
effects of stellar activity on spectra. The investigators will develop methods
for robust estimation of individual spectral line properties that will be used
to build an advanced statistical model for non-planetary radial velocity
signals. The methods will be tested using spectra from stars observed by two
EPRV spectrometers in order to evaluate the consistency of the methods across
different spectrographs. Student research assistants will be recruited from
underrepresented minorities and public engagement material will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.