* 2204110
* Ligand Regiochemistry on Gold Nanoclusters
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Christopher Ackerson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2025
* USD 499,000.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
(MSN) in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Christopher Ackerson of Colorado
State University is combining chemical synthesis and advanced chemical analysis
tools to study how different types of molecules compete for bonding sites on the
surfaces of clusters of gold atoms. These surfaces can be low-symmetry, meaning
that many different types of bonding sites are present. Different types of
molecules prefer different types of bonding sites. Some molecules will bond to
two sites at the same time. To determine which molecules prefer which binding
sites, Professor Ackerson and his students make well-defined gold clusters, such
as Au25, which has 18 molecule binding sites. They mix Au25 with other molecules
and use advanced imaging methods to see where the molecules bind. In the long
term, they want to write rules that describe where molecules will bind to metal
clusters. Their discoveries could lead to methods for making large molecules
that cannot currently be synthesized. Those molecules could find use in
catalysis, as labels in microscopy, and as medicines. The award supports a
workshop that brings together synthetic experts from different sub-specialties
in chemistry, as well as training the diverse future scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Ackerson aims to transform
current understanding of regiochemical control of ligands on metal nanoparticle
surfaces. The specific system examined is that of thiolate, acetylide, and
similar ligands on magic number gold clusters. These clusters are of low
symmetry (e.g., conforming to C2, i, and similar point groups), meaning that
there are many symmetry-unique ligand binding sites. The overall goals are to
understand the regiochemistry of monodentate ligands on such gold nanoclusters
and to determine structurally how bidentate thiolate ligands bind to magic
number gold clusters. Questions addressed include: (1) What reaction mechanisms
access sites with long-term lifetimes? (2) Do thiolates with distinctive or
demanding R-groups localize to specific regiochemical sites based on their
shape? (3) Do acetylide ligands exchange associatively under ambient conditions?
(4) What is the structural nature of bidentate thiol ligand binding? (5) Do
bidentate ligands achieve useful lifetimes (days to weeks) in ambient conditions
where monodentate ligands continue to exchange? (6) Can a magic-number cluster
protected exclusively by bidentate ligands be produced and crystallized? These
questions are addressed with methodological approaches including MALDI-MS to
determine extent of ligand exchange, and either single crystal X-ray diffraction
or multidimensional NMR spectroscopy to determine regiochemistry of ligand-
exchange products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.