* 2204726
* Research Initiation: Understanding Interactions Between Affect and Identity in First- and Second-Year Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Jessica Swenson, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2024
* USD 178,171.00

Retention in engineering programs and careers is a longstanding concern in
engineering education, particularly among historically underrepresented
populations. Students’ development of their engineering identity, or the sense
of themselves as being an engineer, is known to play an important role in their
decision to persist within the major. While the development of engineering
identity has been explored from many perspectives, the influences of students’
feelings/emotions, values, attitudes, beliefs about the subject have not been
addressed. This research seeks to understand how students’ feelings associated
with learning engineering, science, and mathematics as well as their values,
attitudes, and beliefs about those subjects, interact with students’ development
of their engineering identity. This project will follow participants through
their first two years as undergraduate engineering students, which is a critical
time during which students decide whether to persist in engineering. This work
will improve understanding of how students’ feelings about their experiences in
mathematics, science, and engineering courses contribute to the formation of
their engineering identities, which in turn contributes to their decision to
pursue or leave engineering. Because students’ other identities shape both their
affective experiences and the development of their engineering identity, we will
examine the relationships between engineering identity and affect within the
context of students’ other social identities. In addition to shaping instructor
practices to help all students experience positive identity-building affective
experiences, this work could therefore support participation and retention of
women and underrepresented minorities in engineering, supporting this NSF
program’s goal of making participation in engineering open and accessible to
all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing models of affect and engineering identity
separately suggest that local affect (the changing emotions that students
experience during disciplinary activity) and global affect (the broad attitudes,
values, and beliefs that students hold about a discipline) may have potential to
influence and interact with engineering identity, and in turn, to influence
retention; however, these links have not been explored. This work will build on
disciplinary literature in mathematics and science education about affect, as
well as theories on engineering identity development, in order to contribute to
a theory of how affect pertaining to science, mathematics, and engineering
contributes to students’ engineering identity. Using a mixed-methods
longitudinal approach that follows students across their first two years in an
engineering program, researchers from Trinity University and the University at
Buffalo seek to answer three research questions: RQ1: How are first- and second-
year engineering students’ local affect different or the same while doing
engineering work vs. mathematics and science work? RQ2: Over the course of their
early college experiences with mathematics, science, and engineering, how do
students’ global affect about these disciplines change? RQ3: How do students’
local and global affect about mathematics, science, and engineering contribute
to/interact with their identities, including engineering identity? The research
team will interview and survey engineering students in each of their first four
semesters to understand these students’ affects and identities. The study will
contribute a set of case studies based on the interviews, from which we will
develop a model of the interactions between affect and engineering identity
which also considers the influence of a range of other student identities on
shaping those interactions. Additionally, the study will develop new instruments
for measuring engineering affect. The instruments, model, and case studies will
inform efforts to improve retention and broaden participation in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.