* 2204171
* A large-scale investigation into the foundations and development of social cognition
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Rotem Aboody, Aboody, Rotem
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the
SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Laura Schulz
at MIT and Dr. Elizabeth Bonawitz at Harvard, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist examining how children’s understanding of
other minds develops. To share what we know, learn from others, work together,
and conduct even simple conversations, we need to consider other people’s mental
states—their goals, desires, knowledge, and beliefs. This social cognitive
ability to figure out what other people are thinking, and reason about their
mental states, matures throughout the preschool years. However, despite the
importance of these capacities for teaching, learning, and basic communication,
it is still not fully clear how they emerge. Instead, recent work has uncovered
a puzzle: while preschoolers have an early grasp of mental states like goals,
preferences and desires, they often struggle to reason about what others know or
believe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate how different aspects of mental
state reasoning emerge, this project will leverage a computational approach to
clarify the cognitive capacities required for different mental state reasoning
tasks, and validate an updated mental state reasoning battery to assess the
development of each capacity. The project will then leverage recent advances in
large-scale online developmental science to administer this battery to a large
and representative sample of children. Specifically, the NSF-funded online
CRADLE infrastructure will enable the project to collect data of unprecedented
richness and scale, collecting data from participants worldwide, and following
participants longitudinally with ease. Through this project, the fellow will
develop new tools and pipelines for online data collection, and will assess
whether these new methods enable researchers to recruit more representative
samples. These advances will be of broad use to the field of developmental
science. By learning more about the development of human social cognition, we
can better understand what makes humans such uniquely good teachers, learners,
and communicators. This information can help researchers continue improving
educational policy, help clinicians better assist individuals who struggle with
mental state reasoning, and enable scientists to design artificial intelligences
that can better interact with humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.