* 2204080
* Riboflavinator: a molecular machine for efficient riboflavin biosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2022,03/31/2026
* Audrey Lamb, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 03/31/2026
* USD 486,057.00

With support from the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the Chemistry
Division, Professor Audrey Lamb from the University of Texas at San Antonio
(UTSA) will investigate the chemical mechanism of the biosynthesis of riboflavin
(vitamin B2) with a special focus on the last enzymes in the pathway. Riboflavin
is required by all living organisms and is synthesized from one guanosine
5â€™-triphosphate (GTP) and two ribulose 5-phosphate molecules using five unique
enzymes. Despite unparalleled chemistry and the ubiquitous requirement for
riboflavin, compelling evidence for the chemical mechanisms of the enzymes in
this biosynthetic pathway has not been presented. We will investigate the
hypothesis that the enzymes work in concert as a molecular machine for efficient
production of this critical vitamin. This project will allow graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows to acquire specialized training in enzyme kinetics and
high-resolution X-ray crystallography. Portions of this project are structured
such that undergraduate students will obtain meaningful research experiences to
inspire careers in chemical research. This project also includes professional
development outside of the laboratory for graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows and pedagogical training for faculty at UTSA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under
this grant, the Lamb research team aims to establish how riboflavin is formed
enzymatically from GTP and ribulose-5-phosphate, including structural
identification of intermediates that are detected kinetically. This proposal
focuses on the two final enzymes of the biosynthetic pathway that perform
curious reactions. RibE (lumazine synthase) adds 4 carbons derived from the
sugar ribulose 5-phosphate to a pyrimidinedione derived from GTP, generating
lumazine. RibC performs an unusual dismutation reaction in which those same 4
carbons of the RibE reaction are transferred from one lumazine to another,
generating riboflavin. The team will apply nuclear magnetic resonance
methodology that they have developed to observe the formation and disappearance
of intermediates for enzymes earlier in the biosynthetic pathway to substantiate
or refute the largely hypothetical chemical mechanisms of RibE and RibC. Earlier
work on this system has led the Lamb team to propose that efficient catalysis
occurs when a molecular machine is formed, in which RibE forms as capsid that
encapsulates the other 4 enzymes of the pathway. They have labelled this system
the riboflavinator. The outcomes of this project are expected to advance the
understanding of how this essential cofactor is
biosynthesized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.