* 2204892
* Research Initiation:  Predicting Student Success and Persistence in Early Engineering Coursework Using Real-Time Changes in Emotion
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Ali Ghahremaninezhad, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 05/31/2024
* USD 199,999.00

This research will address the systemic problem of persistence and retention in
engineering education. Nationwide, college students' success in undergraduate
engineering programs is commonly hampered by rigorous first-year engineering
coursework. Students often abruptly discover that early engineering courses are
especially challenging due to their rapid pace and the wide breadth of
challenging technical concepts that must be mastered. A major influence
governing students' performance is their belief in their own capability to
succeed. However, their waning self-confidence and other mental health
challenges eventually lead many to withdraw from engineering. This research
initiation project aims to serve the national interest by identifying critical
factors that affect students' beliefs and can predict their success and
persistence in undergraduate engineering programs. Of particular significance
are the psychological stressors that drive changes in students' confidence on a
daily basis, and how such changes affect students' persistence, especially in
underrepresented groups. The results of the research will inform the development
of intervention strategies that could ultimately improve retention rates in
engineering programs throughout the country. This outcome is well aligned with
NSF's initiatives to drive a larger, stronger, and more diverse stream of
students into the country's STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal is to establish causal links between engineering students' state of mind
(self-efficacy, emotion, and motivation) and other major variables including
time, demographics, rigor of course content, and psychological stressors. The
research approach will utilize experience sampling (using mobile phone
assessment) of students' psychological state on a semi-daily to semi-weekly
basis. These sampling polls will repeatedly solicit students' states of emotion
and other factors that may be leading-edge indicators of dropout. The polls will
utilize validated survey instruments such that the research efforts can be
replicated by researchers at other institutions. The data will be analyzed using
well-established statistical methods to provide explanations of: (1) which
indicators of students' self-efficacy and emotion fluctuate over time, (2) how
the difficulty of specific course topics relates to changes in students' self-
efficacy, (3) which course-specific aspects and psychological stressors
primarily dictate students' self-efficacy, and (4) whether daily changes in
emotion and self-efficacy are correlated to student demographics. These results
will enable the research team to scientifically understand how students'
emotional fluctuations disrupt (or stem from) their performance in early
engineering coursework. In the long-term, the research efforts could ultimately
lead to (a) enhanced interest and motivation, (b) increased persistence in
engineering, and (c) the development of novel early warning and intervention
systems tailored to the unique backgrounds of at-risk demographic cohorts. The
challenging first-year engineering curricula could be revised to better align
with the psychological demands of early engineering students who struggle to
adapt to college lifestyle. In terms of professional development, theoretical
knowledge and functional social science research skills will be instilled in
three Civil Engineering faculty under the guidance of a faculty mentor from
Psychology, all located at the University of Miami. This project represents a
unique opportunity for researchers in these two disparate disciplines to
collaborate to address a multidisciplinary problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.