* 2204362
* 2022 AIChE/ASEE Chemical Engineering Summer School: Building the Chemical Engineering Community
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Taryn Bayles, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 04/30/2023
* USD 99,557.00

The American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) and the American Society
for Engineering Education (ASEE) will hold the 17th Chemical Engineering Summer
School from July 24-29, 2022, at the Colorado School of Mines in Golden,
Colorado. At the behest of AIChE, the Summer School was initiated in 1931 by the
Society for the Promotion of Engineering Education, now known as ASEE, to
promulgate best practices in chemical engineering education. The Summer School
has since been held every five years and continues to be a valuable professional
development resource for hundreds of new chemical engineering faculty members.
The 2022 Summer School attendees will engage in a half-day Teaching Institute,
attend plenary talks, and participate in sessions on pedagogy, diversity and
inclusivity, emerging technical topics in the field, and industry-related
content. The Summer School agenda includes time for both informal and structured
professional networking with other attendees and organizers as well as invited
industrial representatives. At the conclusion of the Summer School, attendees
will have developed new skills and knowledge to improve their teaching
effectiveness and have discovered a peer network with whom they can share new
insights and continue to grow as chemical engineering educators. The attendees'
early investment in learning effective teaching strategies will manifest
benefits with each subsequent cohort of chemical engineering graduates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2022 Chemical Engineering Summer School emerges from
the partnership between the AIChE Chemical Education Division and the ASEE
Chemical Engineering Division to provide new faculty members with effective
teaching strategies. The Summer School is a unique professional development
opportunity for new chemical engineering faculty and builds upon a model that
has been successful for decades. The Summer School curriculum is rooted in
evidence-based teaching practices taught by experienced chemical engineering
educators. Attendees are, thus, expected to come away from the Summer School
having developed their teaching portfolios, strategies for adopting active and
cooperative learning in courses, as well as an understanding of how to assess
student performance and outcomes and to use this information to improve teaching
effectiveness. The Summer School agenda also includes "Industry Day" programming
to support effective undergraduate curricula design and to discuss the keys to
successful industrial-academic research collaborations. Virtual communities of
practice, supported via the AIChE Engage platform, will provide attendees with
opportunities to continue sharing and learning best practices with their
colleagues for years to come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.