* 2204419
* Allosteric Modulation in Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptors
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Mark Levandoski, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 06/30/2024
* USD 123,674.00

With support from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Divisio, Dr. Mark Levandoski of Grinnell College will investigate how nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors respond to neurotransmitters, chemical signals that
control how cells communicate with each other throughout the nervous system.
These receptors change their shapes to control the passage of charged particles
into muscle cells and neurons. This project will use high level computational
methods to study how these shape changes are affected by acetylcholine, a
neurotransmitter found naturally in the body, or nicotine, one that comes from
use of tobacco products. The project provides research opportunities and
mentoring to undergraduate students and, as a result, is expected to increase
access to the sciences for students traditionally underrepresented in STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) fields, improve STEM
education, and contribute to a more diverse, global STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors play important
roles in higher order brain functions such as memory, attention and motor
control. These receptors have been intensely studied, making them foundational
exemplars of a very large family of ligand-gated ion channels. Dr. Levandoski’s
research has focused for two decades on the actions of small molecules that
modulate the receptor state transitions without activating the system
themselves, compounds that work like molecular rheostats. This project will
apply molecular dynamics simulations to elucidate local structural elements in
the receptor binding sites and how model allosteric modulators effect global
changes that transform modulator binding into channel gating. The results from
these simulations will allow molecular interpretation of the large body of
functional electrophysiology data from the PI’s lab and others. This project
aims to provide a comprehensive view of how a full-length, heteromeric nicotinic
receptor interacts with allosteric modulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by Chemistry of Life Processes Program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.