* 2204910
* FOCS Conference Student and Postdoc Travel Support
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2022
* Shanghua Teng, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 12/31/2022
* USD 15,000.00

The IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) is one of the two
premier annual research conferences that covers the breadth of theoretical
computer science. It is a conference of very long standing that has continued to
played a formative role in the field; it is also at the leading edge of
connections made to other fields. This project aims to increase the impact of
this conference on students and postdocs, particularly those from under-
represented groups, by encouraging and enabling their participation, especially
in cases where travel expenses would otherwise preclude their
attendance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concretely, the investigator requests NSF fund
to assist students and postdoctoral fellows for attending this year’s Annual
FOCS conference, sponsored by the IEEE Computer Society Technical Committee on
Mathematical Foundations of Computing (TCMF). The coming FOCS will take place at
the Hilton Denver City Center in Denver, Colorado, between February 7-10 2022.
As computing becoming ubiquitous, it is crucial to expand the participation of
young scholars in cutting-edge research. FOCS has served as one of the most
important venues for groundbreaking research in theoretical computer science –
and increasingly, as a key ambassador to other areas within and outside computer
science. The intellectual merit consists of supporting researchers at early
stage of their career to present their work and to enhance their engagements. We
anticipate that the resultant discussions will expose the awardees to a broad
set of fundamental questions and ideas. We expect the community to benefit in
turn, as such junior researchers have contributed substantially to the growth of
theoretical computer science over the years. With emphasis on young scholars in
need, the broader impact is on supporting under-represented junior researchers
in this the stimulating exchanging of ideas, and for the conference attendees to
benefit from the attendance of a diverse population. As the tools and techniques
from theoretical computer science (such as novel models, algorithms,
impossibility results, and unexpected connections in data science and machine
learning) are becoming vital to several domains inside and outside computer
science, it is anticipated that such broader participation of junior researchers
will benefit society at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.