* 2204489
* EAR-PF: Methane Dynamics in Tidal Salt Marshes: Production and Fate
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Margaret Capooci, Capooci, Margaret
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2024
* USD 0.00

Dr. Margaret Capooci has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
pursue research and further her education at the University of Georgia under the
mentorship of Dr. Amanda Spivak. Dr. Capooci will conduct field experiments to
better understand methane dynamics in salt marsh soils. Tidal salt marshes,
along with mangrove forests and seagrass beds, store large amounts of carbon
within their soils. Marshes can also release carbon through several pathways,
including methane emission from the soil to the atmosphere. Since salt marshes
play an important role in reducing climate change via carbon storage, it is
important to understand how, when, and why salt marshes release methane, a gas
that contributes to climate change. Therefore, Dr. Capoociâ€™s research aims to
better understand the ways in which methane is produced, consumed, and released
from salt marsh soils. These data will help scientists better model salt marsh
carbon cycling, as well as provide information to better restore and manage salt
marshes for their carbon storage benefits. Dr. Capooci will also involve
teachers and undergraduate students from underserved and underrepresented
communities in her research, including opportunities for hands-on data
collection in the marsh.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methane emissions were thought to
be low-to-non-existent in tidal salt marshes due to acetoclastic and
hydrogenotrophic methanogenesis being outcompeted by sulfur reducers in the
soil. However, researchers have found high methane emissions in marshes, as well
as an alternative methanogenesis pathway, methanotrophic methanogensis, that
uses non-competitive substrates to produce methane. However, methane emissions
are highly variable and difficult to predict in salt marshes. Therefore,
resolving the heterogeneity regarding CH4 emissions necessitates a closer look
at how methane is produced, consumed, and transported under a variety of
scenarios, as well as linking these processes to active microbial communities. A
combination of techniques will be used in this project, including mesocosm
studies, isotopic tracers, qualitative staple isotope probing, and field surveys
to assess how methane dynamics change over temporal (i.e., tidal, seasonal) and
spatial (i.e., micrometer to plot scale, depth from soil surface) scales. This
project aims to advance scientific knowledge of salt marsh carbon cycling by
providing mechanistic information regarding methane dynamics that can be applied
across sites and be used to up-scale methane fluxes in model runs, as well as
provide data to support natural resource managers in the conservation and
restoration of salt marshes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.