* 2204163
* CAREER: Flat Singular Optics: Generation and Detection of Optical Vortex Beams with Plasmonic Metasurfaces in Linear and Nonlinear Regimes
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Jie Gao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 09/30/2023
* USD 335,156.00

Abstract Title: CAREER: Flat Singular Optics: Generation and Detection of
Optical Vortex Beams with Plasmonic Metasurfaces in Linear and Nonlinear
Regimes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The study of
the phenomena of phase and polarization singularities is known as singular
optics. Vortex beams display singular scalar features with phase singularities
in the beam center, while polarization singular beams present singular vectorial
features with one undefined polarization parameter. The current open research
challenges in singular optics are how to generate pure vortices with broad
bandwidth and polarization singular beams on chip, how to realize compact linear
and nonlinear vortex beam converters, and what kind of device enables direct
identification of vortex topological charges. In order to address these
challenges, in this research, uniquely designed plasmonic metasurfaces made of
ultrathin metallic nanostructures are utilized as a powerful and compact
platform for exploring flat singular optics, generating singular optical beams
in both linear and nonlinear regimes, as well as detecting vortex beam orbital
angular momentum with optoelectronic integration. This research paves the way
for advancing many applications in optical communication, beam shaping and
conversion, optoelectronic devices, and optical sensing and imaging. The
research of singular optics and metasurfaces is integrated with education and
outreach activities in order to enhance various levels of education, including
undergraduate and graduate students training, underrepresented and female
students recruitment, women in optics student group organization,
interdisciplinary metamaterials course development and outreach activities for
K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The goals
of the research are to explore the generation and detection of optical vortex
beams using ultra-thin plasmonic metasurfaces in both linear and nonlinear
regimes in order to solve open research challenges and create new opportunities
in singular optics, gain fundamental knowledge of spin-orbit and orbit-orbit
interactions and optical angular momentum conservation. The research uses the
approaches of linear and nonlinear optical design and simulation, plasmonic
metasurface sample nanofabrication, optical and optoelectronic device
characterizations to study the underlying physics of metasurface based light
manipulation and light-matter interaction in singular optics, nonlinear optics,
and spin-orbit photonics. The intellectual significance of the activity
includes: (i) generation of pure optical vortex beams and polarization singular
beams to advance the research of complex structured light manipulation and
topological singularities; (ii) exploration of second- and third-harmonic vortex
beam generation and beam shaping in nonlinear plasmonic metasurfaces to reveal
the conservation law of orbital angular momentum and create compact nonlinear
beam converters and active photonic devices; (iii) realization of optoelectronic
vortex beam detection based on spin and orbital Hall effects in plasmonic
metasurfaces to solve the challenge of on-chip orbital angular momentum
detection and build functional metasurface based optoelectronic devices.