* 2204042
* CAS-Climate: Spectromicroscopy of Elementary Steps in Catalytic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Wilson Ho, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 480,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, a research team led by Professors Wilson Ho and Ruqian Wu
from the Departments of Chemistry and Physics and Astronomy, respectively, at
the University of California-Irvine is developing a sophisticated measurement
approach for studying the catalytic chemistry of carbon dioxide, an important
greenhouse gas. This research has the potential to provide fundamental
understanding that is needed to help develop the chemistry of carbon
sequestration a very important environmental/climate science goal. An important
objective is the application of sophisticated measurement tools to probe the
mechanism for conversion of carbon dioxide to higher-value hydrocarbons using
single-atom catalysts. Catalysis by single metal atoms deposited on a substrate
enables conservation of valuable metals. This project will examine how metal
atoms bind reactants and serve as catalytic centers for directed chemical
reactions that are stimulated by electrons and light, rather than by heat. The
team is working to combine chemical measurement and imaging at the atomic scale
with theoretical calculations in order to characterize and visualize
intermediate species that remain challenging to identify but whose observation
would facilitate mechanistic understanding and thereby enable the development of
catalysts for targeted reaction courses. This project seeks to provide missing
knowledge that is crucial for controlling the chemistry of carbon dioxide while
also advancing the state-of-the-art in precision measurement and theoretical
methodology for studying the chemistry of single-atom catalysts. In addition to
addressing one of the most consequential challenges in chemistry and the global
implications for moderating climate change, the broader impacts of the work are
enhanced by the emphasis on basic principles of chemical reactions that are
transferrable to the classroom. Broader impacts of the project will include
demonstrations involving liquid nitrogen and vacuum for middle school students
from nearby underserved communities. The educational impact of the project will
be enhanced through education and outreach activities in collaboration with the
University of California-Irvine Eddleman Quantum Institute and the NSF Materials
Research Science and Engineering Center, including opportunities to connect with
high school students and undergraduate and graduate students from surrounding
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature of complex interactions between
atoms, molecules, and substrates has for many years confounded insights into
catalytic reactions. The design of effective catalysts is among the most urgent
fundamental and technological challenges for energy harvesting and environmental
protection. Chemical reactions occur rapidly and often indiscriminately in
complex environment and at elevated temperature, and details of the reactions
are difficult to obtain by density functional theory calculations and large
ensemble statistical experiments. It is desirable to be able to measure and
control chemical reactions step-by-step and associated intermediate species.
This research explores with the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) the smallest
catalytic centers in chemistry: a single active atom on an inert two-dimensional
van der Waals monolayer or ultrathin insulating film. The reactions under study
will proceed by inducing with different stimuli: mechanical motion of the tip,
tunneling electrons, and light illumination. Furthermore, the spectro-microscopy
capability is expected to provide direct real-space visualization of individual
chemical bonds and skeletal structure of the chemical species. A deeper
understanding of the local chemistry and reaction kinetics will rely on first-
principles calculations to explain the data and make predictions to guide the
experimental effort. This project will focus on the reduction of carbon dioxide
to value-added hydrocarbons as fuels and will examine intermediate species with
different electronic, vibrational, spin, structural, and energetic properties.
The combined experiment-theory effort is designed to identify and identify these
species and provide molecular-level information about their
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.