* 2204594
* EAR-PF: The Rapid Response of Permafrost (RRP) to Intense Day-Long and Season-Long Climate Warming
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Cansu Culha, Culha, Cansu
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 05/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Approximately 85% of the Alaskan landscape, more than half of Alaskan
communities, 75% of Alaskan pipelines, and 80% of state-owned Alaskan roads are
on periglacial land -- an active soil layer that undergoes seasonal freeze-thaw
cycles, supported by a deeper frozen layer called permafrost. Global warming
accelerates melting, thinning and weakening of permafrost, which raises concerns
for the stability of periglacial landscapes and the sustainability of critical
infrastructure. Furthermore, land surface failures in periglacial environments
can deliver large quantities of sediment, metals, and bacterial life to fragile
local and coastal watershed ecologies, as well as release greenhouse gasses to
the atmosphere. A vital part of government and industry response to climate
change will be tools that manage the unprecedented hazards of permafrost in
periglacial landscapes. Dr. Culha will characterize the underlying physics of
these tools. One objective is to create models that predict the different types
of periglacial response to rapid, intense warming, like seasonal heat waves. A
second objective is to develop a novel interactive application that can support
national and local Arctic community leaders in the rapid permafrost response, as
well as to use community inputs to train and enhance her
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During July 2019, one of the hottest on record,
collaborators documented a 100-meter wide ``retrogressive thaw slump," an
unprecedented periglacial landscape response to rapid, intense warming. This
horseshoe shaped landscape failure has since formed a stream from the melting
permafrost, delivering silty water to a nearby watershed. Landscape failures
like retrogressive thaw slumps and water draining events can pose risks not just
to critical infrastructure such as roads, oil pipelines and schools but
potentially to the sustainability of indigenous populations across the Canadian
Arctic and in parts of Alaska. The risks may also cause these indigenous
populations to relocate or rebuild if the failures lead to clogged fresh water
resources, damaged fisheries and altered ecological habitats. Furthermore,
landscape failure events are associated with the release of permafrost-trapped
gasses, metals, nutrients and pathogens into the ecosystem. Thus, the effects of
periglacial landscape failure are not limited to the failure area. A key
proposal objective is to develop a regime diagram of the different permafrost
responses as a function of landscape and climatic characteristics. The models
from this objective will enable the development of hazard maps of periglacial
landscapes. A second major objective is the development of a practical
interactive digital tool that applies the predictive hazard maps to provide
instantaneous risk assessments. For example, through this application, water
agencies can quantify vulnerability to sediment bombardment from land failures,
fisheries can extract probabilities for increased sediment delivery and metal
leaching, and natural disaster agencies can estimate the regional extents and
infrastructure that are most vulnerable to permafrost landscape collapse. With
user input, the application can further help test and improve the accuracy of
the models. This proposal will use field observations with unprecedented spatial
and temporal resolution from Axel Heiberg Island, novel computational physical
models, data science and traditional knowledge to characterize, understand, and
disseminate emerging hazards and critical risks of these summer warming
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.