* 2204380
* ADVANCE Partnership: Advancing Gender Equity in Computing and Engineering Academic Professions through Multi-Organization Collaboration
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Beth Quinn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 07/31/2026
* USD 540,871.00

The project team seeks to significantly advance organizational change for gender
equity in STEM, particularly in computing and engineering academic professions.
Recent data indicates that 26% of tenured faculty in STEM are women, which
dwindles further when specifically looking at engineering and computing faculty
(17%). For this project, the National Center for Women and Information
Technology (NCWIT) will partner with the Women in Engineering ProActive Network
(WEPAN) and the Aspire Alliance to address the systemic barriers women face in
computing and engineering academic workplaces. This project seeks to leverage
collective impact practices and directly enhance the experiences and career
opportunities of intersectionally diverse women in computing and engineering
academic workplaces nationally. The approach is by unifying organizations that
collaboratively provide resources to address systemic and structural change and
targeting policies, practices, and norms in computing and engineering academic
workplaces. The project aims to raise awareness, and increase the adoption of
effective, research-based diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) change efforts
among higher education administrators, faculty, and staff, who then become
institutional change leaders. The project team plans to adapt evidence-based
resources and programs to better—and more comprehensively—address systemic
issues related to recruiting and retaining intersectionally diverse women in
computing and engineering workplaces at multiple institutional levels
(institution, college, department, program).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
goal of this project is to lay the foundation for the creation and widespread
utilization of a first-of-its-kind, scalable software decision support platform
specifically designed to empower computing and engineering departments to
implement systemic, sustainable approaches to creating inclusive cultures in the
academic workplace. Working together, the partner organizations seek to 1)
integrate their evidence-based resource collections; 2) curate these resources
into sub-collections aligned with the NCWIT Academic Workplace Systemic Change
Model; 3) build out and scale an easy-to-use online platform, which embeds the
curated resource sub-collections, to guide computing and engineering departments
through the process of developing strategic and intersectional approaches for
addressing systemic barriers to creating inclusive cultures; and 4) deploy a
guided, community-based professional development and strategic planning
experience for computing and engineering departments. The project and
collaborative infrastructure plans are based on established theories of
organizational change and relevant research. The project team seeks to utilize
insights generated through targeted focus groups and a community-based
professional development program to enable the creation and refinement of
contextually relevant, easily adopted resources that can be shared on a national
scale. Sound quantitative and qualitative evaluation methods will be utilized
throughout the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed
to foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions.  Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate.  ADVANCE "Partnership" awards provide support for projects
that scale-up evidence-based systemic change strategies to enhance gender equity
for STEM faculty regionally or nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE
program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions. 
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate.  ADVANCE "Partnership"
awards provide support for projects that scale-up evidence based systemic change
strategies to enhance gender equity for STEM faculty regionally or
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.