* 2204671
* Collaborative Research: Bridging the Space-Time Continuum to Investigate How Biodiversity Scales Across Subterranean Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2026
* Annette Engel, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 02/28/2026
* USD 201,568.00

Many cave-dwelling animals have evolved striking traits, such as reduced or lost
eyes, lost pigmentation, elongated limbs, and altered metabolism associated with
colonizing a range of unique subsurface habitats. Previous studies of individual
cave-adapted species from the same locations suggest that complex biological
interactions within and among species have occurred over time. However, it is
unclear how long it takes to form a cave ecosystem and how ecosystem functions
are maintained through time. On Hawaiʻi Island, continuous volcanic activities
over hundreds of thousands of years created subterranean habitats, known as lava
tubes, that are of different geologic ages and represent distinct eco-evo
“islands.” Diverse yet understudied communities of cave-adapted arthropod
species live in these Hawaiian lava tubes and are sustained by the roots of the
native pioneer tree, ōhi'a. The project will result in several major
advancements, including documenting and describing new species occurrences and
distributions, as well as obtaining ecological and genetic data for the lava
tubes and species, both of which will serve as significant breakthroughs for
Hawaiʻi, where island biodiversity loss has reached unprecedented levels. The
project places a strong emphasis on the local Native Hawaiian community, and
will support educating the next generation of diverse scientists and the public
about integrative biological research by including: (1) year-long cross-
disciplinary research internships for undergraduate students in Hawaiʻi, (2)
collaborative training for students and researchers in biodiversity, ecology,
and molecular genetics, and (3) renovation of the Hawaiian Cave Arthropod
Exhibit at the Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum in Honolulu, Hawaiʻi, which will
include the development of public outreach programs and K-12 educational
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses an integrative approach to
understand how ecological interactions and evolutionary chance generate
biodiversity and support the taxonomic, functional, and phylogenetic diversity
of subterranean arthropod communities across different spatial and geological
scales. With the potential to discover more subterranean arthropod diversity,
this research involves systematic biological surveys of under- or unexplored
lava tubes on Hawaiʻi Island to determine community-level diversity patterns
that can be compared to estimated species richness and alpha (within community)
and beta (among communities) diversity. Ecological niches and species
interactions that define functional diversity will be evaluated using stable
isotope ratio analysis of arthropods and diet resources. Phylogenetic
diversities will determine the extent of parallel diversification across
lineages, communities, and niches. The uncovered ecological and evolutionary
relationships establish the importance of ecosystem-level feedbacks among
different diversity-regulating processes (i.e., food web interactions,
population dynamics, speciation) that govern subterranean ecosystem creation and
maintenance through time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.