* 2204301
* Singular Structure of Minimal Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Nicholas Edelen, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2025
* USD 250,573.00

Minimal surfaces are mathematical models of soap films, or more generally any
interface whose energy and area are proportional: they are surfaces that locally
minimize area. In addition to having a rich history, minimal surfaces are an
important tool in analysis of physical systems and geometric questions. A
prominent example is the role stable minimal surfaces play in the study of
scalar curvature in general relativity. Just like the soap films they model,
minimal surfaces in general have a "singular set" where they are not smooth (for
example, consider bubbles in the bathtub: they have singular junctions were
multiple bubbles meet). The goal of this project is to work towards better
understanding of the singular set of a minimal surface, what structure it
possesses, and the behavior of the minimal surface near singularities. In
addition to pursuing these research projects, the PI will mentor graduate and
undergraduate students and continue outreach work with a local community
center's afterschool math program for elementary-, middle-, and high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies higher dimensional minimal
hypersurfaces that are area-minimizing, stable, or have finite index. If one
precludes, often for natural reasons of orientability, "Y-type" singularities
(encountered in the bathtub), then the singular set drops to codimension 7. The
project will study the space of 7-dimensional minimal hypersurfaces with
isolated singularities and finite index/area in a closed 8-manifold, with the
view towards a proving a notion of "bumpiness" for certain singular minimal
hypersurfaces. The PI will also investigate non-isolated singularities. The
research will also attempt to classify 8-dimensional minimal hypersurfaces in
Euclidean space asymptotic to certain cylindrical cones, which would serve to
model the geometric degeneration of surfaces towards these cylindrical
singularities. The work aims to establish a general isoperimetric-type
inequality for the singular set in terms of the minimal hypersurface's boundary
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.