* 2204741
* LSAMP BD: LSU BD 9 2022 Cohort, LA-BRIDGE: Louisiana Broadening Resources for Increasing Diversity in Graduate Education
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Guoqiang Li, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through the
development of highly competitive students from populations underrepresented in
STEM disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians,
Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The goal of the
LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity is to increase the quantity and
quality of STEM graduate students from underrepresented populations, with
emphasis on PhD matriculation and completion. BD programs implemented in the
nation's institutions of higher education contribute to addressing one of the
objectives in NSF's 2018-2022 Strategic Plan, namely to "foster the growth of a
more capable and diverse research workforce and advance the scientific and
innovation skills of the Nation." The vision of this grant is to provide a
national model to produce underrepresented scientists and engineers with
doctoral degrees in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The performance site for this
LSAMP BD Activity is Louisiana State University (LSU), one of the 14
universities and colleges included in the Louis Stokes Louisiana Alliance for
Minority Participation (LS-LAMP) program. This project is designed to attract,
retain, and graduate a cohort of underrepresented PhD students in STEM
disciplines equipped with career readiness skills and self-efficacy to enter the
STEM workforce. The program components integrate mentoring and research into
recruitment and retention strategies alongside targeted activities such as
retreats, workshops, monthly meetings, individual development plans, cultural
events, summer writing experiences and community outreach. In addition, the
project is guided by research questions that are designed to ignite best
practices and generate new knowledge about the experiences of a critical
graduate student populace. This LS-LAMP BD activity at LSU will positively
impact the retention and graduation rates of STEM graduate students from
underrepresented populations in doctoral programs, thus producing a diverse
workforce of STEM professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.