* 2204757
* CAS: Sustainable Carboxylation with Carbon Dioxide at Tailored Heterogeneous Electrocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Karthish Manthiram, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 11/30/2023
* USD 342,085.00

Chemical manufacturing in the United States is source of economic benefits,
though it can also be a contributor to environmental pollution. The project is
conceived with the goal of developing new methods of chemical manufacturing that
optimize the benefits and minimize the problems. The Chemical Catalysis program
in the Division of Chemistry is funding work by Professor Karthish Manthiram at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to develop methods of making polymers
(plastics) using carbon dioxide, simple carbon-containing molecules, water, and
electricity. The new process may provide a highly sustainable route to “carbon-
negative plastics.” Key to this this project is the use of metal catalysts that
can add carbon dioxide to molecules made of hydrogen and carbon. In parallel
with the laboratory research, a new outreach program targeted at middle school
girls is being developed. This program teaches chemical principles surrounding
renewable energy for chemical manufacturing. These efforts promote the
involvement of women and underrepresented minorities in research and STEM fields
of study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrochemical carboxylation can enable the
sustainable synthesis of a wide variety of valuable carboxylic acids from carbon
dioxide and renewable electricity with net-negative greenhouse gas emissions.
Acrylic acid is a large-volume commodity chemical whose sustainable synthesis is
highly sought. With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Karthish Manthiram is leading a project to
develop electrochemical carboxylation as a key driver for a novel synthetic
route to sustainably produce acrylic acid from carbon dioxide and ethylene. To
activate ethylene for carboxylation, it is necessary to halogenate it, which can
be done at ambient or near-ambient conditions. This reaction leads to a variety
of halogenated-intermediates. This project is focused on studying how to
electrocatalytically carboxylate these halogenated ethylene derivatives by
developing silver-based catalysts. The Manthiram Lab at MIT is developing an
outreach program that conveys how knowledge of chemistry can be used to
understand global warming and solve problems in chemical synthesis. The program
is targeted at middle school girls, helping to improve representation of women
and underrepresented minorities in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.