* 2204393
* Ideas Lab: Dark Dimensions of the RNA Regulome (D2R2)
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Lydia Contreras, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 11/30/2023
* USD 374,671.00

A week-long workshop, a so-called Ideas Lab, will bring together different
members of the life science community to better understand how the full set of
genetic components that are present in living organisms are used to sustain
their functions. Part of the DNA that has been characterized in living organisms
(the genome) is transcribed into RNA that encodes for proteins that in turn
perform biological functions (growth, metabolism, movement, etc.). Yet a large
part of the genome produces diverse classes of RNA that do not encode proteins
and that remain vastly uncharacterized in their function. Given that these types
of molecules are known to exist in all living systems, it is important to
understand their function. This is relevant to understanding how living systems
function and adapt to their environment, as well as to develop new technologies
with applications in bioeconomy, including agriculture, medicine, and bioenergy.
In addition to supporting insightful exchanges among scientists of different
expertise and backgrounds, this workshop will ultimately provide educational
opportunities for students and postdocs in interdisciplinary research, as new
research projects will be developed as result of this Ideas
Lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Dark Dimensions of the RNA Regulome (D2R2) Ideas
Lab will be a week-long workshop designed to bring together new research teams
from a broad range of disciplines to address cutting-edge questions about the
evolution and functional significance of RNA molecules that ordinarily do not
encode proteins. Gaining a deeper understanding of this poorly characterized set
of molecules will help illuminate dark dimensions of the complex interplay
between genotype and phenotype. Although non-coding RNAs are virtually
ubiquitous among living organisms, their roles are poorly understood and
difficult to define. This Ideas Lab is expected to lay the groundwork for
fundamental advances in molecular and evolutionary biology. This project will
bring together biologists, chemists, physical scientists, and bioinformaticians
to develop cutting edge research with substantial potential for translation to
applications that are relevant for the bioeconomy. In addition, this Ideas Lab
will give rise to educational opportunities for students and postdocs, as
several interdisciplinary research projects will be developed as result of this
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.