* 2204222
* Brush Particle-Based Building Blocks for High Refractive Index Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Rob Macfarlane, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2025
* USD 450,000.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Optical devices that emit, absorb, or bend light
require mechanical protection, as scratches or cracks can cause undesirable
light scattering. Such coatings must have a range of different properties,
including both mechanical resilience and high refractive indices; the former is
necessary to protect the underlying device, while the latter ensures maximum
optical performance, because through the protection layer the light gets bent
towards the device. However, most materials can only be optimized for one of
these target criteria. With this project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, Prof. Rob
Macfarlane and his research group develop new strategies to synthesize composite
materials consisting of high refractive index nanoparticles embedded within a
mechanically robust polymer matrix. These materials can be easily formed into
appropriate macroscopic shapes at low temperatures, then thermally crosslinked
into mechanically stable solids. The researchers study how and why significantly
larger fractions of the high refractive index components can be incorporated in
the matrix with this synthesis method, which then results in materials that have
ideal mechanical and optical performance. The simple synthesis methods for these
materials potentially allow for the fabrication of more complex devices in the
future that can be used to tailor material reflection to either induce
structural coloration or anti-reflective properties. Such materials have benefit
as adhesives, coatings, and sensors coupled to optical devices. In addition, the
project provides opportunities for community college students from
underrepresented groups to participate in STEM research, allowing them to gain
both experience in current chemistry research techniques and insights into
potential career opportunities. This program enables real-world, hands-on
experiences to aid these students in pursuing higher education opportunities or
STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;With this
project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research, polymer/nanoparticle composites are synthesized
using crosslinkable polymer-grafted nanoparticles (PGNPs) containing large
volume fractions of high refractive index nanoparticles. Systematic
investigations of fundamental structure-property relationships are conducted to
explain how the optical and mechanical properties of these materials are
affected by the large amount of filler content. The target materials possess
tunable refractive indices due to the controlled amount of inorganic content (up
to 85 wt.%), but also possess superior mechanical properties that surpass the
bare polymer alone. Specifically, the researchers study the following aspects I)
Developing materials-versatile protocols to synthesize and crosslink PGNPs with
different inorganic nanoparticle and polymer compositions, II) Fully
characterizing the mechanical and optical properties of the resulting
structures, and III) Developing methods to induce photonic band gap
architectures through ordered nanoparticle organization or multi-layer stacks of
different composite compositions. The basic synthetic science and materials
characterization efforts conducted enable a new class of optical materials, and
also provide better design parameters for both grafting polymer brushes to
inorganic particles and inducing covalent bond formation on nanoscale surfaces.
This work advances both fundamental chemistry in solid state materials
development and provides highly useful composites for optical
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.