* 2204750
* LSAMP BD: The University of Texas at El Paso - The University of Texas System LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Helmut Knaust, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM)disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: Black/African-Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians,
Hispanic/Latinx Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The
Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) Activity provides support for postbaccalaureate
studies in STEM programs leading to the STEM doctoral
degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Texas System Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (UT LSAMP) will host a Bridge to the
Doctorate (BD) program at the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP), a Hispanic-
serving institution and the lead institution of the Alliance. The proposed
project builds on experiences gathered by the UT System LSAMP on the development
of successful and replicable strategies to ensure that large numbers of students
from underrepresented groups graduate with undergraduate degrees in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and complete STEM doctoral
degrees. Twelve fellows from LSAMP populations in STEM disciplines and from the
LSAMP alumni pool from across the nation will be selected to participate in the
2022-2024 program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project at UTEP, in particular,
emphasizes STEM mentoring for BD participants and faculty advisors. It leverages
the activities of the Southwest Rockies Louis Stokes Inclusive Mentoring Center
of Excellence and incorporates mental health and involvement of family in
retention activities. It promotes the maturation of the students' research and
professional skills, values, and attitudes. The project results will further
diversify the nation's STEM workforce, enable the replication of promising
practices in STEM graduate education at emerging research universities for
students with profiles similar to those participating in this alliance of
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluative efforts will determine which
interventions are needed for qualified students from underrepresented groups to
successfully transition from their undergraduate STEM disciplines to the
completion of a Ph.D. program in their field of study, at rates comparable to or
exceeding those of all similarly qualified students. Outcomes will be
disseminated nationally and internationally through professional research
conferences, scholarly journals, institutional websites, and social
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.