* 2204811
* Discovery and control of high-Z materials - Beyond Mott and topological materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Gang Cao, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 455,482.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;It is widely recognized that whoever
controls materials controls technology. Emerging technologies increasingly
require new single-crystal materials for definitive studies of fundamental
properties, and successful integration of their properties into state-of-art
device structures. A large number of quantum materials that are driven by
competing fundamental interactions have yet to be explored and understood. It is
these quantum materials that the PI seeks to discover, synthesize, and study.
U.S. leadership in Science and Technology requires drastically increasing the
number of scientists who possess skills in both the synthesis and
characterization of new materials. The current situation presents an urgent
national challenge that could ultimately undermine the Nation’s economic
competitiveness, if left unaddressed. This project addresses this problem by
providing rigorous training of graduate and undergraduate students, who are the
future human capital for technologies that drive the
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;Novel quantum
materials can exhibit surprising or even revolutionary physical properties
necessary for critical advances in science and technology. This project focuses
on strongly correlated materials with strong spin-orbit interactions that are
manifested in strong quantum effects that can be induced by surprisingly weak
external stimuli. Recent research dictates the project address the following
four topics unique to the high-Z materials: (1) Electric-current control of
quantum states. Electric-current control of structural and physical properties
is a long-sought but elusive goal of science and technology. The PI’s recent
work demonstrates that strong spin-orbit interactions in a distorted Mott
insulator is sufficient to realize this important goal. (2) Delicate quantum
liquid in un-frustrated trimer lattices and beyond: Ba3n+1Ir3nO9n+1 (n=1,2,).
Quantum spin liquids are among the most intensively sought states of matter.
Although theoretically predicted, they have not been experimentally observed.
PI’s preliminary work revealed an anomalously strong frustration in the trimer
lattice Ba4Ir3O10, and a critical role of Ir3O12 trimers in producing spin
entanglement. Single crystals of the trimer series Ba3n+1Ir3nO9n+1 the PI has
recently synthesized will provide a new paradigm in the search for novel phases
of matter. (3) Loop-current-driven colossal magnetoresistance without magnetic
polarization: Magnetic polarization usually reduces electron scattering and
electrical resistance in almost all materials and is an essential ingredient of
colossal magnetoresistance. The PI most recently discovered Mn3Si2Te6 and
Ca3Ru2O7 are surprising exceptions to this rule. The electrical resistivity
drops by up to 9 orders of magnitude, but only when the magnetic polarization is
avoided, implicating a new type of electrical transport yet to be explored. (4)
Discovery and synthesis of new quantum materials. A successful effort to
discover novel phenomena requires a persistent pursuit of new materials, which
has been an essential part of the PI’s research. The crystal synthesis effort
will focus on materials with comparable spin-orbit interactions and electron
correlations. The phenomena to be studied defy conventional precedents and pose
far-reaching scientific and technological breakthroughs. The project brings to
bear combined assets of proven expertise, comprehensive experimental facilities,
and broad collaborations that complement in-house
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.