* 2204432
* EAR-PF: Timescales and processes of magmatic resurgence at Toba caldera
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Alejandro Cisneros, Cisneros, Alejandro Omar
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 04/30/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Volcanoes like Toba and Yellowstone calderas are the sites of the greatest
natural catastrophes produced by the Earth: supereruptions. It is no surprise
then that significant effort has been put into understanding the nature of these
eruptions, their hazards, and the risk they pose to society. However, whereas
the build-up to supereruption is now well understood, what happens after a
supereruption, the recovery period known as resurgence, is still poorly
understood. This is important because all active supervolcanoes on Earth are in
this state and still pose a significant hazard. This project seeks to fill this
knowledge gap and improve our ability to assess future hazards and risks at
supervolcanoes by studying the events after the largest supereruption in the
last 2 million years: the Youngest Toba Tuff (YTT; ca. 74,000 years BP) from the
Toba Caldera in Indonesia. As an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellow, Dr. Cisneros de
Le√≥n will integrate time, chemistry, and temperature information recorded in
microscopic crystals erupted at Toba to build a history of the physical and
chemical conditions in the magma during recovery after the supereruption. This
approach will also reveal the history of eruptions since the supereruption, and
allow estimation of the volume of eruptible magma present today beneath the Toba
supervolcano enabling better assessment of future risk.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to use Toba caldera as a
natural laboratory to resolve time and spatial scales of the magmatic processes
governing post-caldera resurgence at supervolcanoes. This will be achieved by
integrating petrochronology, thermochronology, diffusion, and thermochemical
modeling using zircon, allanite, monazite, apatite, sanidine, and quartz to
decipher the complementary records of these crystal phases as they pertain to
the post-caldera plumbing system and its compositional evolution over decadal to
millennial timescales. The specific aims are to 1) develop an integrated
petrogenetic approach for investigating pre-eruptive silicic magma reservoirs at
all scales based on time, temperature, and chemistry recorded in multiple
accessory and major mineral phases; 2) use this information to infer the
physicochemical state of pre-eruptive magma storage; and 3) determine the rates
at which magmatic processes promote post-caldera eruptions. To accomplish these
goals, this study will apply noble-gas 40Ar/39Ar and (U-Th)/He thermochronology
to exploit differing closure temperatures of Ar- in sanidine and He- in zircon,
monazite, and apatite to resolve eruption ages, storage conditions, and
extrusion rates of effusive volcanism from selected post-caldera eruptions. In
addition, high-spatial-resolution secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) and
laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) will be
employed on accessory mineral phases and quartz to determine absolute and
relative timescales, respectively, paired to elemental and isotopic
compositions. Finally, data from various crystal-scale records will be
integrated into thermochemical models to evaluate the current state of the magma
system at Toba and the driving forces for resurgent uplift. Thus, constraining
the timescales, conditions, and extent over which magmatic processes are
occurring in resurgent reservoirs will make a fundamental contribution to
eruption forecasting, especially when geophysical approaches are challenged to
characterize melt-containing reservoirs at high
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.