* 2204106
* Computational and developmental investigations of children’s self-representations and learning decisions
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Julian Jara-Ettinger, Asaba, Mika
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 05/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the
SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Drs. Julian Jara-
Ettinger and Julia Leonard at Yale University, this postdoctoral fellowship
award supports an early career scientist studying the development of children’s
self-representations. Children’s understanding of the self––what they like, what
they know, what they are good at––has a deep influence on their learning and
achievement. However, we lack a clear understanding of how exactly children
develop views of the self, how these views are affected by their social
interactions, and how they impact important real-world behaviors, such as
children’s learning decisions. This research will advance fundamental scientific
knowledge on children’s self-representations by developing a formal,
quantitative theory of how children revise self-representations in social
contexts, and how these self-representations impact their
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies will combine computational and
developmental approaches to test the hypothesis that children rationally
construct and revise self-representations by integrating their prior experiences
with social interactions. First, we will build a computational model that
combines self-observations (e.g., failures and successes) with social feedback
(e.g., what others think of the self) to explain learning about the self in
social contexts. This model will be exhaustively tested and refined through
studies with adults and compared against published developmental findings on
relevant work. Second, we will use our model and alternative lesioned models to
generate and test quantitative predictions for the developmental trajectory of
children’s (3- to 6-year-olds) reasoning about the self. These models will make
different assumptions about children’s sensitivities to self-observations and
social feedback and if and how they integrate these sources of information. Our
developmental experiment will systematically vary children’s performance on toys
and a teacher’s beliefs about their competence, and test how these inform
important learning behaviors: children’s persistence and challenge-seeking. By
integrating state-of-the-art computational and developmental methods, this
project will shed light on a deeply important learning problem for children: who
they are, and what they can do.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.