* 2204996
* Collaborative Research: How do biopolymers dissolve? Identification of rate-limiting steps as a framework to design polymers with tailored dissolution.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kevin Edgar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 08/31/2025
* USD 306,307.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Polymers are very long chains of molecules and
are widely used in products ranging from paint to ice-cream. Nature provides an
abundance of biopolymers such as cellulose and starch which are typically benign
and can degrade to water and carbon dioxide in the environment. They can be
chemically modified to produce, for example, broadly useful cellulose
derivatives that are widely employed by society, including in medicines. Getting
a medicine into the body by swallowing a tablet is becoming increasingly
difficult because few modern drugs easily dissolve in water. It is important
that a drug can be dissolved from a tablet in the right region of the digestive
system so that it can be absorbed and exert its therapeutic effects on the body.
Biopolymers can be used to help improve drug solubility and release. However,
because new generations of drugs are increasingly difficult to absorb, it is
important to understand more about how polymers dissolve and release their
cargo, and how to chemically modify these polymers to make them even more
effective at delivering drugs and other poorly soluble additives. This research
investigates how polymers interact with water, and how this in turn impacts the
rate of polymer dissolution. Polymers will be mixed with water-hating additives
(many drugs can be described as water-hating), revealing how this changes
dissolution. Finally, new biopolymer derivatives will be designed that maintain
a good interaction with water, even in the presence of water-hating additives.
The goal is to develop polymers that are more effective than existing polymers
at releasing poorly water-soluble drugs (and other additives). Broad impacts of
this work include training graduate and undergraduate students including under-
represented minorities and women, including developing a professional skills
program for graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;Polymer dissolution is both fundamentally and practically
important. It differs significantly from small molecule dissolution and is often
problematic. Key issues include slow or poorly controlled dissolution, and
undesired gelation. Systems that also contain small molecule additives are
common, for example amorphous solid dispersions (ASDs) for enhancement of
aqueous solubility of hydrophobic additives. In these systems, mismatch of
additive and polymer dissolution rates can lead to system failure (e.g. additive
precipitation). Fundamental understanding of how additives impact polymer
dissolution is lacking. Herein, we propose to elucidate the impact of additives
on the rate limiting steps of biopolymer dissolution, in particular for
polysaccharide (PS) derivatives, whose benign nature and potential for
modification make them well suited for polymer/additive systems of technical
importance. A set of novel PS derivatives will be designed and synthesized to
test key hypotheses about the importance of hydration extent, as well as the
impacts of specific functional groups upon dissolution rate. Selective PS
oxidation and halogenation will permit substitution with omega-amino and omega-
mercaptocarboxylic acids. PS dissolution rates will be measured in the presence
and absence of model additives; tests of impact of ionization, counterion
size/nature, and steric hindrance will reveal whether hydration rate/extent is
the key rate limiting step. By elucidating polymer structural features necessary
for release, the goal is to develop new oral delivery systems for poorly water-
soluble compounds. Students will collaborate to elucidate rate-limiting steps in
polymer dissolution, synthesize and characterize polymers, test dissolution
rates with and without carefully selected additives, and apply the generated
fundamental understanding to refine theory and enhance polymer
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.