* 2204363
* Combining Physics and Machine Learning-based Models for Full-Energy-Range Solar Energetic Particles Events Prediction
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Soukaina Filali Boubrahimi, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 06/30/2025
* USD 527,129.00

Solar flares and coronal mass ejections (CMEs) accelerate solar energetic
particles (SEPs) into the heliosphere. When SEPs are directed towards Earth,
they cause impacts for human technology. They can cause satellite damage, high
dosages of harmful radiation for astronauts, and many other effects. This
project develops a new SEP prediction model, led by an early-career female PI.
Two graduate students will be supported. This project includes an outreach plan
to impact students at all educational levels in Utah from middle school to
college level through lecture series talks in Utah State University Library,
college-level presentations, and solar crafts activities during summer camp. The
PI also will organize a public Kaggle competition to promote scientific research
on SEP events prediction. The PI will prepare a monthly “Space Weather” five-
lectures series that will take place at the USU library. Additionally, the
research results will be taught as part of the data mining-related classes
curriculum across many Utah State University regional campuses, which includes
campuses located in rural areas of Utah. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inspired by the
success of machine learning (ML) in several areas of physical and life sciences,
the project will implement new advanced methods to augment current datasets,
improve SEP forecasts, and answer essential scientific questions. To achieve
this vision, the new model will identify SEP predictive features based on the
wealth of existing spatiotemporal and physical metadata of SEP parent events.
These features will be extracted from image parameters and trajectory metadata
of active regions and solar prominences preceding CMEs and solar flares parents’
events. The newly engineered features will improve our understanding of the
underlying processes leading to particles acceleration following fast CMEs and
solar flares events (Thrust 1). The second challenge that the project will
address is the small amount of SEP events that total merely 349 occurrences
across all the energy ranges to this day. The project will augment the current
SEP events catalog and time series dataset by generating new realistic synthetic
solar events (Thrust 2). Finally, the project will build an accurate and robust
ensemble model that combines state-of-the-art physics-based models, machine
learning-based models, and new spatiotemporal methods for full-energy-range SEP
events prediction (Thrust 3). One of the by-products of this research will be a
one-of-its-own kind augmented SEP catalog supplemented with the new
spatiotemporal metadata that will be freely available through Application
Programming Interface (API) for its potential usage e.g., to train machine-
learning-based and physics- based models. The final operational ensemble model
will be deployed at the Community Coordinated Modeling Center (CCMC), supported
by NSF and NASA, and deposited in publicly available
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.