* 2204816
* Geochemical Insights Into the Post-Caldera Architecture of the Yellowstone Magma Reservoir
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Kari Cooper, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2025
* USD 401,173.00

Volcanic systems such as Yellowstone in Wyoming produce very large, highly
explosive eruptions that form immense craters called calderas. The volcanic
system at Yellowstone has had three of these caldera-forming eruptions over the
past two million years. In between these very large eruptions the system has
also produced many smaller eruptions that were less explosive, which fed large
lava flows that partially filled the caldera. As a result, the potential hazards
and destructiveness of an eruption at volcanoes such as Yellowstone can vary
widely, ranging from nation-wide or even global effects to more local hazards.
An open question in volcano science is what factors control whether a volcano
produces a very large explosive eruption or a smaller lava flow in a particular
eruption. This probably depends partly on how the “plumbing system” beneath
volcanoes changes over time, and whether large bodies of mostly-liquid magma are
present continuously, whether they build up slowly over long periods of time, or
whether they are only present just before an eruption. For example, does
generating a very large eruption require a longer time to build a big pool of
magma? Does it require more magma bodies to be present than a smaller eruption,
or are there the same number of magma bodies present at all times but more of
them get triggered to produce a very large eruption? In this project researchers
will use chemical “fingerprints” of different magma bodies to identify how many
different magma bodies have been tapped in the most recent series of smaller
eruptions at Yellowstone, and will compare this to the number of magma bodies
that have been identified as part of the most recent caldera-forming eruption to
help answer these questions. Understanding how different kinds of eruptions are
produced will contribute to volcanic hazard forecasting and risk management. The
project will also train graduate and undergraduate students, contributing to the
scientific workforce, and public outreach about the results will help contribute
to scientific understanding for the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large silicic systems produce a wide
range of eruption styles and eruptive hazards, but the connections between the
architecture of the magma storage region and the type of eruption produced are
not well understood. For example, does a caldera-forming eruption require a
different distribution of melts within the shallow reservoir, and/or a different
triggering mechanism, than a smaller eruption? As a contribution to answering
these broad questions, this team proposes to compare the architecture of the
magma system during intra-caldera eruptions to existing data for caldera-forming
eruptions at Yellowstone Caldera, Wyoming. New high-precision 40Ar/39Ar dating
of the most recent intracaldera eruptions at Yellowstone (the Central Plateau
Member, CPM) shows that they were erupted in five episodes, each of which
spanned at most 1-2 kyr. This provides an opportunity to examine the number and
distribution of magma bodies during each of five snapshots of the magma system,
and to compare this with published work on the Yellowstone caldera-forming
eruptions. They will investigate compositional diversity recorded in sanidine
and zircon crystals both within and between individual eruptions and eruptive
episodes using 238U-230Th age data coupled with geochemical data for both
sanidine and zircon. Based on previous work, the sanidine and zircon surface
compositional data will provide insights into the number of distinct magma
bodies present during the period immediately prior to CPM eruptive episodes, as
well as constraining the time scale of assembly and storage of different magma
bodies prior to eruption. In contrast, zircon interiors are typically older with
ages spanning 10s of kyr prior to eruption, which will provide a measure of
compositional diversity present on a longer time scale, between eruptive
episodes. The team will test the hypothesis that the basic architecture of the
magma reservoir consists of multiple compositionally distinct magma bodies
within a more heterogeneous crystal mush, and that the state of the system is
similar before CFE and recent intracaldera eruptions. The data collected will
also allow them to assess whether there are systematic changes in the average
composition of erupted crystals over time, which may reflect secular variations
in the proportions of mantle-derived and crustal-derived melts contributing to
the system. Synthesizing their new data with data for Yellowstone CFE and data
for other silicic systems will provide additional insights into the development
and evolution of large silicic magma reservoirs. Broader impacts will include
outreach by the PI to increase scientific literacy and public engagement,
training and mentoring of diverse graduate and undergraduate students,
strengthening partnerships between academia and the USGS, and contributing
information that will be used to inform public policy and volcanic hazard
mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.