* 2204269
* Anthropological Investigation of Social Determinants of Knowledge
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Jessica Katzenstein, Katzenstein, Jessica
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Lawrence Bobo
at Harvard University, and Drs. Tricia Redeker-Hepner and Heather Smith-Cannoy
at Arizona State University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating the social conditions of knowledge
production across social initiatives at regional police departments and
nonprofit organizations. In the past several decades, workplace programs have
increased in popularity promising to produce more favorable institutional
outcomes. However, some scholars have criticized these efforts as offering
individual solutions for structural problems, and, we understand little of how
those involved respond to the initiatives and how their responses challenge
ongoing issues. The proposed research will address these questions via a
comparative, multi-site ethnographic analysis of social initiatives across two
distinct institutions. An ethnographic understanding of how systemic issues
persist within these contexts has the potential to improve outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposed study is to contribute to theory
and public understanding of social determinants of knowledge within the
workplace. The project aims to do so by collecting ethnographic data—including
observations of workplace trainings, analyses of program documents, and semi-
structured interviews with trainers, employees, and hiring and training
managers—from multiple regional police departments and nonprofit organizations.
This research will ask how various conceptualizations contribute to participant
recruitment and how they compare across institutions; how challenges are
managed; and how trainers and employees negotiate participation. It will build
upon growing social scientific efforts to examine the conditions of collective
knowledge production and will thereby offer fresh insight into the relation
between social determinants of knowledge and structural outcomes. Furthermore,
this project’s comparative framework will facilitate theorizing about how
systemic issues vary across institutions, as well as how uniform policies may
not translate across different types of organizations. Through these
contributions, this study seeks to enrich public and scholarly conversations
about how to best promote more favorable structural outcomes in the
workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.