* 2204529
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Innovating Faculty Workloads through an Equity Lens
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Karyn Scissum Gunn, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

CCalifornia State University Long Beach (CSULB) intends to adapt and implement
The Faculty Workload and Rewards Project from the University of Maryland (NSF
ADVANCE 1463898). The University of Maryland project was designed to understand
how inequities arise in workload at the department level and how to utilize data
on these work practices to improve existing workload practices and develop
policies that lead to greater equity. By addressing workload equity for non-
tenure and tenure track faculty at CSULB, the project will address a significant
national challenge shared by many other institutions of higher education. Within
CSULB, non-tenure track faculty (full-time and part-time) have grown in numbers
and collectively provide more than half of all instruction, while the number of
tenure track faculty has been mostly static or declining. This work is designed
to address issues related to work satisfaction and retention, tenure, and
promotion raised by STEM faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
adaptation project aims to advance the understanding of both the sources of
inequity in workload among STEM faculty and the policies and practices that can
increase equity and to provide tools that can be used to identify "invisible
labor" and quantify "identity taxation." CSULB's unionized environment presents
an opportunity to demonstrate that it is possible to bring about positive and
practical changes on a topic subject to collective bargaining when local
representatives of labor and management work collaboratively and in good faith.
Depending on the success of the CSULB ADVANCE Adaptation project, it may become
a model that could be used at any of the 22 other California State University
(CSU) campuses. The CSU is the largest 4-year public university system in the
United States, boasting 23 campuses in California and employing approximately
28,000 faculty. Results of the project will be distributed to two unique and
important audiences. These are: (1)the CSU systemwide faculty and administrators
via the CSU systemwide affinity groups and (2) the CSU statewide union, the
California Faculty Association (CFA), which represents all faculty across the
CSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender
equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of organizational
barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of diverse faculty
in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist
in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate.
ADVANCE "Adaptation" awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of
evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit institutions of higher
education as well as non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was supported with co-funding
from the HSI Program, which aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education,
broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims,
given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches
that incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote
fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes
to diversify and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that
improves our understanding of how to build institutional capacity at
HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.