* 2204536
* SHF: Small: INCA: Incremental Analysis of Software Specification for Evolving Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Allison Sullivan, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 489,946.00

From the cars we drive to online banking, society has become increasingly
dependent on software systems. As a result, software reliability remains an
important problem to solve. One way developers can improve software reliability
is by using software models, which allow developers to define the behavior of
their software in the form of mathematical logic. Once a software system is
modeled, various tools exist that automatically analyze the model for any issues
with the software’s design. Unfortunately, software systems are not static:
software is constantly getting updated as new features are added or requirements
change. As the system evolves, the software model also needs to be updated and
re-analyzed. However, if the change to the model is small, this analysis can be
largely redundant. This project looks to improve the efficiency of re-running
different types of analysis over an updated model, which increases the
feasibility for maintaining models of real world systems. The project involves
preparing students for their careers by mentoring graduate students and
connecting students to role models in the formal methods community, and the
tools developed by the project will improve formal methods education.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on improving incremental analysis of Alloy models
based on three ways users can interact with a model: writing a model, testing a
model, and synthesizing a model. First, this project explores improvements to
incremental analysis when writing Alloy models, which focuses on how to maximize
reuse of past scenarios and how to minimize the new scenario exploration
problem. This project investigates a suite of techniques that derive new reuse
and exploration strategies based on what component of the model changed and seek
to present the impact of the change to the user through disjoint categories of
scenarios. Second, this project explores improvements to incremental analysis
when testing Alloy models, which includes introducing regression testing to
Alloy as well as leveraging first order logic to automatically generate high
value tests that reason over the changed portion of the model. Third, this
project explores improvements to incrementally synthesizing Alloy models by
pausing the sketch to generate tests to refine the synthesis problem and by
creating an incremental, parallel sketching environment. In addition to research
papers, the project will produce open-source toolsets and benchmarks of
incremental models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.