* 2204389
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Nevada State College - Pursuing Equity to Enhance Retention (PEER)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Laura Naumann, NSHE Board of Regents on behalf of Nevada State College
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Nevada State College (NSC) Pursuing Equity to Enhance Retention (PEER)
project will address workload disparities in female and underrepresented
minority faculty using an intersectional lens to establish institutional support
for scholarship at a teaching-intensive institution. NSC is a minority-serving
institution (MSI) with Hispanic-Serving (HSI) and Asian American Native American
Pacific Islander Serving Institution (AANAPSI) designations in an Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) jurisdiction. Invisible
service disproportionally impacts women and other underrepresented faculty. The
PEER project will adapt and implement evidence-based systemic change to address
the intersectionality of women in STEM and reverse power dynamics by creating
transparent workloads as well as providing scholarship and psychosocial support
to improve faculty job satisfaction, research/publication, and tenure/promotion.
The results of this project will help inform best practices to support women of
color in STEM at a MSI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the PEER
Project are to address three institutional challenges identified by female and
underrepresented racial minority STEM faculty at NSC, including: 1) inequitable
service and teaching loads, 2) lack of recognition and rewards for invisible
service, and 3) inadequate scholarship and career development support. To
address these challenges, PEER Project objectives include: 1) improving PEER
EQUITY via development of faculty workload dashboards and department equity
plans to ensure fair distribution of teaching and service loads, 2) increasing
PEER RECOGNITION via development and implementation of academic policies that
mitigate workload imbalance and reward invisible service, and 3) enhancing PEER
SUPPORT mechanisms by revising and bolstering extant services that prioritize
professional development and collaborative mentorship for faculty identities to
increase belonging and scholarship productivity in STEM. The PEER project will
support the full inclusion of all women and historically underrepresented STEM
faculty and will disassemble institutional barriers in academia. The project
will have a major impact on the teaching and research infrastructures at NSC by
developing a core STEM faculty. Expected project outcomes include an evidence
base for the feasibility and efficacy of project activities that improve faculty
retention and capacity for research, as evidenced by attainment of extramural
funding, peer-reviewed publications, and career longevity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender
equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of organizational
barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of diverse faculty
in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist
in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate.
ADVANCE "Adaptation" awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of
evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit institutions of higher
education as well as non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.