* 2204417
* EAR-PF: Strength, deformation, and recovery of phyllosilicates: How do phyllosilicates accommodate large amounts of shear strain?
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2024
* Caroline Seyler, Seyler, Caroline Elizabeth
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 10/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Caroline Seyler has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
conduct research at the University of Minnesota investigating the deformation
and recovery mechanisms in phyllosilicates that help accommodate slip between
tectonic plates. Phyllosilicates are a group of minerals that are incredibly
common in the mature faults and shear zones that define plate boundaries from
major strike-slip faults to subduction zones. They are also stable across a wide
range of depths, persisting as clays near the surface, micas in the crust, and
talc and serpentine in the mantle. Their crystal structure consists of sheets of
atoms held together by weak interlayer bonding, making slip on these sheets an
easy deformation mechanism. This style of deformation strengthens grains with
increasing strain, however, phyllosilicates observed in nature are inferred to
be weak, even after high strain. This project will determine how phyllosilicates
remain weak at high strains through innovative deformation experiments. These
results will connect the deformation mechanisms operating at the atomic- and
grain-scale to the dynamic behavior of faults and shear zones. Beyond research,
Dr. Seyler will mentor students through the Research Opportunities in Rock
Deformation (RORD) REU at UMN and the Department of Mechanical Engineeringâ€™s
capstone course. Dr. Seyler will also engage in ongoing outreach efforts through
the university and organize outreach to students at the tribal colleges in
Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lithospheric strength profiles rely on lab-
derived constitutive laws, but without well-constrained rheological models for
the deformation mechanisms in common fault and shear zone materials, these
models remain incomplete. High-strain and high-pressure deformation experiments
will be performed on biotite to determine the deformation and recovery
mechanisms operating in phyllosilicates and explain why phyllosilicate
deformation may be more effective at accommodating large amounts of strain than
predicted by dislocation theory. High-strain experiments will be conducted in
torsion in the gas-medium Paterson apparatus at the University of Minnesota
(UMN), and high-pressure Deformation-DIA experiments will be conducted at the
Advanced Photon Source (APS) at Argonne National Laboratories. Microstructural
analysis of deformed samples will utilize optical and electron microscopy as a
diagnostic tool to identify active deformation and recovery mechanisms. These
results will also be compared with the microstructures documented in
phyllosilicate-rich plate boundary shear zones to ensure the reproduction of
natural deformation microstructures in the lab. Improving our understanding of
phyllosilicate mechanical behavior will result in better strength estimates and
rheological parameters. These parameters are essential inputs for geodynamic
models as well as for rupture modeling of the earthquake cycle that informs
seismic hazard assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.