* 2204181
* Investigating Latinx Caregiver Preparation for Immigration Socialization in Mixed-Status Families
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Sarah Rendon Garcia, Rendon Garcia, Sarah A
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Carola
Suarez-Orozco at the Harvard Graduate School of Education, this postdoctoral
fellowship award supports an early career scientist investigating the
immigration socialization practices of mixed-status immigrant families in the
U.S. While 7 percent of U.S. children live with an unauthorized immigrant
parent, researchers and practitioners alike have little insight into how these
children and their families process the phenomenon of “illegality.” Existing
research highlights the role of external messages in the family’s communication
practices, like school and media messages. The literature on ethnic-racial
socialization suggests caregiver approaches to communicating with their children
about how to cope with such messages can play an inhibiting or protective role
in youths’ development. Family separation and other immigration-related threats
may complicate caregivers’ ability to provide a safe and developmentally
appropriate avenue for meaning-making, which can affect children’s learning in
school via a low sense of belonging, self-concept, or safety, however. The focus
of the proposed study is to unpack family-level socialization processes,
referred to as immigration socialization, to better understand the familial
mechanisms involved in the association between immigration status and child
development. Ultimately, providing caregiver support related to discussing
topics of immigration and legal status in a developmentally appropriate way is
needed. Family-level socialization processes about race and ethnicity matter for
immigrant and non-immigrant children alike because a strong sense of belonging
in society, communities, school, and the home predicts success in academic
achievement and health outcomes. For parents, navigating immigration policy may
be cognitively challenging and further complicated by the responsibility to
protect and educate their children. To understand the ways current U.S.
sociopolitical forces related to immigration policy affect the mechanism of
self-concept as an outcome in children and adults, basic research is needed to
understand how immigration-related rhetoric shapes children’s learning through
caregiver/parental processes as well as how to intervene to support these
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to begin establishing
this foundational knowledge around immigration socialization related to the
legal concept of undocumented status. This research study project consists of a
two-phase mixed-methods approach from the lens of caregivers/parents in mixed-
status immigrant families and focuses on these adults’ process of immigration
socialization preparation. Phase 1 will consist of semi-structured interviews
with caregivers in Latinx mixed-status families. Those qualitative findings will
consequently be used to adapt an existing knowledge-building and interactive ERS
workshop series using stepwise learning, attention to affective concerns of
caregivers, and providing vicarious social models with verbal encouragement In
Phase 2, the adapted content will be implemented, and a set of measures will be
gathered to capture caregiver/parent skills, motivation, confidence, and
immigration-threat to test the efficacy of structured preparation for the
delivery of an intervention providing immigration socialization messages for
Latinx mixed-status immigrant families. Findings will advance scientific
knowledge on immigration-specific family socialization and study the potential
moderating role of caregiver-child immigration socialization preparation on
parental and caregiver outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.