* 2204527
* EAR-PF: Short fuses: investigating recent phreatic eruptions at Whakaari, New Zealand, through poroelastic modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* John Albright, Albright, John A
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 04/30/2025
* USD 180,000.00

Despite many recent advances in volcano monitoring, unforeseen volcanic
eruptions pose a major hazard to human life and property around the world.
Beyond the direct threat to the volcano’s immediate surroundings, ash clouds
from such events can have far-reaching consequences, contaminating water
supplies and rendering large sections of airspace unusable to commercial or
defense traffic. Moreover, even foreign volcanoes can endanger American lives,
given their popularity as tourist destinations. For example, the December 2019
eruption of Whakaari (White Island) in New Zealand left 5 American citizens dead
and wounded 4 others. As with many deadly eruptions in recent history, this
event was “phreatic”, driven primarily by the explosive release of shallow
superheated steam rather than by the direct action of deeper magma. Such
eruptions tend to occur suddenly; in many cases local monitoring networks do not
observe any clear or reliable indication that an explosion is imminent. In these
scenarios, local authorities are unable to evacuate the area, leading to
significant casualties even from relatively small eruptions. Using Whakaari as a
case study, this project will combine sophisticated computer simulations with
years of monitoring data, spanning 3 eruptions, to investigate the volcano’s
longer-term evolution. In particular, it seeks to study how non-eruptive
activity at Whakaari may have predisposed or primed the system for the observed
explosions. Ultimately, this process will deepen the scientific understanding of
phreatic eruptions in general, beyond just Whakaari, and will allow these
volatile events to be forecasted more reliably, even in the absence of immediate
warning signs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first stage of this project will
synthesize previous advances in numerical modeling to develop a finite element
simulation capable of fully capturing the poroelastic interactions between a
volcano’s shallow hydrothermal system, from which phreatic eruptions are most
often triggered, and the surrounding host rock. By combining the physics of
fluid flow with those of rock deformation, this model will be able to predict
how the volcano would mechanically respond to different configurations of
permeability and magma influx. The second phase of the study would then use
statistical data assimilation techniques to compare these predictions against
measurements of ground deformation at Whakaari, finding the sets of underlying
conditions that best match the volcano’s observed behavior. These models can
then be further constrained and validated by comparing their predictions against
additional seismic and geochemical observations. In the end, this project aims
to test the hypothesis that Whakaari’s eruptions were caused by the mechanical
rupture of low-permeability hydrothermal seals which had caused the slow
accumulation of pressure in the months to years beforehand. Additionally, it
will determine whether the modeled stress state of the system would have been
sufficient to cause seal failure alone, or if an additional external trigger was
required. By considering phreatic eruptions in the context of a volcanic
system’s longer-term mechanical evolution, this study will help to understand
how there events are triggered, what precursory activity may occur beforehand,
and why certain precursors may be present for some eruptions but not
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.