* 2204184
* Synthesis of Catenane-based Polymers and Materials Using Orthogonal Metal Templation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jonathan Barnes, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Jonathan Barnes of Washington University-
St. Louis (WUSTL) will investigate and expand on efficient synthetic methods to
prepare a series of catenane-based polymers and networked materials. Catenanes
are mechanically interlocked molecules (MIMs) that have drawn research interest
due to their unusual molecular linkages and structures. Mechanically interlocked
molecules (MIMs), for example, possess well-defined topologies and unique
molecular architectures and can offer conformational and translational degrees
of freedom at the molecular level that are simply not accessible with
traditional polymers. The project will result in the development of new classes
of poly[n]catenanes and catenane-based materials, thus laying the foundation for
future research and development in the area of topologically controlled polymers
and materials. To engage young students in STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics), Barnes will build on a collaboration with the St.
Louis Chess Club (SLCC) to develop outreach that would merge the overlapping
principles of chess and science (e.g., analytical thinking, planning, focus,
etc.). Students from the The Young Scientist Program (YSP) at WUSTL will be
mentored with internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to bridge the
synthetic gap between small-molecule and poly[n]catenanes by implementing metal-
templated, convergent syntheses, while also addressing potential scalability
issues through the development of functionalized catenane monomers and
crosslinkers that can be paired with traditional monomers. The research aims to
remove some of the limitations seen in synthesizing higher molecular weight
oligo- and poly[n]catenanes. Current approaches show decreased yields after each
iteration, and/or because one-pot approaches often lead to unproductive cross
reactions that generate unwanted kinetic byproducts. The fundamental synthetic
and physical polymer knowledge gained from the proposed research is expected to
aid the development of next-generation MIM-based materials and applications.
Characterization of these polymers and materials will allow key metrics to be
tabulated, such as thermal transition temperatures (Tg + Tm), molecular weight
thresholds for entanglement (Mc, Me), and material properties including shear
and Youngâ€™s moduli, in addition to toughness, tensile strength, etc. The
culmination of the research proposed herein would be the development of new
classes of poly[n]catenanes and catenane-based materials, an achievement that
would help build a foundation for future research and development in the area of
topologically controlled polymers and polymeric
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.