* 2204170
* Chemical Tools for Precision Metabolic Labeling and Detection of Terpenes and Prenylated Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Joshua Baccile, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2025
* USD 436,846.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Joshua Baccile of the University of Tennessee is studying
two biologically important classes of chemical entities, terpenes and prenylated
molecules. They are among the largest classes of biomolecules and are both
critical to basic life processes and clinically important as drugs. Terpenes and
prenylated molecules both derive in part or in full, from the two structurally
related five-carbon building blocks, isopentenyl pyrophosphate and dimethylallyl
pyrophosphate (IPP and DMAPP, respectively). IPP and DMAPP are therefore among
the most significant metabolic precursors in biology. Despite this prominence,
chemical tools and strategies to study IPP and DMAPP in cells are lacking. Dr.
Baccile aims to bridge this scientific gap through the development of a suite of
IPP- and DMAPP-based chemical probes and methods for the metabolic labeling of
terpenes and prenylated molecules and their detection in a cell-specific manner.
The proposed tools and experiments will also enable a systematic evaluation of
the roles of IPP and DMAPP themselves, which is not currently possible. In
addition to the chemical innovation, Dr. Baccile will integrate objectives for
innovation in student research mentorship, teaching, and learning through the
introduction of new pedagogical training methods in the laboratory. Baccile will
endeavor to broaden participation in chemistry through a dedicated summer
program for underrepresented students in STEM (science, technology, engineering
and mathematics) from community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project sets out to investigate a facile and modular synthesis of IPP and DMAPP
probes, which leverages a “prodrug”-like mechanism for precision metabolic
labeling. While related strategies have been employed for metabolic labeling of
glycans and proteins, this approach is innovative in natural product and post-
translational modification (PTM) research. The proposed cell-type specific
isotopic labeling and enrichment methods will enable detailed studies of the
isoprenoid pathway in heterogenous cell populations, which could be
transformative in our understanding of host-microbe interactions and tumor
development. Currently, five-carbon prenyl PTMs are presumed to be absent in
life in contrast to the well-established higher order protein prenylations
known, specifically protein farnesylation (15 carbons) and geranylgeranylation
(20 carbons). However, chemical probes engineered to definitively rule out such
five-carbon modifications have not previously been tested. Successful
application of the proposed probes will enable the potential identification of
five-carbon prenyl modifications, which would be a paradigm shift in the field
of protein prenylation. Significant regulatory mechanisms and signaling cascades
could be mediated through this yet unknown PTM. We note that the proposed
synthetic approach is modular and readily adapted to other pyrophosphate
metabolites. This project is an important step toward the long-term goal of
creating resources to study the biosynthesis, regulation, and function of
biomolecules, with a focus on using isotopic labeling and enrichment chemistry
to understand interkingdom signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.