* 2204078
* Phage Display of Multicyclic Peptides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jianmin Gao, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2025
* USD 306,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program in the
Chemistry Division, Professor Jianmin Gao from Boston College is developing
multicyclic peptide libraries to facilitate the discovery of inhibitors against
proteins of pathogenic bacteria. Multicyclic peptides are short polymers of
amino acids in which the backbones and side chains crosslink to form complex
closed circular structures. Naturally occurring forms of multicyclic peptides,
such as vancomycin, have been rich sources of antibacterial drugs. However, it
has been difficult to develop synthetic multicyclic peptides that that have
desired biological activities. The Gao group will integrate molecular biology
and synthetic chemistry to construct libraries of peptides with complex
multicyclic structures. These synthetic multicyclic peptides will be screened
for their abilities to inhibit bacterial proteins using phage display, a
technology that allows identification of compounds that show specific desired
biological activities. This interdisciplinary project will help train the next-
generation of scientists by engaging students in research, including
undergraduate students and high school interns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phage
display, a popular technology for screening peptide libraries, has been largely
limited to the display of linear or simple disulfide-cyclized peptides. These
peptides fall short in terms of structural complexity in comparison to peptide
natural products, which often display multicyclic structures. In this studies,
the Gao group aims to develop novel chemical strategies to construct multicyclic
peptide libraries on the surfaces of bacteriophages. These strategies include
developing and examining various protein conjugation chemistries, to be used in
combination to effect sequential multicyclizations of phage-displayed peptides.
Specifically, the research will capitalize on a newly developed ultrafast
cysteine conjugation chemistry that crosslinks specific amino acid residues with
high efficiency and site selectivity. These novel multicyclic peptide libraries
will be used to screen and select for inhibitors of specific bacterial protein-
protein interactions. If successful, this project will provide a powerful and
broadly applicable strategy for inhibiting protein-protein interactions such as
those that facilitate immune response evasion by bacterial
pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.