* 2204449
* Isoperimetric Clusters and Related Extremal Problems with Applications in Probability
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Joseph Neeman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2024
* USD 62,378.00

The isoperimetric problem in the plane -- which has been known and studied for
more than 2 millennia -- asks which shape of a given area has a minimal
perimeter (the answer: a circle). The last hundred years have seen significant
advances and generalizations in two directions: on one hand, we now how how to
study related problems on other spaces including on the sphere, in hyperbolic
space, and in Gaussian space. On the other hand, in some situations we can
describe what happens when we optimize multiple sets at the same time. In
particular, we can describe what happens to soap bubbles when they touch, which
also gives insight into the structure of foams. Surprisingly, these geometric
problems have a close link to computational complexity: is it widely believed
that many important computational problems cannot be solved efficiently. More
importantly for applications (because in practice we don't often need exact
solutions), it's computationally hard even to approximately solve some of these
problems. The field that studies this topic, known as "hardness of
approximation," has progressed in leaps and bounds over the last two decades,
and one of its seminal achievements was the forging of a deep connection between
computational complexity and isoperimetric-type problems in geometry and
probability. If we had a better understanding of certain probabilistic, high-
dimensional, multi-part isoperimetric problems, it would close several open
problems in hardness of approximation. The project will also develop software
for numerical computation and support the advising and mentoring of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is about introducing and exploiting
new techniques for multi-part isoperimetric problems, with an emphasis on both
problems that are natural in geometry (such as the double-bubble conjecture on
the sphere) and problems coming from computer science. One of the difficulties
with these partitioning problems is the presence of combinatorially many saddle
points or local minima, but the investigator's recent resolution (with E.
Milman) of the Gaussian double-bubble conjecture included a new method to
circumvent this difficulty; the PI will build on this success by extending the
method to related settings. This project will allow graduate and undergraduate
students to participate in related research projects, it will aid the
development of open-source software for numerical computation, and it will
support outreach activities for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.