* 2204148
* Explorations in Entanglement and Knotting in Low-Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Allison Moore, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2025
* USD 294,584.00

Knots and links are closed loops in a 3-dimensional environment, possibly
entwined in an interesting or complicated configuration. Knotting, linking, and
entanglement occur in a broad range of physical phenomena. DNA can become linked
and unlinked, or knotted and unknotted, during replication, recombination, and
in other enzymatic reactions. The global topology of knotted nucleic acids and
the local activity of enzymes can be modeled with objects and operations from
knot theory. At the same time, the relationship of knotted structures with three
and four-dimensional manifolds plays a central role in leading-edge geometry and
topology, where recent mathematical developments have provided new tools with
which to formally investigate knotting and linking. This project is centered on
the theory and applications of knots, links, and tangles from the perspective of
low-dimensional topology. Potential benefits of this project are advances in our
understanding of unknotting operations, uncovering new relationships between
invariants of links and three-manifolds, and providing a more robust
mathematical framework for the modeling and analysis of enzymatic activities and
topological structures of biopolymers. This award will increase mathematical
literacy and promote broad dissemination of knowledge by supporting an online
database of knot and link invariants (KnotInfo) and a lecture series at Virginia
Commonwealth University that promotes emerging research topics while emphasizing
achievements of underrepresented people and women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central objects of focus in this project are invariants of knots, links, and
tangles. The research uses Floer homology, Khovanov homology, and techniques in
geometric topology to explore the relationships between knots, links, and three-
manifolds. The first aim is to resolve fundamental questions in knot theory on
crossing changes, tangle decompositions, and unknotting. New interpretations of
Heegaard Floer and Khovanov-theoretic invariants of tangles in terms of immersed
curves on surfaces are a major component of the methodology. The second aim is
to investigate the relationship between invariants of links and three-manifolds
through an exploration of Milnor's invariants and Dehn surgery. The third aim
seeks to uncover new connections between knot theory and the structure of
biopolymers, and to probe the broad geometric structure of Gordian-type knot
graphs with methodology in geometric and low-dimensional topology and graph
theory. The project includes biologically motivated questions that center on
spatial theta-curves and models of entanglement in nucleic acids. The project
provides avenues for graduate and undergraduate students to contribute to
research in theoretical and applied knot theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.