* 2204126
* Development of cryogenic electron microscopy for probing phase separation in lipid membranes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Frederick Heberle, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2025
* USD 684,211.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Frederick A. Heberle of the University of Tennessee and
M. Neal Waxham of the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston are
developing cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM) for the study of lipid
membranes. These membranes provide crucial structure to living organisms,
forming the boundary between a cell and its external environment as well as the
boundaries of internal cellular compartments. Scientists have long been puzzled
by the unusually large number of different lipids found in some cell membranes;
for example, the outermost plasma membrane of mammalian cells contains several
hundred chemically distinct lipid species. Mixtures of many components often
result in phase separation, such as occurs when oil is mixed with water. An
intriguing hypothesis is that an analogous phase separation occurs in some cell
membranes, in which membrane lipids self-organize into clusters termed lipid
rafts that have properties different from those of the sea of lipids surrounding
them. A large body of evidence suggests that rafts are useful to the cell and
play an important role in many cell functions. However, their small size (less
than 1000 times the width of a human hair) makes them impossible to see with a
conventional microscope, and consequently our knowledge of raft structure is
limited. By using a beam of electrons rather than visible light as the
illumination source, it becomes possible to image much smaller structures,
including raft-like domains in artificial membranes that mimic the lipid
composition of cell membranes as shown in preliminary studies from these
laboratories. This project seeks to optimize the quality of cryo-EM images of
membranes and thus, their information content, through various methods of
enhancing contrast; to determine the minimum raft size that can be detected; and
to apply the improved imaging methodology to obtain pictures of rafts in genuine
cell membranes. Another goal of this project is the training of graduate
students in experimental and computational methods to prepare them for careers
in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) fields. The
researchers create useful, freely available tools for other researchers who wish
to use cryo-EM to study lipid membranes. An important part of the project is a
public outreach program to enhance awareness of and appreciation for physical
chemistry research and its application to the biological sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell membranes have an enormous capacity for self-
organization conferred by the structural diversity of their lipidomes. Within
the outermost plasma membrane, non-ideal interactions between different classes
of lipids results in a phenomenon akin to liquid phase separation that can
direct the spatial organization of membrane proteins and thus influence cell
function. The phase domains or “rafts” are nanoscopic in size under normal
conditions, precluding their detection by conventional light microscopy and
motivating the development of alternative imaging techniques with greater
spatial resolution. This project will develop cryo-EM as one such technique for
investigating the phase behavior of probe-free, unsupported membranes at length
scales relevant to lipid rafts. A primary objective is to optimize the
experimental and analysis workflow for this new and specialized imaging
application. Key to this effort is the combined use of atomistic molecular
simulations and mesoscopic vesicle models to generate synthetic ground-truth
image datasets, thereby enabling unambiguous estimates of the accuracy and
precision of measured parameters and establishing the resolution limitations of
the technique. The optimized workflow will be tested on well-characterized
experimental systems for which domain sizes and area fractions have been
independently established. A final scientific objective is the expansion of the
technique into cellular membranes that are now accessible with cryo-EM, thus
paving the way for a deeper understanding of lateral heterogeneity in complex
lipid and protein mixtures. The PI and co-PI will train graduate students in the
study of lipid phase separation and the physical chemistry of mixtures, and will
develop protocols, software tools, and ground-truth data sets to expand the
community of researchers using cryo-EM to study lipid
membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.