* 2204477
* EAR-PF: Measuring the Effects of Large Volcanic Eruptions on a Shallow Magma Reservoir using Microanalytical Techniques
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Madeline Lewis, Lewis, Madeline J
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 05/31/2025
* USD 0.00

Dr. Madeline Lewis has been awarded an NSF EAR Postdoctoral Fellowship to
investigate how large volcanic eruptions affect potentially hazardous magma
stored beneath the surface of the Earth. Her research, professional development,
and public outreach will take place at Stanford University alongside scientific
mentor Dr. Ayla Pamukçu. Volcanic centers are connected to magma storage
reservoirs within Earth’s crust, yet not all magma is immediately eruptible.
Magma storage conditions (pressure, temperature, and dissolved water content)
strongly influence the potential for magma to erupt. However, the extent to
which eruptions influence magma storage conditions is poorly understood. Is
magma stored after an eruption easily mobile and primed to erupt, or is it
nearly solidified? Dr. Lewis will address these questions using the extinct
Stillwater Caldera Complex (SCC), Nevada, which exposes both volcanic rocks and
portions of the now solidified magma storage system. She will collect
geochemical data to calculate magma storage conditions during different stages
of SCC magmatic activity. Dr. Lewis’s earlier research established the sequence
and duration of magmatic activity in the SCC, which she will use to evaluate
changes to the magma storage conditions in response to major eruptions. Dr.
Lewis will expand the broader impacts of her work by designing a virtual field
trip, which will be a publicly available educational resource through Stanford
Earth Field Education. In addition, she will complete training in STEM education
and volunteer as a mentor with the Palo Alto chapter of the Association for
Women in Geoscience to improve retention and support for women pursing
geoscience degrees and careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The uncertainty
surrounding whether eruptible magmas remain in shallow storage after caldera
forming eruptions will be improved by investigating both the intrusive and
extrusive portions of a shallow silicic magma system. The Oligocene (~25 Ma)
Stillwater Caldera Complex, Nevada, preserves a sequence of pre- and post-
eruptive intrusions (magmatic history of ~106 yrs), as well as two very large
(&gt;350 km3) explosive deposits that record snapshots of definitively eruptible
melts. Dr. Lewis will collect and analyze the compositions of erupted
(extrusive) and unerupted (intrusive) crystals and melt inclusions to establish
magma storage conditions (e.g., temperatures, pressures, volatile contents) from
mineral equilibria. She will apply these calculated parameters to thermodynamic
and diffusion-based models to estimate magma crystallinity and the residence
time of eruptible magma bodies. Coupling these results with her existing high-
precision geochronology data will enable tracking of reservoir conditions over
the lifetime of the magma system. If eruptions are found to leave behind
crystal-poor magmas in the shallow reservoir, this indicates the capacity of
volcanic systems to produce “silent” eruptions with little seismic warning.
Conversely, if eruptible magma is not retained shallowly after eruption, this
has significant implications for interpretation of magma injection signals as an
indicator of impending eruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.