* 2204753
* LSAMP BD: Bridge to the Doctorate at California State University, Los Angeles: CSU-LSAMP BD Cohort 17
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Andre Ellis, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,075,000.00

The performance site for this LSAMP Bridge to the Doctorate Activity is
California State University, Los Angeles, one of the 23 California State
University campuses included in the California State University-Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (CSU-LSAMP). The project will provide a
master’s level “bridge” to doctoral-level study for a cohort of 12 graduates of
LSAMP undergraduate programs. The Master’s-level experience is designed to
remediate the underrepresentation of students from minoritized populations in
STEM by supporting their access, persistence, and competencies to advance to e
and succeed in Ph.D. programs. In addition to providing substantial financial
support to enable students to focus full time on a two-year program of
Master’s-level course work and research, the project will provide an integrated
set of activities designed to advance BD students toward completion of doctoral-
level studies. Activities include: (1) monthly and semester meetings with the BD
Project Director to monitor student progress and provide comprehensive
advisement; (2) a workshop series focused on information/tools needed for
adjustment to and success in graduate school; (3) writing support; (4) weekly
professional seminars; (5) community and network building activities to further
develop their social identities and sense of belonging; (6) “connecting” Fellows
to doctoral programs through collaborations with faculty and programs at Ph.D.
institutions; (7) assistance with applications to Ph.D. programs, financial aid
and fellowship programs; and (8) career coaching and mentoring activities that
will further provide the fellows with emotional and social support in their path
to a Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to advancing the
NSF’s Mission “To promote the progress of science: “to advance the national
health, prosperity and welfare, or to secure the national defense” and its
2018-2022 Strategic Plan to: “foster the growth of a more capable and diverse
research workforce and advance the scientific and innovation skills of the
nation.” The project will increase the number of Ph.D.-level scientists by
identifying and developing the talent of students who would be unlikely to
pursue graduate-level study at either the masters or the doctorate level without
the project’s support. This includes students with deficits in their
baccalaureate credentials and others with competitive credentials for direct
entry into Ph.D. programs, but who are otherwise unable or hesitant to do so.
For these students, the Masters-level program serves as a necessary "bridge" to
doctoral-level study. Since the pool of LSAMP baccalaureate recipients includes
a high proportion of individuals from minoritized communities, the project
anticipates that most, if not all of the participants will be students from
these groups. Therefore, the project will contribute significantly to broadening
participation in academe and science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.