* 2204924
* RAPID: Agenda Generality and Behavior in Social Network Interactions about COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Dolores Albarracin, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 10/31/2022
* USD 100,548.00

The same types of social networks that transmit the COVID-19 disease may be
leveraged to spread healthy norms and positive behaviors. This research gathers
important, time-sensitive data to understand the conditions under which digital
social networks can influence health behaviors relevant to the COVID-19 pandemic
and how to reduce negative social influences in digital environments. At a time
when people spend unprecedented amounts of time on digital networks, public
health strategies deployed in these networks may shape the health and social
outcomes of Americans in the next 12 months. This research advances
understanding of these public health strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project’s theory is that discussing either general or specific issues (e.g.,
curbing COVID-19 disease or wearing a mask) can have important consequences on
the spread of risky attitudes and behaviors through a network. The research
entails (a) an ecological study of Twitter and Instagram networks and (b)
experiments manipulating the mix of healthy and risky behaviors promoted in the
network and the focus of the discussion on either general or specific issues.
The project generates public health recommendations and algorithms to improve
health discussions on social media. The investigators use a dynamic panel data
model to predict individual behavior from the individual’s own attitudes and own
past behaviors as well as the behaviors of other members of their network. The
research team uses graph convolutional networks both to capture richer network
aspects and to model sparse networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.