* 2204145
* CAS-MNP: Evaluating Degradation Products and Changes in Colloidal Properties of Microplastics During Photochemical Weathering
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Laodong Guo, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 96,384.00

This award is supported by the Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) Program in
the NSF Division of Chemistry. Professor Laodong Guo and his students in the
School of Freshwater Sciences at University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee will study
the weathering of microplastics / microfibers in aquatic environments. The
kinetics, products, and mechanisms of these degradation processes will be
determined. Microplastics and nanoplastics are ubiquitous, persistent, and toxic
in aquatic environments and have been recognized as emerging contaminants.
Nanoplastics are believed to have higher toxicity to organisms. The project will
integrate research, education, and outreach through the participation of
graduate and undergraduate students, especially underrepresented students and
undergraduate research fellows, promote multidisciplinary collaborative
research, and augment the training of graduate and undergraduate students in
environmental chemistry and freshwater sciences. Microplastics are an important
issue in the Great Lakes Region and subject increasing regulation by local and
state ordinances. The project team will work with relevant federal/state
agencies, stakeholders, and the general public, including K12 students, to share
research findings on the fate and transport of microplastics in aquatic
environments and their potential impacts on ecosystem and human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite their importance, little is known about the
fundamental environmental chemistry of micro- and nano-plastics (MNP),
photochemical reactivities, and changes in their surface and colloidal
properties and environmental behavior during and after weathering. To fill the
knowledge gap, the project team will conduct research using controlled
laboratory experiments on representative microplastics and microfibers. The
degradation products from microplasics, including dissolved organic molecules
and nanoplastics, will be characterized for chemical and optical properties
using total organic carbon analyzer and ultraviolet-visible and fluorescence
spectroscopy. Changes in surface and colloidal properties, such as zeta-
potential and hydrodynamic size-distribution, will be determined using dynamic
light scattering technique and asymmetrical flow field-flow fractionation
coupled with multiple angles light scattering detectors. In addition, Fourier-
transform infrared spectroscopy and Micro-Raman spectroscopy will be used to
characterize plastic polymers and functional groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.