* 2204559
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Intersectionality and Mentoring in the Professoriate for Advancement, Community, and Transformation (IMPACT)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jennie Burnet, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Georgia State University (GSU) ADVANCE project IMPACT (Intersectionality and
Mentoring in the Professoriate for Advancement, Community, and Transformation)
will implement practices aimed at increasing the number of women, particularly
underrepresented minority women, who are recruited, promoted, and retained in
STEM tenure track positions and GSU leadership. IMPACT will adapt and build upon
a suite of activities demonstrated by Florida International University to
effectively produce systemic changes that promote the recruitment and retention
of women in STEM faculty positions on the tenure track. Faculty diversity
benefits the workforce, national competitiveness, and prosperity and is critical
for national social justice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IMPACT aims to transform the
cultural landscape at GSU by profiting from lessons learned from DEI scholars,
decades of ADVANCE initiatives, and the strong commitment of GSU leadership to
promote faculty diversity. The project aims to 1) institutionalize Strategies
and Tactics for Recruiting to Improve Diversity and Excellence (STRIDE) training
for fair and equitable recruitment and increase the intersectional content of
the training, 2) provide bystander leadership training to promote awareness of
implicit bias and microaggressions and skills to interrupt them when they occur,
3) offer a university-wide faculty mentoring program that targets faculty at all
career stages, and 4) institutionalize policy review that advocates for
diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI), with an initial focus on equitable
service allocation and faculty review processes. IMPACT activities will
contribute to the body of knowledge of institutional solutions for increasing
faculty diversity by offering a unique testbed for investigating the efficacy of
these activities in a large R1 minority-serving urban institution and will
provide lessons learned on effective/ineffective strategies in this setting.
Additionally, IMPACT will advance DEI efforts and scholarship by increasing the
intersectional content available for faculty recruitment training. The project
includes a comprehensive communication plan to disseminate IMPACT activities,
findings, and resources widely.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is
designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and
elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full participation and
advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers
that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the
organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation" awards provide support
for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based strategies to academic, non-
profit institutions of higher education as well as non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.