* 2204919
* Research Initiation: Developing Spatial Visualization and Understanding of Complex Systems via Interactive Mixed Reality Modules
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Paul Asunda, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,996.00

Spatial visualization is the ability to mentally maneuver two- and three-
dimensional objects, and thus is an essential skill for engineering technology
students. Research shows that students with poor spatial-visual skills feel
discouraged because they cannot complete tasks that seem easy to their
colleagues. Consequently, the lack of spatial visualization skills may
negatively impact students' performance. These students may switch their majors
to disciplines that do not require high spatial-visual abilities. This RIEF
project will develop students' spatial visualization skills utilizing
interfaceable Mixed Reality (MR) modules. The MR modules will be incorporated
into undergraduate fluid power courses to develop students' cognitive spatial
thinking and thus reinforce their problem-solving skills.

This research demonstrates a digitized-based technique to develop spatial
visualization in engineering technology students. The research will examine the
efficacy of integrating state-of-the-art MR technology into advanced engineering
technology courses. Interactive MR modules will be employed as a pedagogical
tool to study and enhance students' visualization skills. The proposed research
will have a broader influence that benefits society in different aspects,
including (1) developing spatial visualization skills that are needed in
everyday life situations, (2) advancing the infrastructure of STEM instruction
and research, and (3) progressing discovery and promoting learning through the
implementation of interactive visual representations. Utilizing such MR complex
systems for demonstrating engineering concepts will allow students to learn,
practice, and become familiar with digitized-based technology. This RIEF project
will also develop an instrument to measure students' attitudes towards MR
technology in engineering technology courses. The research outcomes will serve
as a reference for the academic community interested in MR, spatial
visualization, and new teaching methodologies in STEM education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.