* 2204466
* Photoactive Ionically Bonded Organic Metal Halide Hybrids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Biwu Ma, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2025
* USD 478,790.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New functional materials are one
of the keys to the advancement of technologies useful for our daily life.
Organic metal halide hybrids, in which organic and metal halide ions form
ionically bonded single crystals, are an emerging class of functional materials
that have potential applications in many areas, such as light emitting diodes
and radiation detectors. In this project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, Prof. Biwu Ma
and his research team aim to develop and study new organic metal halide hybrids
with unique crystalline structures. The team will focus on “zero-dimensional
structures” which possess diverse and unique chemical and physical properties.
The expected outcomes of this project include fundamental understanding and
ability of controlling matter and material processes at the atomic/molecular
level, as well as macroscopic functional properties of hybrid materials. Various
educational and outreach activities are integrated in this project, for
instance, (i) promoting multidisciplinary research education and training to
graduates and undergraduate students, in particular those from underrepresented
groups; (ii) involving K-12 students and general public through summer young
scholar programs, scientific exhibitions, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic-inorganic metal halide hybrid materials
have attracted great research attention for their remarkable and useful optical
and electronic properties with applications in a variety of areas. In addition
to the well-known three-dimensional (3D) halide perovskite structure, organic
metal halide hybrids can have many other crystallographic structures, in which
metal halide units, for instance, metal halide octahedrons, form zero- (0D),
one- (1D), two- dimensional (2D) structures. These low dimensional hybrid
materials exhibit unique and remarkable properties that are completely different
from those of 3D metal halide perovskites. This project, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research,
aims to advance the research on organic metal halide hybrids, through designing
and synthesizing new 0D organic metal halide hybrids via various synthetic
approaches, gaining better fundamental understanding of the structure-property
relationships, and exploring material integration with potential technological
innovations. Unlike previous efforts mainly focusing on single component systems
containing insulating organic cations, the research team investigates
multicomponent systems that contain various types of organic components (both
insulating and semiconducting) and metal halides (both molecular species and
multinuclear clusters). These 0D organic metal halide hybrids serve as a
powerful platform to unlock the hidden properties of both organic and metal
halide species, and study important physical phenomena and processes, including
electronic band formation, exciton-lattice coupling, charge/energy transfer,
excited state structural reorganization of metal halides, as well as the
dependence of the properties of organic molecules on their molecular packings.
The exploration of their applications in various types of devices, such as X-ray
scintillators and detectors, leads to new opportunities for hybrid
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.