* 2204386
* RUI: Link Homology Theories and Other Quantum Invariants
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Carmen Caprau, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2025
* USD 226,328.00

Low-dimensional topology is a branch of mathematics that studies spaces of low
dimensions, including knots, singular links, and virtual knots, as well as
knotted surfaces. Invariants of knots and links are efficient tools that allow
us to distinguish between such mathematical objects. Study of link invariants
has yielded powerful new invariants in the form of homology theories that arise
through categorification, the process of replacing a known invariant for links
with a family of algebraic objects that generalize and enrich the original
invariant. One focus of the project is to better understand some existing link
homologies and investigate their properties and applications, as well as to
construct new link homologies. Another goal of the project is to extend known
quantum invariants to other knot-like objects, including singular links. The
award will support research experiences in which students are charged with
investigating and working on publication-worthy open questions. The PI is
committed to increasing the participation of women in mathematics and will also
continue to organize the university's annual Sonia Kovalevsky Math Day, an event
designed for students in grades 7-12, with the goal of empowering the next
generation of female mathematicians, scientists, engineers, and innovators.
Moreover, the PI organizes a series of talks aimed for college students,
celebrating the achievements of young mathematicians, in particular women and
underrepresented groups in mathematical sciences; speakers are encouraged to
talk not only about math and their mathematical achievements but also about
their path and endeavors to a career in mathematical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The range of topics in this project will establish connections
between various areas of mathematics, including low-dimensional topology,
combinatorics, abstract algebra, and representation theory. The project aims to
construct and study new Khovanov-type homology theories for classical knots and
singular knots via webs and foams modulo relations and to investigate
applications of these theories to questions about braids and cobordisms, in
particular to questions related to concordance, ribbon distance, and invariants
of surface-links and surface-knots. Another goal of the project is to extend
classical quantum invariants to singular links and virtual links by means of
skein modules, Markov traces, and Birman-Murakami-Wenzl algebras, as well as
combinatorial techniques involving graphical calculus. There are manageable
problems for students stemming from the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.