* 2204309
* The 2023 Gulf States Math Alliance Conference and Faculty Development Workshop
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Tuncay Aktosun, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 04/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

This project serves the national interest by working to broadening participation
of students from underrepresented and underserved populations in the
mathematical sciences. Specifically, this project will organize the 2023 Annual
Gulf States Math Alliance (GSMATH) Conference and offer a faculty development
workshop to support the use of collaborative mentoring strategies by mathematics
faculty at participating institutions. The GSMATH Conference will be held at
Texas Southern University in Houston, Texas during February 24-26, 2023. The
conference is organized by GSMATH, which is the regional mathematics alliance
covering the states of Texas, Louisiana, and Mississippi that includes an active
and strong network of faculty mentors in over 25 HSIs (Hispanic Serving
Institutions), HBCUs (Historically Black Colleges and Universities), and other
institutions that serve a diverse population of students. Building from six
prior GSMATH conferences, it is anticipated that 125 students will attend the
conference with an additional 25 faculty also participating in the faculty
development workshop. The conference will provide multiple sessions centered on
demystifying the pathways through undergraduate degree programs in the
mathematical sciences. Keynote speakers, panel discussions, a student poster
session, and a graduate and undergraduate program fair will provide multiple
opportunities for students to network, ask questions, and receive mentoring. The
faculty workshop will focus on equitably supporting students as they grow from
2-year and 4-year colleges into graduate education or the workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GSMATH conference will directly contribute to efforts
to broaden participation and promote equity in the mathematical sciences. This,
in turn, has potential to improve STEM education and academic outcomes for
students across disciplines. Panels like “What I wish I knew Before Graduate
School”, “Math Career Pathways (Academic and Non-Academic)", and “Research
Opportunities for Undergraduate Majors” will allow participating students to get
advice from faculty and experienced peers. The involvement of community college
mathematics faculty and students is a critical element of the GSMATH conference,
as 2-year colleges are a starting point for many students pursuing bachelor’s
and graduate degrees in the mathematical sciences. The faculty development
workshop will not only enable faculty to collaboratively mentor those students
throughout the year but will also address important issues in DEI (Diversity,
Equity, and Inclusion), critical transition from CCs to four-year undergraduate
studies, and from undergraduate to graduate studies. Faculty development will
also strengthen connections between participating institutions, supporting the
growth of a responsive community of mentors across the discipline. The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in
STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature
and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity at HSIs are supported by this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.