* 2204558
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Advancing Inclusion, Diversity, and Equity in STEM (AIDE-STEM)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Maritsa Poros, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2025
* USD 999,839.00

TThe overall goal of the City College of New York (CCNY) 's ADVANCE Adaptation
project is to implement institutional transformation that fosters an equitable
and supportive professional environment for all faculty, with a particular
emphasis on women and Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC) STEM
faculty. The persistent underrepresentation of women and BIPOC faculty in STEM
at CCNY and across the nation undermines the attainment of a diverse, well-
prepared STEM workforce and national prosperity. The reasons for the persistent
underrepresentation are complex. The solutions to address this persistent
underrepresentation require new and multi-faceted integrative approaches rooted
in the primary forces that drive academic careers: research, teaching, and
service. This project will work to ensure that women and BIPOC faculty are
supported so they can thrive in all three of these pillars. The project has
three key activities: 1. Increase the promotion, retention, and mentoring of
women and BIPOC STEM faculty. 2. Improve workload equity and internal support
for research and collaboration. 3. Foster an inclusive environment for all by
decreasing systemic racism. CCNY is uniquely positioned in the CUNY educational
system because it includes the CUNY School of Medicine and Grove School of
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from a prior NSF ADVANCE Catalyst
award at CCNY have informed the development and design of the current project.
The Catalyst institutional self-assessment work, which included faculty
interviews and climate surveys, indicated that women and BIPOC faculty have
differential experiences in mentoring, understanding of policies and procedures,
and career progression at CCNY. The CCNY project will adapt best practices from
several past ADVANCE institutions. Together, the suite of activities is
comprehensive and designed to address the systemic issues identified in the
Catalyst project and faculty surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE
program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation"
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to academic, non-profit institutions of higher education as well as
non-academic, non-profit organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was
supported by a co-funding from the HSI Program, which aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity
at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs,
requires innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.