* 2204082
* Collaborative Research: Transport of model-virus through the lung liquid lining
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Juan Lopez, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2025
* USD 214,373.00

The novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic, is
similar to other respiratory coronaviruses, such as SARS-CoV (2002) and MERS-CoV
(2012). All these viruses cause dangerous respiratory disorders with high
mortality and grave impacts on society. This virus destroys the cells that
produce lung surfactants which, among other things, keep the alveoli air-sacks
from collapsing, and eventually the lungs fill with liquid. The fluid dynamic
interactions between the liquid lining of the lung, the lung surfactants, and
the respiratory virus are presently not well understood. This project addresses
this gap by conducting experiments and numerical modeling to capture the
essential fluid dynamics of a model virus interacting with lung surfactant. The
numerical models will then be used to simulate physiologically relevant scales,
not accessible experimentally. In addition to understanding flow in the lung
liquid lining, the present knowledge gap in predictive modeling of interfacial
dilation and compression is hampering developments in other areas, such as in
water waves, which are of utmost importance in modeling of carbon dioxide gas
exchange between the atmosphere and the oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two
primary functions of lung surfactants are regulating the interfacial tension and
surface viscosities of the liquid lining of the alveoli, and providing a first
line of immune defense against airborne pathogens. Predictive models for the
transport of small particles in a surfactant-covered liquid layer will be
developed. A key advancement in the proposed modeling of surface elasticity is
to measure the equation-of-state of the monolayer in a state corresponding to
that found when it has been subjected to a large number of dilation/compression
cycles. The usual approach of determining properties of a recently spread
monolayer undergoing slow compression is inappropriate for modeling monolayer
hydrodynamics coupled to an oscillatory bulk flow, as the monolayer is in a
different state with very different interfacial properties. The role of
interfacial dilatational viscosity and its significance relative to surface
elasticity remains poorly understood and presents a major impediment to the
predictive modeling of free-surface flows. The PIs have a proven track record of
productive multidisciplinary collaboration, and will continue to provide a
unique educational opportunity for the graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.