* 2204008
* Ultra-Long Polyradicaloid Wires for Single-Molecule Electronics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Colin Nuckolls, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B Program of
the Chemistry Division, Professor Colin Nuckolls of the Department of Chemistry
at Columbia University will test the hypothesis that open-shell molecules can be
used to form molecular wires of virtually any length. These highly conductive
molecular wires, have the potential to connect functional molecular electronics
(e.g. rectifiers, switches, etc.) to microfabricated electrodes, thus
demonstrating a path for integrating molecular electronics and existing
circuitry manufacturing. The proposal contains technological broader impacts
because it pioneers a new approach to the realistic preparation of single-
molecule devices that could be useful across many established and emerging
technologies. Beyond the technological broader impacts, this proposal aims to
increase the number of scientists as well as bridge related fields with an
integrated science/educational program that spans K-8 outreach, curriculum
development, and research training for undergraduate, graduate, and post-
doctoral scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal outlines a new approach
to the preparation of ultra-long polyradicaloid molecular wires that become more
conductive at longer lengths. Professor Nuckolls and his research group will
produce long molecular wires that can be used to interconnect single-molecule
elements to carbon nanotube electrodes. Through this proposal, they will
synthesize air-stable polyradicaloid wires that can be functionalized and
integrated into test structures. Furthermore, the proposed studies will modify
the electronic couplings of these wires through their synthetic design. Finally,
the studies outlined in the proposal will enable single molecule electrical
measurements from these polyradicaloid wire
interconnects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.