* 2204644
* Collaborative Research: Martensitic Transformations in Paraelectric Shape Memory Ceramics Activated by an Electric Field
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Eric Homer, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2026
* USD 228,014.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A martensitic transformation is a
structure change that takes place in some crystalline materials, in which the
atoms spontaneously and rapidly reshuffle into a new crystal structure in a
coordinated way. In some materials this transformation is reversible, so that
the material can repeatedly transform back and forth between two shapes, giving
rise to the property of “shape memory”. In a martensitic ceramic like zirconia,
the shape change is very large (elongating and contracting a shape by ~10%) and
it also exerts very large forces. For this reason, shape memory materials are
like “solid-state engines”, able to do work on their surroundings as actuators.
What is more, it has been recently discovered that shape memory zirconia can be
transformed by applying electric fields to it, which opens the door to
electronic control over shape memory. With support from the Ceramics Program in
the Division of Materials Research, this project investigates the new property
of electrical shape memory in ceramics and develops tools to discover and design
new ceramic materials that exhibit this property. The project consists of
computational and theoretical efforts to understand how different parameters
affect the martensitic transformation, led by Prof. Homer at Brigham Young
University, and an experimental effort to validate the phase transformation
theory for different orientations of the crystals, temperatures, and applied
electric fields. This research to synthesize and test new prospective shape
memory ceramics is carried out in Prof. Schuh’s research group at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. This research has implications for
actuator device technologies, which have not been as easily miniaturized as
other electronic technologies. Additionally, the project will also provide
scientific training for two PhD students, one at each institution, and outreach
activities will involve a collaborative effort to strengthen the roll out of a
Materials Science minor program at BYU to unify materials-oriented students that
are spread across different majors on campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supported by the Ceramics Program in the Division
of Materials Research, this project investigates a new class of shape memory
ceramics in which the classical advantages of shape memory (the ability to do
large amounts of mechanical work through a solid state phase transformation) are
paired with a new mechanism for activating that property (an electric field-
driven paraelectric-to-paraelectric phase transformation). Besides developing an
entirely new class of “paraelectroactive” ceramics that can perform meaningful
mechanical work and expanding the portfolio of electroactive ceramics, the
research also has implications for the theory of phase transformations more
broadly. The research involves four interrelated tasks: (1) developing and
validating thermodynamic models that incorporate the coupled influence of
electrical-thermal-mechanical energy on a paraelectric-to-paraelectric
martensitic transformation; (2) examining the role of crystal orientation and
anisotropic material properties on the predicted and observed phase
transformation conditions; (3) exploring the role of dopants to control the
transformation conditions and enable room temperature operation of this
phenomenon; (4) expanding the materials-scope of the phenomenon by discovering
alternative (non-zirconia) shape memory ceramics that exhibit paraelectric-
paraelectric martensitic transformations. These tasks are collaboratively
investigated with a primarily experimental effort in Prof. Schuh’s research
group at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Prof. Homer’s research
group mostly carrying out theoretical effort at Brigham Young
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.