* 2204523
* EAR-PF: Constraining Paired Air-Water Temperature Models' Efficacy In Head and Intermediate Watersheds With Groundwater and Bedrock Assessment and Multi-Decade Temperature Records
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Jill Riddell, Riddell, Jill
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Climate change increases atmospheric temperatures, which alters temperature
patterns in groundwater and streams and results in reduced water quality and
ecological diversity. In parts of the eastern United States, like West Virginia,
climate has already warmed 0.5º – 1.0º F over the last century and temperatures
are expected to rise another 3º – 4º F by the year 2100, further warming stream
and shallow groundwater temperatures and affecting the organisms that live
there. Stream temperature patterns provide insight into the vulnerability of
these streams and watersheds to warming temperatures. However, current models do
not fully account for temperature changes caused by interactions of water on the
surface and underground. Model predictions of ground and surface water
temperatures in a changing climate must be informed by the factors that
influence thermal signals, including climate, geology, hydrology, land use, and
land cover. Data show stream temperature changes in response to changing climate
are likely driven (in part) by changes in relative contributions and
temperatures of discharging groundwater. The Fernow Experimental Forest (FEF) in
West Virginia has been recording temperature data in at least ten headwater
watersheds since 1958. Using the FEF as a well-controlled outdoor laboratory to
study these temperature patterns, Riddell will generate improved models and
better knowledge of these systems. Improved models can be used to estimate
watershed responses to drought or high intensity precipitation events, and
associated disasters such as flooding. This work will directly impact middle and
high school high school students in WV through collaboration with the National
Youth Science Foundation (NYSF). This proposed work is in the Monongahela
National Forest where the National Youth Science Foundation has hosted its
National Youth Science Camp since 1963. The FEF is close to the camp and the
newly purchased National Youth Science Center (NYSCenter) in Davis, WV. During
this project, collaboration with NYSF staff will result in the installation of a
stream gage monitoring station on the Blackwater River, which is adjacent to the
NYSCenter to deliver hydrology education to middle and high school students in
WV. This collaboration will support the NYSF mission to build and maintain
student interest in STEM fields and promote high school retention rates and the
pursuance of post-secondary STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change
is increasing atmospheric temperatures which alters thermal patterns in
groundwater and streams, resulting in reduced water quality and ecological
diversity. Thermal regimes in surface waters are highly influenced by
groundwater and its connectivity to the surface, which may be discerned by
comparing air and stream temperature records. Paired air-water temperature
analysis via sine wave regression is a way to characterize the relationship
between air temperature and surface water temperature to elucidate the
groundwater contributions to watershed hydraulics, cold-water habitat refugia,
and groundwater temperature response to climate change. Recent research has
focused on modeling annual paired-air/water temperature signals to assess the
role of groundwater in propagating air temperature to stream water from sub-
watershed to continental scales. Results of these sine regression studies are
focused on determining the inputs of groundwater to surface water and the
eventual response of surface water to climate change by comparing the amplitude
ratios (sine curve peak height) and phase lag signals (time between peaks) of
air and water temperature records. Deeper groundwater signatures show little
variation in annual temperature and have ambiguous amplitude ratio and phase lag
whereas shallow groundwater signatures show high amplitude ratios and measurable
phase lag on the order of days. However, current models do not fully account for
groundwater – surface water interactions that influence stream temperatures.
These processes are governed by aquifer characteristics such as aquifer
thickness, porosity, hydraulic conductivity, and bedrock type and depth. This
study will utilize the Fernow Experimental Forest in WV to improve thermal
stream model efficacy in small and intermediate watersheds by collecting new
groundwater temperature measurements, assessing the influence of differing
bedrock geology in the same watershed, and exploring the efficacy of these
models in hydrologically connected, nested watersheds and in watersheds in which
air and stream temperature records exist across multiple decades. This study
will advance the knowledge of groundwater contributions to headwater watersheds
and intermediate watersheds into which they discharge and to the vulnerability
of these watersheds to climate change. The current models (sine regression)
being applied to large, continental size watersheds recognize the importance of
local hydrogeology and geology on groundwater behavior and the subsequent
effects on surface stream temperature patterns. However, no study has yet to
intensively characterize the surface hydrology, hydrogeology, and bedrock
geology of small watersheds and the contribution of all these factors on stream
temperature patterns. This study will fill that gap and highlight the importance
of characterizing the subsurface when making predictions about the surface.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Earth Sciences
Postdoctoral Fellowship program, the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) and the Hydrologic Sciences
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.