* 2204588
* EAR-PF: A multidisciplinary investigation of biotic and environmental change within the Triassic-Jurassic strata of southwestern Honshu, Japan
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2024
* Benjamin Breeden, Breeden, Benjamin Thomas
* Fellowship Award
* Aisha Morris
* 10/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Dr. Benjamin T. Breeden III has been awarded an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral
Fellowship to carry out research on the beginning of the Age of Reptiles in
Japan under the mentorship of Dr. Makoto Manabe at the National Museum of Nature
and Science. The “Age of Reptiles,” or Mesozoic Era, is the interval of geologic
time spanning the Triassic, Jurassic, and Cretaceous periods (~252–66 million
years ago) during which reptiles such as non-avian dinosaurs (i.e., dinosaurs
other than birds) dominated terrestrial ecosystems. Throughout the early
Mesozoic, life on Earth endured and recovered from two mass extinctions tied to
global environmental change, resulting in the evolution and diversification of
many groups of vertebrate animals that remain important components of modern
ecosystems. The early Mesozoic vertebrate fossil record has received heavy
scientific scrutiny in recent decades; however, vertebrate fossil-bearing strata
from the Late Triassic and Early Jurassic epochs in Japan have remained widely
overlooked by researchers outside of Japan despite over a century of research by
Japanese researchers. This project will focus on Triassic-Jurassic strata in
southwestern Honshu (the largest of the main Japanese islands) and integrate
observations of vertebrate fossils from Japanese museum collections, field
geological and paleontological observations, laboratory geochemical analyses,
and the translation of Japanese scientific literature into English to elucidate
the relationship between vertebrate evolution and environmental change along the
northeastern margin of the supercontinent Pangea, where this region of Japan was
positioned throughout the early Mesozoic. This project will facilitate outreach
and education via public lectures, undergraduate mentoring, and museum exhibit
design; and it will make certain research on early Mesozoic geology and
paleontology in Japan accessible to a broader English-speaking audience for the
first time via publications for both scientific and general
readers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The established early Mesozoic vertebrate fossil
record of Japan is sparse but diverse, and many vertebrate fossil-bearing early
Mesozoic strata in Japan lack precise and accurate multiproxy datasets with
which to evaluate hypotheses regarding paleobiogeography and environmentally
driven biotic change. These strata are therefore relatively untapped potential
resources for studying these changes. Among the most productive vertebrate
fossil-bearing early Mesozoic strata in Japan are the Upper Triassic Mine Group,
and the Lower-Middle Jurassic Toyora and Kuruma groups, all of which crop out
across regions in southwestern Honshu. This project will establish an integrated
record of environmental change and vertebrate evolution in northeastern Pangea
throughout the early Mesozoic via paleontological and geological reconnaissance
of these strata and a revision of the existing early Mesozoic vertebrate fossil
records from these and other Triassic and Jurassic strata in museum collections
across Japan. Phylogenetic and biogeographic methods will be used to evaluate
the anatomy and evolutionary history of the vertebrate fossils from these
strata, and the carbon isotope chemostratigraphy of these strata will be
established for correlation of major carbon isotope perturbations associated
with relevant environmental crises (e.g., Carnian Pluvial Event; Toarcian Ocean
Anoxic Event). This work will contribute to the broader knowledge of
environmental and biotic change throughout the early Mesozoic at regional and
global scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.