* 2204094
* Controlling Protein Post-translational Modification by Separating Affinity and Catalysis in Designer Enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Albert Bowers, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 05/31/2025
* USD 495,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program in the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Albert A. Bowers from the University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill will investigate methods for making artificial enzymes. Enzymes
are proteins that act as the key drivers of metabolic transformations and
processes in all cell-based life. Enzymes are also increasingly important
‘green’ tools for a variety of industrial processes, including the make and
manufacture of pharmaceuticals, materials, fuels, and foods. Despite significant
advances in computational protein design, the creation of useful, efficient,
artificial enzymes remains a major challenge. This is due to the need to fashion
proteins that are capable of simultaneously 1) holding a substrate (or binding)
and 2) modifying the substrate (or catalysis). The proposed experiments will
test a potentially generalizable strategy for enzyme design that separates
substrate binding and catalysis for peptide-based substrates. This work employs
cutting edge technologies and will provide rich training grounds for graduate
students in high-throughput experimentation, DNA-encoded technology,
computational protein design, and machine learning and artificial intelligence.
These methods will also form the foundations of a focused outreach program to
bring emerging concepts in biotechnology to the broader public. Ultimately, if
successful, this research has the potential to open up new avenues for the
design of enzyme function and enable the biocatalytic synthesis of peptides with
new properties and biomaterials applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project seeks to quantitatively characterize efficiency gains in designer
peptide post-translational modification (PTM) enzymes comprised of separate
substrate recruitment and modification domains. This constitutes a potentially
generalizable approach to creating artificial PTM enzymes. Rosetta design suite
will be used to fashion designer interfaces between the fyn-SH3 substrate
recruitment domain and two different catalytic domains for comparison against
naive (or undesigned) fusions as well as the parent, wild-type catalytic subunit
in kinetic assays. Generalizability and flexibility of the strategy will be
measured by an innovative, mRNA display-based substrate display assay approach
and results analyzed and integrated with advanced machine learning (ML) methods.
These model enzymes will further be employed to assess the additive effect of
the design strategy on small, designer biosynthetic
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.