* 2204052
* Quantitative Scattering Microscopy (QSCAT) for Nanoscale Imaging of Ion Insertion Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Justin Sambur, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2025
* USD 423,650.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, a research team led by Justin Sambur and Randy Bartels of
the Departments of Chemistry and Electrical and Computer Engineering,
respectively, at Colorado State University is developing quantitative scattering
microscopy, or QSCAT, a new microscopy approach that uses light to quantify the
number of ions in a host material. Accurate and precise measurements of ion
concentrations are critical to the successful operation and performance of many
technological applications that benefit society, including lithium-ion
batteries, energy-saving electrochromic “smart” windows, water desalination
systems, ion separation membranes, and neuromorphic transistors. The problem
with current electrical-based measurement approaches is that one electron
detected in the electrical circuit does not always equal one ion inserted in the
host material. To address this measurement selectivity problem, the research
team will leverage the fact that inserted ions change the way light travels
through a material to develop a light scattering-based measurement technique
(QSCAT) that exploits the acute relationship between optical and electronic
properties of solids. This research project seeks a simple, selective,
sensitive, quantitative, and high-throughput optical microscopy technique to
quantify ion insertion chemistry at the single nanoparticle-level. The
development of QSCAT microscopy has the potential to accelerate materials
characterization and, therefore, the discovery and development of functional
materials that impact and benefit society. The project provides training
opportunities that will help build a diverse scientific workforce, including
training opportunities for students from groups that are underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The QSCAT microscopy technique being developed by
the research team uses quantitative phase and field amplitude information
related to the light that scatters from single particles (or localized regions
on a surface) in order to selectively measure ion insertion processes in a host
material. This approach isolates the ion-insertion process from all other
processes that contribute to the electrochemical current response (for example,
double-layer charging, solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer formation,
corrosion, interfacial charge transfer), and does so via widefield imaging where
hundreds of particles can be studied in a single experiment. The intellectual
merit of the project will be the development of a robust and simple quantitative
phase method that extracts the real and imaginary parts of the optical
susceptibly perturbations of an ion insertion host. Because the approach is not
a form of interferometric microscopy with coherent laser light, the current
state-of-the-art in the field, QSCAT should reduce or eliminate issues such as
multiple reflections, surface quality, dust contamination, thermal drift, fluid
flow, and sample stability that ultimately limit sensitivity and selectivity.
The research has the potential to enable new electroanalytical methods to
interrogate charge storage mechanisms and surface chemical processes at the
single nanoparticle level by allowing researchers to quickly determine
structure-property relationships for systems of interest that cannot be
interrogated with current optical microscopy approaches. Understanding higher-
level effects, such as how particle morphology and exposed surface facets
contribute to reactivity, has the potential to provide critical design
principles that could be used to advance materials discovery. The broader
impacts of the work include the potential to provide new insights into the
behavior of materials that are important for energy storage and other important
applications, as well as dissemination of the work through educational and
outreach activities related to the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.