* 2204085
* Historical Archaeology of Race and Class in the Antebellum South
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Brandi MacDonald, Greer, Matthew Clark
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2024
* USD 143,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the
SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Brandi
MacDonald at the University of Missouri Research Reactor (MURR), this
postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist studying
historical racial identification. While prior research has not systematically
assessed how class shaped racial identity, this project seeks to provide a more
nuanced understanding of racial identity in the Antebellum South by analyzing
eight archaeological sites in the Cedar Creek drainage of Virginia’s Shenandoah
Valley. Archaeologists have long argued that people used consumer goods and food
to perform various identities. Therefore, this project will focus on the
consumer goods and food remains from these sites. To gain a broader view of the
role consumer goods played in local identities, this project will also look at
ledgers from local stores to compare purchases across customers from different
classes. The funded research will provide new insights into the intersections of
race and class in the Antebellum South. More broadly, it will provide new
insights into the way different groups of people laid claim to racial identity
in the 19th-century that can inform future archaeological, historical, and
sociological research. The results will be shared with the public through
lectures and the creation of a museum exhibit aimed at broadening the way racial
identities are understood in the past. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
approaches racial identity using theoretical insights, allowing it to explore
what identity meant in the past and the diverse ways racial identity was
experienced and performed through consumption practices and foodways.
Specifically, by assessing the connection between racial identities and class,
the project provides insights into the ways socioeconomic status shaped the
various meanings, experiences, and performances of racial identity. Four
archaeological sites will be excavated for this project and collections from
four more reanalyzed. The analysis of foodways will include an assessment of
4,000 faunal fragments and a gas chromatography-mass spectrometry study of
absorbed residues from 330 ceramic vessels. Consumption practices will be
assessed using archaeologically recovered ceramics. This will include a minimum
vessel analysis to look at the choices these households made about what types of
imported ceramic tea and tablewares to purchase and a use-wear analysis to
determine how members of these households used ceramic vessels. To map out where
these ceramic purchases took place, and by extension where these racial
identities were being performed in local stores, the provenance of 280 locally-
made utilitarian wares will also be assessed using laser ablation-inductively
coupled plasma-mass spectrometry, neutron activation analysis, petrography, and
Raman spectroscopy. To further assess consumption practices, an archival
database will be created for the project using 10 merchants' ledgers, with
consumers cross-referenced with census and tax records to determine their
socioeconomic status. This project’s use of provenance and residue analyses make
it the first study of racial identity to use analytical techniques from
archaeological science and its successful completion will show how these provide
new lines of evidence that enhance the methods archaeologists use to study
racial identities. Data from the project will be used to create a workshop and a
subsequent course syllabus along with training datasets for teachings students
how to use archaeological science to answer research
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.