* 2204202
* Controlling the Synthesis and Placement of Organic Color-Centers with Light
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* YuHuang Wang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2025
* USD 488,482.00

With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor YuHuang Wang of the University
of Maryland College Park will address the synthetic challenge of the controlled
placement of organic color-centers, also known as quantum defects, on the
surface of single-walled carbon nanotubes. These atomic defects can emit
photons—the elementary particles of light—one at a time, creating a source of
single photons; however, they typically exist randomly within the solid, lacking
the synthetic control required for achieving control over atomic structure,
placement on the surface and color tuning. Controlled placement of organic
color-centers on the surface of single-walled carbon nanotubes would enable the
nanotubes to emit single, short wave infrared photons at room temperature.
Success in accomplishing the objective of the project would enable the creation
and tuning of identical organic colo- centers emitting single wavelengths for
emerging applications in bio-imaging, molecular sensing, and quantum information
science. In addition to the involvement of graduate and undergraduate students,
particularly from under-represented groups, in cutting-edge research, the
project will also involve developing engaging nanoscience and technology
demonstrations based on project results and sharing these with others in
community outreach events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Wang
and his team will synthesize model defect color-centers by covalently attaching
small functional groups to semi-conducting carbon nanotube hosts using organic
chemistry. When the nanotube is excited, the resulting excitons—or electron-hole
pairs—are harvested by the organic color-center to produce bright shortwave-
infrared single photons whose “color” sensitively depends on the atomic
configuration of the defect site. The team will use this optical fingerprint to
study how these organic color-centers can be generated, erased, or corrected on
the carbon lattice of the nanotube semiconductor using light. This work, if
successful, will pave the way to attaining atomic control and deterministic
placement of these defect color-centers. The team will also work to advance a
method to enable tracing of dark excitons and quantification of the exciton-to-
photon conversion efficiency at the defect—a property of fundamental importance
to quantum light sources and to the understanding of the excited states of these
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.