* 2204138
* AGS-PRF: Examining the Response of Tropical Cyclone Precipitation Structure to Climate Change Using Idealized and Realistic Models
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Alyssa Stansfield, Stansfield, Alyssa M
* Fellowship Award
* Yu Gu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 190,000.00

Tropical cyclones (TCs) are weather systems made up of rotating thunderstorms
that usually form in the tropics and that can cause injuries, fatalities, and
expensive property damage when they move over land. While coastal residents are
often most concerned about flooding from TC landfalls, TC precipitation and
associated flooding can extend hundreds of miles inland. Although it is well-
established that TC precipitation rates are expected to increase in the future
due to climate change, the scientific community is less certain about how the
patterns of TC precipitation may change, which has implications for issuing the
most accurate flood warnings and evacuation mandates ahead of TC landfalls. This
project will explore how TC precipitation structure will be impacted by climate
change since structural changes may shift the distribution of precipitation
within TCs, which could impact flooding patterns. TC precipitation comes from
both the inner core, commonly known as the eye wall, and outer rainbands. A more
complete understanding of how TC precipitation in the inner core and outer
rainband regions is related and how precipitation may change in these two
regions because of climate change can aid TC forecast modelers in adapting their
models to the changing climate, which will in turn help emergency managers and
decision makers save lives in areas prone to TC
landfalls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous modeling studies on TC precipitation
and climate change have used coarse-resolution models that cannot resolve TC
precipitation structures. Recent observational studies using about 20 years of
satellite data found a decreasing trend in TC inner core precipitation and an
increasing trend in TC outer rainband precipitation, while models using grid
spacings of tens of kilometers or coarser have projected conflicting changes in
inner core versus outer rainband precipitation increases due to climate change.
This research will use an idealized high-resolution model with explicitly-
resolved convection to increase the understanding of how three-dimensional
precipitation structures within TCs are impacted by atmospheric and sea surface
temperature warming. Results will provide insight into discrepancies between
observed trends and climate model predictions of changes in TC precipitation
structure. Physical mechanisms behind any notable changes in precipitation
structure will be explored. Beyond the idealized simulations, an analysis of
pseudo-global warming simulations run at the same resolution as the idealized
simulations will show if the results discovered with the idealized simulations
apply to TCs in more Earth-like environments and how precipitation during TC
landfalls may change in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.