* 2204595
* EAR-PF: Geochemical Evidence for the onset of Plate Tectonics on the Early Earth from the Wyoming Province and Singhbhum Craton
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Heather Kirkpatrick, Kirkpatrick, Heather Margaret
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 180,000.00

Plate tectonics is the theory that the Earth’s outermost layer, which is called
the crust, is divided into different plates which move across the mantle (the
layer directly below the crust). This plate movement causes most volcanos and
earthquakes on Earth and is theorized to be an important control on life
formation on Earth. However, there is disagreement on when plate tectonics
began. This work seeks to answer a crucial question in the earth sciences: When,
why, and how did plate tectonics start? To understand these changes, a mineral
called zircon will be used. Zircon is important because of its physical and
chemical resilience, the wide variety of environments where it forms, and the
rich chemical information it provides. It is also the only remnant of rock from
before 4.01 billion years ago (Ga). Previous studies found evidence of a change
in the source rocks of zircon between 3.8 billion Ga and approximately 3.6 Ga
(Bauer et al. 2020). This variation has been argued to indicate a change in
plate tectonic processes on Earth. However, more information is needed to
understand whether plate tectonics was active during the first ~1 billion years
of Earth’s history, including information on the extent of surface or near-
surface water and variations in rock types. Through high-resolution spatial
analysis of trace and rare earth elements, ages, oxygen isotopes, silicon
isotopes, and mineral inclusions of Hadean (&gt; 4.01 Ga) and Archean (2.5 Ga to
4.01 Ga) zircon from two under-investigated sites, the Wyoming Province and the
Singhbhum Craton, interpretations of ~1 billion years of history related to
Earth’s surface and interior will be made. These investigations will explore the
spatial and temporal extent of liquid water on Earth, tectonic transitions, and
crustal composition during these periods and provide further constraints on
crustal processes during these early eons. This project will include mentorship
of undergraduate students at Harvard, research experiences for high school
students, and outreach to the greater Boston community through events at
museums, Harvard and other community programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, Hadean and Archean zircons from the Wyoming Province and the Singhbhum
Craton will be analyzed in order to expand people’s understanding of early
Earth. Specifically, three topics will be investigated: 1) evidence for and
against modern-style subduction at different periods in early Earth’s history,
2) the spatial and temporal distribution of surface or near-surface water on
early Earth, and 3) the distribution of rock types on early Earth. In-situ
analyses of dated zircons will include measurements of Si-O coupled isotopes,
trace elements, and inclusion studies. Through this project, techniques
originally designed to understand in-context zircons, or those with a very well-
known geologic origin, will be applied to samples from Earth’s earliest history.
Within this, assumptions related to the scalability of these techniques will be
confronted. For example, can it be assumed that the physical processes which
have governed Earth over the past few hundred million years, such as plate
tectonics, were in effect over 4 billion years ago? If they were not, what
processes operated on early Earth?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.