* 2204462
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Enabling Minoritiesâ€™ Prime Outcomes with Education &amp; Research (EMPOWER) at Florida Atlantic University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Alka Sapat, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 08/31/2025
* USD 999,853.00

The absence of an inclusive and diverse STEM faculty significantly hurts the
education of a STEM workforce by the lack of role models to help educate the
diverse group of students at Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs).
Demographically unrepresentative science can also negatively impact and neglect
research in areas that communities and societies need. Prior NSF ADVANCE
CATALYST funding provided significant knowledge and initiated changes in the
hiring processes. However, inclusive support for underrepresented and
intersectional minorities in hiring, retention, and promotion will make a
significant difference in the institutional landscape and culture. An NSF
ADVANCE adaptation award will allow Florida Atlantic University to undertake new
initiatives, build on current policies and data collection activities, and
transform FAU into an equitable, inclusive, and diverse place of academic
teaching and research. This project will seek to advance: (1) self-sustaining
interventions for diverse hiring; (2) transparent and equitable policies, (3)
information through a longitudinal demographic data dashboard of faculty; and
(4) strategic communications. These interventions will focus on inclusive
support for gender diversity and intersectional minorities (most visibly, Latina
and African American women) in hiring, retention, and promotion. The process
will adapt evidence-based practices and innovations from sister ADVANCE
institutions. To aid institutional integration and long-term sustainability, the
project team will prioritize practices that will be bootstrapped with ADVANCE
support and synergized with ongoing efforts and existing institutional
infrastructures for diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the
project are to 1) generate evidence-based research to scan and identify
inequitable policies, the relationships that they entertain with each other, and
their change over time; 2) develop a reproducible and transferrable process for
building a policy database (with a website portal consisting of two key
sections- an open-access section that allows for policy transparency and a
secured section for internal use aimed at flagging inequity); and (3) a scalable
longitudinal faculty dashboard to collect long-term trends in equity. The
project will focus the competencies on Complex Systems and Data Science to
identify interconnected factors that influence systemic change. This will be
done with adaptive analytic approaches that are capable of processing large
numbers of variables that dynamically interact on multiple levels over time. The
successful implementation of this project for institutional change aims to
achieve a more representative and participatory STEM faculty and accelerate
institutional competitiveness in education and research. The crucial outcome of
this transformation will be the mitigation of STEM workforce shortages with
implications for local industries (in particular biotechnologies, aerospace,
health, aging, agriculture, international trade, marine environment, information
technology and security, and financial services).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project was supported by a co-funding from the HSI Program. The HSI program aims
to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and
build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and
context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity at HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation"
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to the academic, non-profit institutions of higher education as well
as non-academic, non-profit organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.