* 2204972
* Collaborative Research: Research Initiation: Defining Engineering Quantitative Literacy
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Kerrie Douglas, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2024
* USD 41,244.00

Employers and educators have expressed increasing concern about the level of
American students' quantitative literacy, which is generally understood to
include computational skills and abilities to interpret, reason, and communicate
quantitative information and data. These abilities are critical for engineering,
yet there is a lack of understanding of the unique aspects of quantitative
literacy needed as students begin their engineering education. This project aims
to define the quantitative literacy expectations of first-year engineering
students and create a means for measuring quantitative literacy, which will
allow educators to better prepare future engineering students for success.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project will be to obtain evidence
to develop a student model for future assessment instruments intended to measure
first-year engineering students' quantitative literacy. Using the Evidence
Centered Designed Framework, the research team will articulate a Student Model
for assessing first-year engineering students' quantitative literacy through
several studies. The research team will conduct a content analysis of
introductory engineering curricula. Next, they will administer a follow-up
survey of introductory engineering faculty to address more specifically the
depth of learning expected of students. Then, a small sample of diverse first-
year students will be interviewed to determine the opportunities they had to
develop their quantitative literacy abilities. Finally, the results will define
quantitative literacy within the specific context of engineering. This
definition can then be used in future projects to develop measures of
quantitative literacy and instructional approaches that support engineering
students' development of this critical skill.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.