* 2204703
* LSAMP BD: Virginia Commonwealth University, Virginia-North Carolina Alliance (2022-2024)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Gregory Triplett, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,075,000.00

The Virginia-North Carolina Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(LSAMP VA-NC Alliance) Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) activity will offer 12
talented students from multiple LSAMP alliances the opportunity to pursue
doctoral degrees in STEM fields at Virginia Commonwealth University. The overall
goal of the program is to broaden participation in STEM graduate programs by
addressing known barriers to URM participation in STEM graduate-level education,
including lack of academic and social integration within STEM graduate programs,
lack of STEM-related professional mentoring, and support for research self-
efficacy. The project will implement a comprehensive program that includes
rigorous academic preparation, mentoring activities and training, research
training experiences, and professional development activities for the BD
Fellows. The objectives for achieving the program goals include a multi-tiered
recruitment strategy, development of an orbital model of support for BD Fellows,
activities such that 90% of the Fellows complete the doctorate within 6 years of
initial enrollment, and evaluation contributing to understanding the impacts,
strengths, and weaknesses of the program for advancing
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to advancing the
NSF’s Mission “To promote the progress of science: “to advance the national
health, prosperity and welfare, or to secure the national defense” and its
2018-2022 Strategic Plan to: “foster the growth of a more capable and diverse
research workforce and advance the scientific and innovation skills of the
nation.” This project will increase the number of Ph.D.-level scientists by
having BD Fellows discover, and subsequently conduct, state-of-the art research.
Fellows will work alongside esteemed STEM faculty in a diversity of STEM
disciplines, leading to a doctoral degree, and, ultimately, careers in research
and teaching, thus contributing to our nation’s STEM enterprise. As the
recruitment pool of LSAMP baccalaureate recipients includes a high proportion of
individuals from underrepresented minority populations, the project anticipates
that BD Fellows will be students from these groups. Therefore, the project will
contribute significantly to broadening participation in academe and science
research. Project success will aid in the recruitment and retention of future
STEM scholars, long after the project has ended.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.