* 2204585
* EAR-PF: Unravelling climate and tectonic signatures using a landscape evolution modelling framework to interpret stable isotope and thermochronology records
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Rachel Havranek, Havranek, Rachel E
* Fellowship Award
* Jennifer Wenner
* 01/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

When geologists use rocks to go back in time to understand what Earth was like
in the past, it can be challenging to pull apart the competing effects of
climate and tectonics (i.e. mountain building). For example, in the Northern
Patagonian Andes, the scientific community has previously noted observations
that indicate the region got colder and drier during the Miocene Epoch. But, it
is hard to know if that apparent cold climate is because the Northern Patagonian
Andes were at high elevations in the Miocene (causing the local climate to be
cold) or if the local environment was responding to changes in global climate.
There are two major portions of this postdoctoral fellowship. In the first part,
PI Havranek will use three different geochemistry tools, all of which were
developed in the last 15 â€“ 20 years, that can each shed light on different
aspects of the climate and tectonics system of the Northern Patagonian Andes in
the Miocene. Because the tools PI Havranek intends to use are so new, the
interpretation of these kinds of data has always been done separately from each
other. To be able to interpret them together, PI Havranek will create a
landscape evolution model. These kinds of models are intended to describe the
ways that landforms (like mountain ranges) change through time. The model will
be capable of predicting what the geochemical data should be based on different
hypothesized climate and tectonic scenarios. Then it is possible to evaluate
which hypothesis best fits all of the geochemical data. The final goal of this
project is to shed light on which came first, a cold climate that enabled the
growth of the Northern Patagonian Andes, or the uplift of a mountain range that
locally cooled the climate. If successful, this kind of approach could be
extended to different places around the world. As a part of the field work
associated with this project, PI Havranek will lead a short course on stable
isotope geochemistry for students at Universidad de La Plata. To make both the
field sites and laboratory settings used for this project more accessible, PI
Havranek will produce a series of video tours of those spaces. Two high-school
students, recruited through the University of Idaho Upward Bound TRIO-INSPIRE
program will help assess the videos and make them accessible to a wide range of
viewers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geoscience community has long recognized that
climate and tectonics are inextricably linked and feedback on each other via
erosion and landscape evolution. Over geologic timescales, tectonics can
modulate climate through silicate weathering, and climate can influence deep-
crustal processes by controlling the extent of weathering and erosion. It is
particularly challenging to disentangle the primary driver, climate or
tectonics, of observations in the rock record. For example, if a
paleoenvironment cooled over time, that cooling could be driven by either
surface uplift or by cooling of the global climate. Many of the proxy tools
geochemists have developed to target questions about climate and tectonics
target either past climatic conditions or rates of rock exhumation. Furthermore,
geochemical proxy data are frequently interpreted in isolation to independently
constrain either climatic and tectonic histories without considering their
concurrent evolution. In this project, the aim is to co-interpret the climatic
and tectonic history of the Paso del Sapo Basin in the Northern Patagonian Andes
(Chubut Province, Argentina). The Paso del Sapo basin in the Broken Foreland of
the Argentine Andes provides a unique opportunity to develop a framework for
integrating thermochronology, stable isotope geochemistry, and landscape
evolution modeling because there is a well-documented geologic context, and
clear, testable tectonic and climatic hypotheses exist. PI Havranek will create
a record of 1) paleoclimate using carbonate clumped isotope thermometry and
volcanic glass stable isotope geochemistry and 2) exhumation using low
temperature thermochronology (detrital apatite (U-Th)/He). Then, PI Havranek
will create a landscape evolution model capable of predicting both stable
isotope geochemistry and low temperature thermochronology data. This model will
be used to test previously proposed tectonic and climatic hypotheses of the Paso
del Sapo Basin. This project would provide a proven framework for future coupled
stable isotope and thermochronology studies. The project will support: 1) the
implementation of a stable isotope geochemistry short course at Universidad de
La Plata; 2) the creation of accessible geoscience education videos; and 3)
mentorship of two high school students through the University of Idaho TRIO-
INSPIRE Upward Bound Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.