* 2204852
* Collaborative Research: Flocculation Dynamics in the Fluvial to Marine Transition
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Jeffrey Nittrouer, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 09/30/2022
* USD 44,716.00

Rivers deliver fine muddy sediment eroded from upstream landscapes to coastal
regions. Upon arrival, mud can deposit in or move through the rivers, bays,
estuaries, marshes, and deltas of the region. Forecasting where the mud goes
when it arrives is important for society. For example, accurately forecasting
the movement and deposition of mud in these regions is important for predicting
and evaluating the effectiveness of river diversion projects aimed at using
sediment deposits to build deltaic landscape, fostering healthy water quality,
and/or evaluating how mud deposits shoal waterways and therefore impede vessel
navigation. Yet, the prediction of mud movement through coastal waters is
difficult. The difficulty is due in large part to the limited ability to measure
and model how mud particles change when suspended in water. Small mud particles
tend to clump together and form aggregates known as flocs, which grow or shrink
depending on turbulence levels in the flow and the salinity, biological content,
and amount and type of sediment in the water. The settling speed of muddy
sediment is directly related to the size and density these flocs. This research
will evaluate the nature of mud particle movement in river and coastal waterways
by collecting detailed measurements that will inform and validate physically-
based models of floc dynamics. The research pairs laboratory experiments and
comprehensive field surveys from one of the largest coastal deltas in the world,
the lower Mississippi River in Louisiana. The team will engage high school women
interested in STEM careers through summer camp programs at Virginia Tech, and
train graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented minority groups
about physical processes of sediment transport. By combining engineering and
earth science studies, students will be exposed to cross-disciplinary objectives
and therefore equipped to handle basic and industry science, and/or policy-
related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will quantify mud floc
sizes as a function of the changing turbulent shear, salinity, and water-column
sediment concentration conditions that exists across the fluvial to marine
transition (FtMT) of the Mississippi River. The three primary zones of this
transition are the freshwater fluvial section, the saline-stratified and
laterally confined estuarine reach, and the laterally unconfined near-shore
river plume. Four central hypotheses will be tested: (1) in the freshwater
riverine reach, flocs produce vertical stratification of mud; (2) mixing in the
estuarine reach at the interface of the near-bottom salt wedge produces rigorous
floc growth; (3) modifications to turbulent shear through the laterally
unconfined river plume is a central driver of floc growth and thus increased mud
settling velocity; and (4) minimal correlation between floc size and local
turbulence and salinity is due in part to disequilibrium between floc size and
local conditions. These hypotheses will be tested by integrating field and
laboratory studies that measure the vertical, longitudinal, and temporal
distributions of floc size, sediment concentration, salinity, and turbulent
shear over the FtMT. The team will use this knowledge to inform and validate
flocculation models that can be integrated into larger hydrodynamic models used
by coastal scientists and engineers to enhance predictions of the transport and
fate of fine sediment. Measurements developed as part of the study will also
initiate a global community database housing key information needed to develop
and calibrate computer models predicting the movement and deposition of
mud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.