* 2204396
* CAS: Synthesis, Assembly and Photophysical Behaviors of Nonconventional Purine-Containing Conjugated Copolymers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Brian Long, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Michael S. Kilbey and Brian K. Long of the
University of Tennessee, Knoxville are developing conductive purine-containing
copolymers. Purines are aromatic compounds that contain two rings fused
together. They are the most widely occurring nitrogen-containing heterocycles in
nature and are common building blocks found in DNA and RNA. Other purine sources
include meats, yeast, oatmeal and caffeine. In this project, small molecule
chemistry will first be performed based on conventional coupling reactions in
order to understand site reactivity of purine-containing monomers. The knowledge
gained will then be used to couple these monomers with sulfur-containing
heterocycles to prepare well-defined oligomers and fully conjugated copolymers.
The copolymers will be examined for their ability to conduct electricity and
emit light, making them potential candidates for optoelectronic devices or for
imaging and sensing applications. A suite of photophysical and structural
characterizations will also be performed to generate relationships that quantify
how connectivity and regiochemistry affect self-assembly in solution and in the
solid state, as well as how they influence photophysical properties. The
resulting body of fundamental chemistry knowledge has the potential to spur
innovations in the design and synthesis of conjugated polymers from
nonconventional building blocks based on purines. Education and training will be
promoted through co-advising of graduate students and the development and
implementation of graduate student mentoring program. Additionally, students
from underrepresented groups in research will be involved through established
NSF-supported on-campus programs. Engagement with young learners and the greater
public through service to the Tennessee Science Olympiad will promote and
nurture interests of young learners in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will investigate the role of molecular design on the conformation, organization
and properties of well-defined oligomers and fully conjugated purine-containing
polymers. In the first objective, small molecule coupling studies will be used
to investigate reactivity bias of the sites used for carbon-carbon bond
formation on the thiophene-purine-thiophene (TPT) triads. These studies are
expected to provide critical insights into how purine-containing copolymers are
constructed and, in this way, inform efforts to create well-defined purine-
containing oligomers and copolymers. The second objective will focus on the
synthesis and characterization of trimers with defined patterns of connectivity
across the purine scaffold (2,6-, 6,8-, and 2,8-connectivity), but featuring
systematic variation in regiochemistry. Finally, in the last objective, linearly
conjugated and cross-conjugated purine-thiophene copolymers will be synthesized
via direct (hetero)arylation polymerization of TPT triads using either AB
polymerizations or AA+BB copolymerizations. Outcomes from this research program
are anticipated to inform and stimulate efforts to use molecular design to
modulate nanoscale assembly and properties of conjugated polymers, which find
applicability in various contexts due to their functionality as organic
semiconductors. In addition to advancing a molecular engineering approach to
understand behaviors and properties of novel, functional polymers, this work has
the potential to provide fundamental knowledge that expands the potential of
bio-derived and abundant purines in organic
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.