* 2204681
* Development of Next Generation Plasmonic Nanosensors for Ultrasensitive, High-Throughput Nucleic Acid and Protein Assays
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Rajesh Sardar, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2025
* USD 396,638.00

As evidenced in the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, there is an ever-increasing need for
highly accurate and specific biosensors to diagnose, monitor, and manage
illnesses. Existing technologies generally operate with a focus on a single
disease biomarker and are unable to perform ultrasensitive assays for multiple
biomarkers simultaneously, leading ultimately to false test results,
specifically at the disease onset. The goal of this project is to address this
limitation by constructing ultrasensitive optical-based biosensors, termed
plasmonic nanosensors, that can detect marker nucleic acids and proteins by
analyzing blood and urine samples. The sensors developed have the potential to
substantially improve the clinical diagnostic approach for early-stage detection
of various diseases such as COVID-19 and cancer. The potential applications for
plasmonic nanostructures span chemical- and biochemical-sciences, clinical
science, and bioengineering, as well as nanotechnology in general. The project
is expected to affect efforts to provide multifaceted research and educational
approaches to prepare the next generation of entrepreneurial science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) innovators through mentored-
research and the integration of data and concepts into both college coursework
and existing community outreach efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to use localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR)-active metal
nanostructures to design and construct optical-based biosensors that can assay
different classes of disease biomarkers, such as nucleic acids and proteins,
utilizing simple UV-vis absorption spectrophotometer by measuring the LSPR peak
shift before and after analyte attachment to biosensors. The LSPR-active metal
nanostructures are functionalized with photoswitchable molecules (PSMs) that act
as receptor binding motifs allowing the biosensor to be reversible and
regenerative, thus reusable, upon repeated exposure to ultraviolet and visible
light. A combined experimental and theoretical calculation approach enables
selection of the most suitable chemical structure of the PSM and organic ligands
connecting it to the nanostructures to enhance the biosensing sensitivity. The
integration of this biosensing approach into a multi-well plate format allows
construction of a high-throughput assay analyzing a few tens of patient samples
with standardization in a single instrument run using a plate reader in the
absorption mode. This leads to shorter assay time, with the potential to improve
clinical disease diagnosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.