* 2204577
* ADVANCE Partnership: Transforming HSI STEM Departmental Climate for Faculty Success
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ala Qubbaj, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2025
* USD 792,947.00

Latinas represent one of the fastest-growing populations in the US, yet Latina
faculty in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers
remain underrepresented. Departmental and institutional environments must
welcome and foster the engagement and career development of Latina faculty to be
successful in academia. This project recognizes the importance of academic
departmental climates in the recruitment, retention, and advancement of Latinas.
The anticipated STEM department climate transformation focuses on equipping
department chairs and their change teams with the resources needed to transform
their departments' cultures into psychologically healthy workplaces for Latina
and other underrepresented minority faculty. The project leverages the
influence, expertise, and resources embedded within a multifaceted, multi-
organizational partnership of academic and professional organizations and
strategically draws on the knowledge and insights gained from, but not limited
to, NSF-ADVANCE projects. The project is designed to facilitate broader
adaptation of evidence-based gender equity and systemic change strategies,
resulting in more diverse and inclusive STEM academic workplaces and
professions. By diversifying STEM faculty, our project aspires to enhance the
STEM pipeline, improve student outcomes, and ultimately strengthen the U.S. STEM
workforce and global competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to transform STEM departmental climates and cultures into
psychologically healthy workplaces where Latina faculty can thrive in ways that
maximize their scholarly productivity and advancement. The project scope
encompasses four objectives, and related activities: 1) expose department change
leaders to Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) information and evidence-based
practices via a newly created Advancing Latina Faculty in STEM Community of
Practice (CoP); 2) engage STEM department change leaders in an annual spring
Advancing Latina Faculty in STEM Summit for networking and resource sharing; 3)
enable annual cohorts of STEM department chair-led change teams to transform
their departments through intensive work guided by experienced
facilitators/coaches; and 4) examine via social science research how
empowerment-driven healthy workplace intervention programs for department chairs
lead to improved diversity, climate, well-being, and productivity for Latinas in
STEM. Implementing and applying strategies through the community of practice and
department chair intervention will sharpen knowledge regarding the critical and
influential factors that facilitate or hinder the success of Latina STEM
faculty. Our broad partnership will disseminate information to various
stakeholders on best practices to create and sustain inclusive and supportive
climates for Latina STEM faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program
is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and
elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full participation and
advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers
that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the
organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Partnership" awards provide support
for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based strategies to academic, non-
profit institutions of higher education, and non-academic non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.