* 2205918
* Collaborative Research: Dust Echo Tomography: New Diagnostics for Galactic Dust and Magnetic Fields
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Lia Corrales, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2025
* USD 36,095.00

Black holes and neutron stars in the plane of our Galaxy are known to emit
flashes of X-rays. When these X-rays travel through the Galaxy, they can bounce
off interstellar dust particles, creating a ring-like echo surrounding the
source. Over the past decade, the discovery of several such echoes has opened a
new field of study called “X-ray Dust Tomography”. The study of these echoes
provides new insights into the properties of interstellar dust, which is a key
building block of stars and planets. The goal of this project is to advance the
understanding of X-ray dust echoes and to connect them with observations by
optical and radio telescopes. Investigator Heinz will build on previous
experience with life-long learning programs and develop a 20-hour public
exploration series on multi-messenger astronomy. Heinz plans to film the new
lectures and make them available online as a self-contained web
course.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The investigators will develop, test, optimize,
and publish a constrained, joint 2-dimensional deconvolution algorithm that will
allow the joint analysis of an arbitrary number of observations of dust echoes
with arbitrary signal-to-noise. The algorithm will be applicable to a wide range
of echo phenomena. The work will enable significantly more sensitive analysis of
past echoes and more flexible and sensitive future observations. The
investigators we will further develop a new method to measure grain alignment
and thus magnetic field orientation from X-ray dust echoes and infra-red
extinction maps of dust clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.