* 2205067
* Research Initiation: Enhancing Engineering Students’ Innovation Self-Efficacy through Design of K-12 STEM Projects
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Azadeh Bolhari, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,915.00

Innovation is an important driver of economic growth and sustainable
development. Learning and working in today’s global and fast-changing world
requires engineers who can think innovatively and generate novel ideas. This
project focuses on the innovation self-efficacy (ISE) of engineering students,
which measures one’s belief in their capacity to execute innovative designs. The
project is investigating how ISE is enhanced by a curricular intervention (i.e.,
a K-12 STEM project designed for a global audience) among undergraduate
engineering students and will support a community of new researchers in
engineering education. The outcomes of the study will generate new, evidence-
based teaching practices to develop students’ self-efficacy in innovation which
aids in the formation of engineers who are responsive to the needs of a rapidly
changing society. The desired societal benefits of this study will be: 1)
advancement of K-12 STEM educational activities in the field of environmental
engineering through dissemination of results to a standards-aligned curricular
resource, which will provide free access to global K-12 educators, 2)
incorporating three undergraduate research assistants drawn from our diverse
student population, and 3) providing a professional development opportunity for
a public-school STEM teacher who will be partnered in the engineering-focused
activity design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, a curricular intervention
grounded in innovative self-efficacy (ISE) will be explored as a means to
encourage innovational competence into engineering students, which contributes
toward a more innovative engineering curriculum, design process, and workplace.
This study will actualize an ISE-grounded teaching practice in a targeted
course. The extent of students’ ISE development will be measured by five
overarching research questions designed to independently capture the impact of
each behavioral components of ISE: 1) To what extent does the intervention shift
students’ ability to raise questions that challenge assumptions and existing
states of affairs?; 2) To what extent did the intervention shift students’
ability to think of new ideas that come though studying the world?; 3) To what
extent does the intervention shift students’ engagement in experimentation to
explore options and generate novel designs?; 4) To what extent does the
intervention shift students’ ability in creating networks that could lead to new
ideas?; and 5) How are students’ ability to connect ideas from different and
diverse areas enhanced by the intervention? A mixed method (sequential design)
study will be used to answer those research questions. Shifts in those
components will be quantified using a blend of validated instruments found in
the social sciences literature and will be accompanied by focus groups at the
end of the intervention to generate qualitative narratives that add value to the
quantitative measures. The outcomes of the study will advance the engineering
education community’s knowledge of how K-12 STEM project design for a global
audience might be used to intentionally achieve targeted self-efficacy
development in students. The outcomes of this research will have the potential
to realize new research avenues in ISE-blended, evidence-based teaching
practices and pedagogies in engineering curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.