* 2205794
* OCE-PRF: Uncovering the drivers of marine metapopulation synchrony and resilience under climate change
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Vadim Karatayev, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 06/30/2024
* USD 319,323.00

Ocean ecosystems form a major component of the US culture and economy. Climate
change is bringing more large-scale environmental shocks to ocean ecosystems,
such as heat waves and disruptions in nutrient supply. This project will
determine the conditions under which large-scale environmental shocks could
propagate into large-scale declines of ecologically important and commercially
valuable marine species on the US East and West coasts. Specifically, the
project will combine emerging quantitative methods with large-scale fisheries
and environmental monitoring data to identify (1) which biological and
environmental features prevent large-scale declines in species abundance at
present, and (2) whether this resilience will remain under future climate
regimes. This research will also develop existing data-driven mathematical
approaches to understanding and forecasting synchronous changes in large
ecosystems. In the process, the project PI will train and involve under-
represented minority and first-generation students in data science and cutting-
edge statistical analyses applied to ocean data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing frequency and spatial scales of extreme
environmental events can cause population abundances to fluctuate in unison
across locations (synchrony). Synchrony erodes population resilience by
weakening portfolio and rescue effects and amplifying the risk of a large-scale
collapse. Theory posits an array of population features that can prevent
synchrony in metapopulations (e.g., location-specific ecological dynamics,
nonlinear population response to environment), only some of which continue to
operate as climate change intensifies environmental variation. Methodological
constraints, however, hinder current efforts to quantify these synchrony-
moderating features in the field. Applying new nonparametric time-delay
embedding methods to spatiotemporal data spanning an array of species and two
ecosystems, this project will develop a new approach that identifies (1) which
features hold back synchrony in large marine ecosystems at present and (2)
whether this resilience will continue under expected climatic changes. More
generally, the approach pioneered here aims to help shift empirical research
from describing synchrony in population and environment time series towards
understanding mechanisms underpinning observed synchrony patterns. This would
help understand and anticipate large-scale changes in ecosystems and the
numerous services they provide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.