* 2205471
* Next Generation Radio Telescope Calibration
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Miguel Morales, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2025
* USD 509,534.00

When planning to obtain radio images of the first stars and galaxies in the
universe it is crucial that telescope being used is in crisp focus. This can be
a timely process, as recently demonstrated by the four months needed for
alignment of the James Webb Space Telescope’s mirrors. The alignment of the
hundreds of antennas in a modern radio telescope is even more challenging than
the alignment of the eighteen segments that compose the James Webb Space
Telescope primary mirror. The color-dependent alignment process is called
calibration in radio astronomy, and this project will develop, and freely share,
a new precision alignment process. The team at the University of Washington
specializes in such precision calibration work and has developed the mathematics
and statistics needed for a new much improved calibration algorithm. During this
project the effectiveness of this new approach will be tested by making radio
observations of the first stars. This project will engage community-college
transfer students to participate in this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Precision calibration of interferometric radio data has
been greatly advanced by the requirements of 21 cm Cosmology observations. A
fundamentally new Bayesian calibration approach referred to as unified
calibration allows the uncertainties to be quantified and generates associated
optimal calibrations. This advance has the potential to greatly enhance both
standard radio calibration and 21 cm Cosmology observations. This project looks
to produce two forms of unified calibration. One will be written in python and
leverage the community around pyuvdata to produce a flexible and robust
implementation. This implementation will enable the community to explore the
best calibration parametrizations and to apply the approaches to a wide variety
of interferometric data. The second implementation will focus on precision and
speed for Epoch of Reionization power spectrum analysis and enable deep data-
driven explorations of calibration that will inform the most effective
parametrizations of instrument and sky models and their associated
uncertainties. The project will also improve the retention rate of community
college transfer students at universities through their better engagement in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.