* 2205863
* Collaborative Research: Dwarf Galaxies Over Cosmic Time
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* David Sand, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2025
* USD 271,496.00

Dwarf galaxies are the smallest and least massive of all galaxies. They are
nonetheless central to several important issues in astrophysics, including star
formation and chemical enrichment, their role as "building blocks" of large, and
as prime candidates responsible for ionizing the intergalactic hydrogen left
over from the Big Bang, ending the universe's so-called "Dark Ages." Dwarfs also
have the largest ratio of dark-to-ordinary matter among the galaxy types.
Unfortunately, our knowledge of dwarfs is mostly drawn from satellites galaxies
that are close to our Milky Way galaxy. This award will support continued
investigations of nearby dwarf galaxies as well as an expansion of detailed
studies to the hundreds of dwarfs in galaxy groups within a radius of 5 million
parsecs (aka the "Local Volume"). It will also support three graduate students
and a continuing partnership with a minority-serving community college in
Tucson, AZ. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers plan to investigate dwarf
galaxy populations within the Local Volume as well as those halfway across the
observable Universe. This will be done using wide-field, high-resolution, multi-
object spectrographs in both hemispheres and a new Integral Field Unit (IFU)
spectrograph constructed with NSF support - the Integral Field Unit for Magellan
(IFUM) - with uniquely configurable spatial and spectral resolution modes to
observe dwarf galaxies in these regimes. Primary science goals include 1)
mapping Dark Matter halos within Milky Way satellites via multi-epoch
spectroscopy that identifies short-period binary stars and efficiently samples
outer regions of low member density; 2) analyzing detailed chemical abundance
patterns at low metallicities characteristic of Milky Way satellitesâ€”including
those dominated by stars showing heavy enrichment by r-process elements from
rare events like neutron star mergers; 3) combining new spectroscopy with ground
and space-based imaging to quantify the abundance, bulk velocities, internal
chemo-dynamics and mass-metallicity relation of satellite populations around
Milky Way analogs in the Local Volume; 4) obtaining the first measurements of
star formation rates, metallicity, and internal kinematics within lensed dwarf
galaxies at z ~ 2. The resulting samples will provide the first basis for
placing the nearby dwarf galaxy population into a truly cosmological context,
enabling the first robust conclusions about dwarf galaxy formation and evolution
that are not biased by the circumstances of our position within the Local
Group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.