* 2205677
* CAREER: Scalable and Adaptive Edge Stream Processing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Liting Hu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 03/31/2023
* USD 278,598.00

Internet-of-Things (IoT) applications such as self-driving cars, augmented
reality, interactive gaming, and event monitoring have a tremendous potential to
improve our lives. These applications generate a large influx of sensor data at
massive scales. Under many time-critical scenarios, these massive data streams
must be processed in a very short time to derive actionable intelligence. This
CAREER project aims to support time-critical IoT applications by applying the
stream processing paradigm to the Edge computing architecture. The success of
this research will benefit many time-critical IoT applications in the areas such
as factory automation, the tactile internet, autonomous vehicles, and process
automation. It will also substantially improve the performance profiles of a
variety of data processing systems, such as wide-area data analytics systems,
mobile data access systems, event tracking systems, and streaming databases. As
an integral part of its research program, this CAREER project involves K-12,
undergraduate and graduate level education in partnership with the local Public
School system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this CAREER project will build
a scalable and adaptive Edge stream processing engine, which enables fast stream
processing of a large number of concurrent IoT queries in the dynamic,
heterogeneous Edge environment. This work includes three primary research
directions. First, a new dynamic dataflow graph abstraction will be implemented,
which automatically chains, parallelizes and replicates stream operators to
adapt to the Edge dynamics and handle failures in a scalable way. Second, a new
customizable data shuffling service abstraction will be implemented, which
customizes the data shuffling path (e.g., ring shuffle, hierarchical tree
shuffle, butterfly wrap shuffle) at runtime for the given network topology and
workload. Third, a fully decentralized architecture with many distributed
schedulers will be implemented, in which each scheduler operates autonomously to
process IoT queries. All three parts of the project will be prototyped and
implemented on real-world stream processing systems and validated by performing
real-world experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.