* 2205920
* Advancing the Understanding of Compact Binary Formation Through Gravitational-Wave Observations
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Anuradha Gupta, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2025
* USD 398,053.00

Recent direct detections of gravitational waves (GW) from merging binary black
holes (BBH) and binary neutron stars (BNS) by the LIGO and Virgo GW detectors
have transformed the way astronomers observe and understand the Universe.
Despite many detections of such compact object mergers and the wealth of
information now available, astronomers still know very little about the
formation mechanisms and environments of merging astrophysical objects. A
research group at the University of Mississippi will use data from GW
observations to gain a deeper understanding of such questions. This work is
timely and will significantly enhance the scope of astrophysics and astronomy
enabled by GW detectors. The researchers will strengthen the broader impact of
this emerging area in science in two distinct ways. First, they will enhance the
engagement of the local community of all ages in astronomy and astrophysics by
conducting activities related to GW astronomy during the monthly campus
Astronomy Open House. Second, they will introduce high school students to GW
science and data analysis techniques through a week-long workshop every year,
with a focus on attracting female students, students of color, and students of
low socioeconomic status.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will develop
methods and build accurate computer software codes to probe the full evolution
history of precessing BBHs on both quasi-circular and eccentric orbits. In
parallel, they will explore the formation scenarios of binaries that contain
black holes in the low-mass gap (~3 – 5 solar masses). The state-of-the-art
models and computationally optimized codes will allow them to constrain various
formation channels of all three types of binary mergers (BBH, BNS, and neutron
star-black hole), and their astrophysical environments. Measurement of spin
precession in BBHs will be crucial in constraining these binaries’ formation
channel as well as discriminating the relative contributions of each possible
formation channel to the observed BBH population. Although there is no definite
sign of eccentricity in GW data yet, any evidence for non-zero eccentricity in
future detections will bring additional discriminatory power in distinguishing
various formation channels as well as help in exploring the new ones.
Furthermore, the development and testing of realistic astrophysical models for
binaries hosting black holes (BHs) in the so-called low-mass gap can remove the
discrepancy of these low-mass-gap BHs being confused with neutron stars and
primordial BHs of similar masses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR),
and the Windows on the Universe Big Idea, as this award advances the goals of
Windows on the Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.