* 2205788
* Targeted Infusion Project:Promoting Student Engagement and Success in STEM through a Combined Approach
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Jinghe Mao, Tougaloo College
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2024
* USD 399,699.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based, innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. This project seeks to improve persistence and retention in gateway
science courses and increase research opportunities for freshman students at
Tougaloo College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project will be
realized by combining two pedagogies, adaptive learning and POGIL (process
oriented guided inquiry learning), that have been proven effective in improving
students’ learning experience and outcomes. The project design aids students of
various background knowledge levels to reach the same competency in mastering
concepts in general chemistry courses. To ensure the success of unprepared
students, a new course which incorporates math components with chemistry
concepts will be developed. This course will help students build connections
between science and math skills which is beneficial for their learning in
advanced courses. This project also equips and engages first-year students in
research through independent and course-based undergraduate research
experiences. The ultimate goal of the project is to increase students’ strength
in pursuing a STEM major and to improve the quality of STEM education and
research at HBCUs. The approaches developed through this project will present an
effective model for colleges facing the challenge of first-year STEM student
attrition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.