* 2205888
* Collaborative Research: The Evolution of Magnetic Complexity in Old Sun-like Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jennifer van Saders, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2025
* USD 444,772.00

Principal Investigators Metcalfe and van Saders will take polarized spectra of a
sample of stars to assess the strength and complexity of their magnetic fields.
For stars like our Sun, the stellar wind slowly escapes along the starâ€™s
magnetic field lines and slows down the rate at which the star rotates over a
period of billions of years. This process is called magnetic braking. Slowing
rotation leads to a mid-life crisis and the magnetic field generation starts to
fail. Stars switch from periods of activity (strong magnetic field with many
flares, sunspots, and outbursts) to in-activity (weaker more complex magnetic
field with reduced activity). Determining when and how these switches occur will
improve our understanding of how stars age. To broaden participation the team
plan to lead a 15-week "Survival Skills for Scientists" seminar at the
University of Colorado and a summer Research Experience for Teachers at the
University of Hawaii.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will observe 12 stars using
the Potsdam Echelle Polarimetric and Spectroscopic Instrument (PEPSI) at the
Large Binocular Telescope combined with contemporaneous spectra using Las
Cumbres Observatory's Network of Robotic Echelle Spectrographs (NRES) to
determine the level of activity. Follow-up detailed magnetic field maps will be
obtained using the Echelle SpectroPolarimetric Device for the Observation of
Stars (ESPaDOnS) on the Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope (CFHT). The resulting
constraints on how the properties of stellar magnetism depend on rotation and
mass beyond middle-age will have implications for theoretical models of angular
momentum loss from magnetized stellar winds, the use of gyrochronology as a
technique for inferring stellar ages, and will inform predictions of long term
"space weather" for the Sun and other planetary
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.