* 2205928
* The developmental basis for sensory-skeletal integration: The osteo-inductive role of neuromasts
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Joshua Gross, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 06/30/2026
* USD 758,583.00

The process of uniting structure with function is fundamentally important for
adapting to the natural world. A key part of this process is connecting sensory
structures (e.g. eyes) with relevant structures, like the skull. The process by
which different organ systems become connected over the course of development is
largely unknown. This project examines the notion that sensory systems may
influence, direct and organize the face and skull of vertebrates, a phenomenon
that has long been suspected in the literature. Classical researchers found that
sensory neuromasts appeared to mark the future positions of bones, based on
extant and extinct (fossil) evidence. Understanding how organ systems become
integrated is necessary for understanding the fundamental processes governing
adaptation. The proposed work informs how different physiological systems
interact during development, and improves our understanding of the molecular and
developmental bases for bone induction. This work will be performed through
creative techniques, such as microsurgery, that will allow novel insight to this
classic problem. The broader impacts of the proposed research will expand an
established K-12 curriculum teaching children about evolution, promote
collaboration and outreach opportunities internationally, and provide
instruction for undergraduate and graduate students in developing a successful
outreach activity. The proposed work also provides an essential case study for
adaptive genetics, and creates resources to support growth of the broader
Astyanax research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objective of
this application is to understand the developmental basis for integration
between the sensory and skeletal systems. The central hypothesis is that sensory
hair cell organs (called “neuromasts”) induce bone formation in specific regions
of the face. This question will be approached via three aims. The first aim
examines gene expression patterns of candidate induction molecules across the
critical period of facial bone formation, and the impact of functional loss of
the endothelin-1 signaling peptide, a key molecule for facial bone patterning.
These experiments will determine when induction occurs during development, and
how inductive molecules may mediate this interaction. The second aim
disentangles the relationship between neuromasts and bones using experimental
transplantation. When completed, this work will determine why only certain canal
neuromasts are able to induce bone, determine if neuromasts induce bone
formation autonomously, and if bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling
mediates the inductive properties of ‘osteogenic’ neuromasts. The third aim will
determine how the experimental loss of sensory neuromasts impacts facial bone
formation. Upon completion, this study will identify the cellular source within
neuromasts of inductive molecules. Additionally, this study will determine if
neuromasts continuously express an inductive signal, if the surrounding tissues
must be able to respond to the signal, or both. Through these research
activities, significant progress is expected towards understanding how structure
and function are coordinated to execute essential biological
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.