* 2205736
* Constraining the Evolutionary Pathways for White Dwarfs: Crystallization, Cooling Anomalies, and Mergers
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Mukremin Kilic, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2025
* USD 368,640.00

White dwarfs (WD) are the final evolutionary state of stars like the sun: the
star’s nuclear fuel is depleted and the core shrinks under its own gravity. A WD
is very hot when it first forms but will gradually cool and crystallize over
billions of years because it has no source of energy. WDs provide essential
tools for understanding a variety of phenomena including type Ia supernovae and
their use as cosmological distance indicators, single and binary star evolution,
and the star formation history of the Galaxy. A team from the University of
Oklahoma will focus on important questions pertaining to the physics of WD
cooling and evolution. This project will achieve significant broader impact
through two educational goals: 1- The Principal Investigator (PI) will continue
his work at the University of Oklahoma Physics Department Lunar Sooner Outreach
group, providing interactive demonstrations, lectures, question and answer
panels, and stargazing events to scout groups and K-12 students, including the
Cheyenne and Arapaho tribal students and 2- this project will provide research
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, including members of
under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using data from the Gaia
satellite and the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) the investigators will carry
out a new spectroscopic survey of WDs in the SDSS footprint and within 100pc
down to a temperature of 5000K. A previous survey by the same team obtained
spectroscopy of white dwarfs hotter than 6000K: the extension to cooler
temperatures is essential for resolving the current challenges in the cooling
physics of WDs. The new survey will enable the team to obtain WD masses and
luminosities for this cooler sample, including the so-called “ultracool” WDs.
Comparing the luminosities and masses of the new cool sample to evolutionary
models of WD cooling will allow the team to probe important physics such as
crystallization, phase separation, and convective coupling for all WD masses for
the first time. In addition, they will use wide WD binaries and “massive” WDs to
test evolutionary models and WD merger rates. These are some of the most
fundamental questions for our understanding of WD
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.