* 2205708
* RUI: Understanding the evolutionary behavior of and radio emission in red quasars
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Eilat Glikman, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 06/30/2025
* USD 160,730.00

This project will investigate how quasars, which are actively growing
supermassive black holes in the centers of galaxies, evolve and influence their
host galaxies. The focus of the project will be on a class of quasars that
appear red because they are embedded in a dusty environment. These red quasars
emit tremendous amounts of energy that expels the dust and injects that energy
into their host galaxies, affecting their evolution. This activity in red
quasars may be the key to explaining why some quasars emit light at radio
wavelengths while others do not. The work will involve significant contribution
from undergraduate research students at Middlebury College. The PI will develop
an observational astrophysics course that will train students utilizing
Middlebury's campus observatory both in imaging and spectroscopy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-evolution of quasars and their host galaxies is not
well understood, and this project will focus on a population of dust-reddened
("red") quasars that are in a transitional phase where feedback mechanisms,
which are not well understood, dominate. Luminous quasars are thought to be
ignited by major mergers between gas-rich galaxies and the red quasars that will
be studied in this work are in an emergent phase, during which their cocoon of
dust is blown out. Red quasars have been shown to have enhanced radio emission,
possibly linking the formation of jets to the merger phenomenon or exposing a
different form of feedback in these systems, such as dusty radiation-driven
winds. To explore these issues, the PI will construct complete samples of red
quasars over a broad range in luminosity, redshift, and radio-emitting
properties. These samples will be studied to understand the differences between
their radio emission, as a function of luminosity and reddening. The fraction of
red quasars compared to the total quasar population will be determined,
separating out differences in their radio emission; this fraction represents the
fraction of time spent in the "blow-out" phase, which may be different depending
on the quasar's radio properties. The execution of this work will involve
photometric selection of red quasar candidates, spectroscopic follow up with
near-infrared and optical spectroscopy at large ground-based telescope
facilities, and detailed analysis of the spectra to determine fundamental
properties of the quasars such as redshift, reddening, intrinsic luminosity,
black hole mass, and accretion rate. The outcome of this proposed research will
be the construction of statistically complete samples of dust-reddened quasars
spanning more than two orders of magnitude in bolometric and radio luminosity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by MPS/AST and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.