* 2205141
* Causes and Effects of Friction in Collective Cell Migration
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Pamela Kreeger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2025
* USD 474,719.00

This project will study how biological cells move in collective groups. This is
an essential process in cancer invasion, tissue development, and wound healing.
It is known that the motion results from cell-generated forces. However, how the
forces balance to create motion is not clear. This gap in knowledge hinders
efforts to control the migration, for example in cancer invasion or wound
healing. It is currently believed that a friction force balances the forces
produced by each cell. However, there is no established way to measure the
friction force. This makes the precise relationship between cell-generated
forces and collective motion unknown. This project will measure friction and
determine what biophysical factors increase or decrease friction. This research
will also study how friction affects the distance over which cell-generated
forces are transmitted across a group of cells migrating together. These
findings will offer a new way to predict how cell forces bring about the
collective migration. This will be the first step to controlling the migration
for applications in improving human health. This work will support
interdisciplinary training of both graduate and undergraduate students. It will
also partner with a Research Experience for Teachers program that will enable a
high school teacher to develop hands-on activities that apply topics of this
research in the classroom, which will give countless high school students an
opportunity to learn about new applications of physics and
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance the field by designing
experimental methods to measure friction and identifying the biophysical factors
controlling friction. To this end, friction will be quantified both at the cell-
substrate and cell-cell interfaces through a combination of well-controlled
experiments and rigorous measurement of cell tractions, stresses, and
velocities. The underlying causes of friction at the cell-substrate and cell-
cell interfaces will be systematically studied by perturbing substrate
stiffness, cell-substrate adhesions, cell-cell adhesions, and actomyosin
contractility. Additionally, theoretical modeling predicts that the ratio of
friction at the cell-cell and cell-substrate interfaces sets a length scale
controlling the size of a collectively moving group of cells. The research will
quantify this length scale in response to various perturbations, hence giving
insight into a physics-based mechanism whereby each cell, by altering friction,
can affect the collective motion on a length scale larger than itself--the scale
of the collective group. Identifying mechanisms such as this one that bridge
length scales is essential for understanding complicated, multi-body systems
such as collective cell migration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.