* 2205585
* I-Corps:  Automated water quality monitoring system using satellite data for measurements of water resource characteristics
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Leif Olmanson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an online service to measure and report on lake water quality for
government and business. Leveraging the ongoing investments for earth
observation using satellites that provide free data, technology advancements
like cloud computing and development of sophisticated algorithms, it is possible
to automate the determination of water quality for every body of water in the
world. Today, the methods and technology for monitoring lakes and field
measurements are sparse with only on a small subset of lakes being monitored on
a regular basis. Regulatory and policy entities could monitor water quality for
every lake and reservoir on a regular basis with the capability of near real-
time measurements to set policy and to better direct limited resources where
they are needed most. The outcomes will be better management of a critical
environmental resource for their constituents. Commercial entities such as
vacation property businesses and real-estate brokerages will be able to better
deliver value by reporting to consumers about the quality of lakes when renting,
buying or selling properties. Lake water management companies would be able to
continuously monitor the water quality to target treatment if needed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on a software technology
that processes remotely sensed satellite data into water quality products from
all available Landsat 8 and Sentinel 2 imagery. Recent advances in satellite
technology (improved spectral, spatial, radiometric and temporal resolution) and
atmospheric correction, along with cloud and supercomputing capabilities have
enabled the use of satellite data for automated regional scale measurements of
water resource characteristics. Field-validated methods were developed and
implemented in an automated water quality monitoring system on supercomputers.
The system acquires satellite imagery, removes clouds, cloud shadows, haze,
smoke, and land, and applies water quality models to deliver satellite-derived
water quality products. Using these methods, a prototype database was created
with monthly open water pixel level mosaics and lake level data for each clear
image occurrence. The lake level (2017-2020) data includes 603,678 daily lake
measurements of chlorophyll, clarity, and color (1,811,034 total) that were
compiled into a database that was used to calculate water quality variables for
different timeframes (e.g., monthly, summer (June-Sept)) and linked to a lake
polygon layer that was used for geospatial analysis and included in a web map
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.