* 2205023
* Research Initiation: Understanding engineering career fairs as informal professionalization learning spaces
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Darshan Karwat, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This project will investigate engineering career fairs as informal learning
spaces that help professionalize engineering students. The scale and widespread
prevalence of engineering career fairs suggests a certain degree of importance
of career fairs to students, engineering schools, and employers/recruiters - yet
little is known about these events. This study aims to capture the goals,
expectations, and experiences of students, career services staff, and
employers/recruiters who shape and attend career fairs. This project will fill
an important knowledge gap in how career fairs inform and shape students’
transformations into engineering professionals, and how career fairs shape the
engineering profession as a whole. Insights revealed from this study will be
broadly applicable to engineering schools, career services staff, and
employers/recruiters across the US, and contribute to our collective
understanding of the professional formation of
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our efforts will address two research questions:
(1) How do engineering career fairs operate as informal professionalization
learning spaces for undergraduate engineering students?, and (2): What implicit
and explicit informal professionalization learning intentions do career services
staff and employers/recruiters have for undergraduate engineering students at
career fairs? We will answer these research questions using thematic and
comparative analysis of interview and focus group data gathered from three
stakeholder groups attending and/or involved in organizing engineering career
fairs—undergraduate students, employers/recruiters, and career services staff—at
Arizona State University. We will conduct the research in two phases: a pilot
and learning study (Year 1) followed by a refined study (Year 2). This research
is potentially transformative in that it will provide the engineering education
community with novel understanding and knowledge of how a specific and
widespread informal learning space—career fairs—shapes the outlooks and
perspectives of those considering engineering careers, and their acculturation
to the profession, its standards, and its norms. Our proposed work will examine
an important informal learning space that informs students about the diverse
pathways to and through engineering, which can greatly impact how students
envision themselves working in the profession. We plan to share what we learn
with key stakeholders—including engineering companies, academics, professional
societies, policy leaders, and career development organizations like the
National Association of Colleges and Employers—through our dissemination
efforts, which will include a special session at the Engineering Ideas Institute
Summit organized by Engineering Change Lab-USA. Emerging research has begun to
show (1) why many minoritized students leave engineering, (2) how engineering
education reduces students' concerns for public welfare, and (3) the importance
of aligning students’ personal and professional values to ensure student
satisfaction with their education and future jobs. The intellectual merits of
the project are thus purposefully tied to the broader impacts of supporting an
innovative and inclusive engineering profession for the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.