* 2205941
* Collaborative Research: Conference: 2022 Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace PI Meeting
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Heather Richter Lipford, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 01/31/2023
* USD 35,198.00

This award supports development of the program for a 2-day workshop to bring
together PIs from across the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program.
Specific objectives of the PI meeting include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- to
stimulate coordination and collaboration amongst SaTC PIs working on different
projects;&lt;br/&gt;- to foster new collaborations between SaTC researchers and
researchers in other disciplines;&lt;br/&gt;- to share experiences and learn
from others' experiences in transitioning research into practice;
and&lt;br/&gt;- to develop ideas and share methods for improving education,
recruitment, and career development in
cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building a strong community among SaTC
researchers helps identify new research topics, avoid duplication of existing
research, and improve educational opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some elements of the meeting are structured so as
to mitigate risks associated with the spread of COVID-19 or the virtual
participation that its spread might necessitate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.