* 2205521
* Advancing Machine-Learning Augmented Free-Energy Density Functionals for Fast and Accurate Quantum Simulations of Warm Dense Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Suxing Hu, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

Density-functional theory (DFT), one of the most successful methods in many-body
physics, has been one of the main tools for understanding the physics and
chemistry of nature as well as for improving our daily life. Examples of DFT
applications range from guiding experimentalists to discover near-room-
temperature superconductors and other functional materials, to controlling
chemical reactions for better products, and to designing drugs to cure diseases.
The success of DFT relies on the accuracy of approximations describing how
electrons in a material interact with each other, the so-called exchange-
correlation (XC) free-energy density functional and the non-interacting free-
energy functional for orbital-free DFT. In this research project, finite-
temperature XC-functionals and non-interacting free-energy functionals, advanced
by machine learning, will be developed to significantly improve the predictive
capability of DFT for both plasma physics and materials research. The outcome of
this research project is expected to make significant impact in a variety of
scientific fields and applications such as planetary science, astrophysics,
fusion energy and national defense, as well as make a positive impact on the
society through delivering tools to speed up discoveries of novel
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Warm-dense matter, at pressures ranging from
millions to hundreds of billions of atmospheres, exists vastly in the universe
-- from planetary cores and astrophysical objects such as brown and white
dwarfs, to diamond-anvil-cell compression, to shocks and inertial confinement
fusion implosions created in a laboratory. Reliably predicting the static,
transport and optical properties of matter at such extreme conditions depends on
the accuracy of first-principles methods such as DFT. This project establishes a
research program to improve the accuracy and speed of DFT for quantum
simulations of extreme materials. The objectives of this project include: (1)
developing fully thermalized and numerically efficient XC free-energy
functionals for ab-initio molecular-dynamics simulations; (2) eliminating the
prohibitively expensive bottleneck in the orbital-based Mermin-Kohn-Sham (MKS)
scheme at elevated temperature by developing a novel class of orbital-free (OF)
non-interacting free-energy functionals; (3) taking these developments,
augmented with machine-learning techniques, to enable an efficient OF-DFT
implementation for accelerating the electronic structure calculations that
preserve the MKS level of accuracy; and (4) applying these advanced tools to
answer key questions in high energy density plasma physics and in extreme
materials science. This award is jointly supported by the Plasma Physics program
in the Division of Physics and the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory program
in the Division of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.