* 2205081
* Superfluidity in Helium Nanodroplets
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Andrey Vilesov, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2025
* USD 261,232.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Helium is an element that is exceptional in
many respects. Unlike any other elements, helium can remain liquid down to
absolute zero temperature (0 K, -273 °C, -460 °F). In this regime (roughly 2 K
and below), helium demonstrates some unique properties that can only be
described by quantum physics. Two kinds of helium atoms exist in nature, so
called isotopes with different mass: He-3 and He-4. While on the outside they
seem similar, He-3 and He-4 behave very differently in the low temperature
regime. Below 2K, He-4 loses all viscosity and can spontaneously create small,
rotating tornados inside the liquid called quantum vortices. In this state,
helium-4 is known as a superfluid. He-3, however, remains in the normal fluid
state in the low temperature regime due to a quantum mechanical difference
between He-3 and He-4. This project investigates physical superfluid properties
in nano-sized droplets of liquid helium by taking snapshots of them with x-rays
using a linear particle accelerator. Images of superfluid He-4 droplets
containing quantum vortices are compared to those of normal fluid He-3 droplets.
Additionally, images of droplets containing a mixture of both types of helium
are obtained to see how the isotopes interact. This project provides
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to take part in cutting-
edge science and acquire technical skills which strengthen the US STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Helium droplets
have long been considered ideal systems to explore vorticity in self-contained,
isolated superfluids. This group has recently shown the feasibility of such
studies using single, sub-micrometer sized helium droplets interrogated via
x-ray scattering using a free electron laser. Droplets undergo rotation after
exiting the nozzle, manifesting an array of quantum vortices and shape
deformations depending on the magnitude of the droplet’s angular momentum. This
project expands the x-ray study of quantum droplets to new directions such as
the rotation of capsule-shaped droplets, which involves a concerted action of
quantum vortices and capillary waves. The project also probes quantum phase
separation in rotating nanodroplets made of mixtures of the bosonic He-4 and the
fermionic He-3. Additionally, the droplets are used as an experimental vessel to
tackle the so-called Thompson problem, finding the minimum energy configuration
of N unit charges on a sphere, which remains unsolved experimentally. Finally,
the shapes of rotating superfluid He-4 and non-superfluid He-3 droplets are
obtained and compared. The proposed experiments will provide benchmark
information on the structure, stability, and rotational dynamics of free
rotating super- and non-superfluid droplets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.