* 2205769
* Theoretical Aspects of New Spectral Signatures and Strong X-ray Emission from Exotic Ions in Dense Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Alla Safronova, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 425,000.00

The goal of this study is to improve understanding of atomic processes in dense
plasmas. The newly developed knowledge and ability to better model atomic
processes in dense plasmas will find broad applications both in astrophysics and
in national security applications. This project will contribute to the
development of dense plasma science and education of the next generation of
undergraduate and graduate students. The award also supports continuation of the
Radiation from High Energy Density Plasmas workshop series with a major focus on
participation of students and post-doctoral researchers. This workshop series
promotes extensive interactions between universities and national laboratories
with a vision toward the future of the field. This project is jointly funded by
the NSF Division of Physics, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR), and the National Nuclear Security Administration within the
Department of Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the last decade, with the
substantial increase in laser pulse intensities and research programs at X-ray
Free Electron Lasers (XFELs), the observation of new spectral features that are
attributed to x-ray emission from exotic states of matter have attracted a lot
of attention. This has stimulated new experimental and theoretical studies of
the spectral features of dense plasmas. The main objectives of this project are
(1) theoretical development of the formalism and plasma/atomic non-local
thermodynamic equilibrium modeling to adequately describe the emission spectra
of KK hollow ions from low- and mid-atomic-number dense plasmas; (2) evaluation
of the accuracy of the atomic data in the model by comparisons of the results
from different atomic structure codes; (3) investigation of the role of the
different configurations and atomic processes leading to the formation of KK
hollow ions; and (4) identification of the possible new spectral features from
exotic multiple-core-hole L-shell states in dense
plasmas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.