* 2205973
* Controlling Electron, Magnon, and Phonon States in Quasi-2D Antiferromagnetic Semiconductors for Enabling Novel Device Functionalities
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Alexander Balandin, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 02/28/2026
* USD 153,254.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the
properties of a new class of ultra-thin quasi-two-dimensional semiconductors
with intrinsic magnetic properties. The exotic properties of this new class of
semiconductors make them particularly interesting for fundamental science
research and practical applications. The investigators will explore the
electronic, magnetic, and thermal properties of these unique materials with
thicknesses of a few-atomic layers only. The PIs will also investigate the
potential of these materials for use in devices with novel functionality that
operate at high speed with low-energy dissipation. This research aligns with the
Nation’s need for the development and research of novel semiconductor materials
and devices under the recent CHIPS and Science Act. The interdisciplinary nature
of the project will facilitate the involvement of students in the proposed
research and contribute to undergraduate and graduate STEM education. The
project team has developed a detailed Broadening Participation Plan that will
impact the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate education of minorities
underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transition-metal phospho-trichalcogenides span
a wide variety of compounds with different electronic, magnetic, and phonon
properties. These materials are one of a few van der Waals layered structures
which can have intrinsic antiferromagnetism, even at mono-layer thickness. The
band gap of these materials varies from ~1.3 eV to ~3.5 eV based on the type of
its transition- metal element. Theory suggests that the application of gate bias
and strain can induce phase transitions in these materials, changing their
properties. While electrical insulators and conductors with AFM spin order have
been studied extensively, little is known experimentally about antiferromagnetic
layered semiconductors. This project aims to investigate the electron, phonon,
and magnon properties of these unique materials at single- and few-layer
structures, and to assess the possibilities of controlling their properties for
enabling novel device functionalities. To achieve these goals, various types of
these compounds will be synthesized and characterized using cryogenic micro –
Brillouin – Raman spectroscopy, and electrical and thermal transport
measurements. The results of this interdisciplinary research will add to the
core knowledge in several areas of material science and electrical engineering,
thereby delivering a transformative impact for applications of antiferromagnetic
layered semiconductors. The intellectual merit of this project include knowledge
of phonon and magnon band structures, and their modification with the thickness,
strain, and electric bias; experimental data for controlling the Néel
temperature in two- dimensional antiferromagnetic semiconductor films;
mechanisms and methods for tuning the phase transitions in AFM semiconductors
under the action of gate and strain; innovative approaches for enabling novel
device functionalities via control of the electron, phonon, and magnon states in
two-dimensional antiferromagnetic semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.