* 2205912
* Electromagnetic Signatures of Inhomogeneities: Visibility vs. Invisibility
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Michael Vogelius, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This mathematics research project aims to improve understanding of the relation
between the regularity, the geometry, and the material contents of an
inhomogeneity and its visibility/invisibility properties when probed by
electromagnetic waves. The investigator plans to develop tools to enhance image
resolution and to provide analysis that determines which geometric features are
more visible or less visible. It is anticipated that the work will have direct
implications for electromagnetic imaging techniques, whether they concern radar
detection of unknown objects, nondestructive testing of material components, or
biomedical imaging of live organs. The same tools and analysis will also be
brought to bear on electromagnetic cloaking. The project will examine to what
extent one may create approximate cloaks that work at broad bands of frequencies
and at the same time use materials that are physically realistic. This will
provide a better understanding of the limitations of passive cloaking devices
and their physical realizability. The investigator will mentor a postdoctoral
researcher as an integral part of the research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research is intended to elucidate the relation between the regularity, the
geometry, and the material contents of an inhomogeneity and its
visibility/invisibility properties. Such understanding can be used to better
detect inhomogeneities or hide them. The project also aims to develop novel
asymptotic formulas for the effect of a change in boundary conditions on small
boundary sets, a topic of importance for optimal design. The project
investigates four sub-topics: (1) study of regularity of (the boundary of)
inhomogeneities that exhibit non-scattering wave numbers, (2) study of geometry
of (the boundary of) inhomogeneities that exhibit in finitely many non-
scattering wave numbers, (3) comparison of recent results about the
infeasibility of perfect cloaking and earlier results about the feasibility of
approximate cloaking, and (4) development of uniformly valid asymptotic formulas
for the field effects of "small" internal inhomogeneities and "small" boundary
(condition) inhomogeneities. The mathematical techniques will include sharp
estimates of the effects of small boundary condition inhomogeneities of extreme
contrast and hodograph transform techniques with associated elliptic PDE
estimates applied to examine the regularity properties of non-scattering
inhomogeneities. To develop the relevant measure of the smallness of boundary
condition inhomogeneities of extreme contrast, the investigator will introduce
and examine various novel notions of capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.