* 2205796
* Non-Hermitian and topological magnonics with interacting artificial spin ices for reconfigurable microwave devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Ezio Iacocca, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2025
* USD 192,956.00

Semiconductors have defined the landscape of our technology, enabling an era of
big-data computing. As devices approach their limits, alternative and energy-
efficient solutions are sought for specific applications. Magnetic materials
offer an energy-efficient alternative because of their natural operation
timescales of nanoseconds (one billionth of a second) and reduced energy losses
through heat. This operation relies on the excitation of magnetic waves, or
“magnons”, that propagate through the material and can be interfaced with
photonics and CMOS devices. However, magnons decay quickly, with detectable
propagation in the micrometer (one-millionth of a meter) scale that limits their
performance. In this proposal, a new class of magnetic materials supporting
magnons constrained to propagate along their edges is introduced. The spatial
constraint on such modes ensures both unidirectional motion and longer
propagation lengths. Additionally, the proposed materials composed of strongly
coupled nanosized magnets are “functional” in the sense that their properties
can be actively and non-destructively reconfigured and even toggled. The success
of this project will open a new pathway toward reconfigurable microwave devices
with superior performance. This project will provide research opportunities for
a diverse graduate and undergraduate student population at the forefront of
magnetism. Outreach activities will engage the community and bring awareness to
scientific advances and their impact on society. This project will allow
graduate and undergraduate students to lead the development of an outreach
demonstration setup specifically designed for K-12 students and to broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The functional
materials proposed here aim to combine the field of magnonics, where magnons are
manipulated, and the field of artificial spin ices, where two-dimensional
lattices exhibit reconfigurable states. In doing so, it will be possible to
harness two distinct physical phenomena for potential microwave applications.
The “magneto-toroidal spin ice” relies on a stable chiral magnetic state to
induce topology in the magnon band structure. In this case, edge modes are
expected to be topologically protected and, therefore, unidirectional. The non-
Hermitian systems will make use of strong inter-layer coupling and the
unavoidable losses to support unidirectional modes based on the conservation of
PT-symmetry. To model these functional materials, this project introduces a new
analytical formalism that will be able to tackle arbitrary magnetic super-
lattices based on a Hamiltonian formalism. The formalism will be then applied to
two distinct numerical schemes: an eigenvalue solver and a time-dependent
simulation. The eigenvalue solver will provide the means to compute the magnon
band structure, which has not been efficiently solved by other numerical methods
to date. A time-dependent simulation is a unique tool that will bridge the
Hamiltonian formalism to large-scale numerical modeling. By combining geometry,
coupling, and topology, this project is expected to spark the investigation of a
larger class of functional magnetic materials in the community, including three-
dimensional geometries and nanoscale-patterned materials. The project will also
enable the next step towards the realization of reconfigurable microwave magnon-
based devices and semiconductor-like devices by providing the analytical and
numerical tools for their modeling and subsequent experimental
realization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.