* 2205405
* Molecular principles of spindle orientation complex organization and function
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Christopher Johnston, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 04/30/2025
* USD 597,219.00

Development of multicellular organisms is a complex process that rests
fundamentally on the ability to generate many diverse cell types that ultimately
result in adult tissues with unique functions. The creation of cell diversity is
tasked to stem cells, whose divisions can produce distinct, non-identical
daughter cells capable of assuming different fates. This so-called asymmetric
cell division (ACD) process is essential to proper development and viability.
Understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in ACD, therefore,
has broad and significant biological importance, particularly considering the
conservation of this process across all multicellular life. The goal of this
project is to understand how conserved protein complexes that control specific
aspects of asymmetric stem cell divisions are regulated to ensure proper
development. Although many of the specific components that will be investigated
are known, important knowledge gaps remain with respect to how they function at
the molecular level. The project will focus particularly on how specific protein
complexes assemble and ultimately achieve a cooperative function within the
cell. Disruption of these events can lead to defects in tissue development that
impact the viability and function of adult organisms. These studies will utilize
the common fruit fly as a model genetic organism, whose genes important for ACD
are highly conserved to humans. The Broader Impact activities include the
intrinsic merit of the research as all multicellular life involves ACD. The work
will also provide training for undergraduate and graduate students, with
opportunities provided to underrepresented groups to inspire their involvement
in a more diverse scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Asymmetric cell
division (ACD) is an evolutionarily conserved process that allows progenitor
stem cells to produce non-identical daughter cells that ultimately diversify
cell fates during development. Proper ACD requires coordinated function between
cortical polarity and spindle positioning complexes, and defects that uncouple
these disrupt tissue development and homeostasis. The goal of this project is to
understand how the conserved Pins/Mud spindle orientation complex organizes at
the cell cortex and functions despite competing interactions with cell polarity
factors. We provide preliminary data demonstrating that the Pins/Mud complex
phase separates into dense liquid droplets in vitro. This is facilitated through
a newly-identified interaction between Mud and the actin-binding protein Hts,
which we also show to be polarized in Drosophila neural stem cells in vivo. We
hypothesize that Hts/Pins/Mud complexes form clustered biological condensates
shielded from competing interactions to ensure spindle orientation precision in
asymmetrically dividing stem cells. To test this hypothesis, we will use loss-
of-function genetic approaches to first determine how Hts polarity is
established in neural stem cells and how it impacts localization of core
polarity and spindle orientation components. Next, we will use quantitative
fluorescence imaging approaches to determine the physical properties of phase
separated Pins/Mud droplets in the absence and presence of Hts. Finally, we will
use genome editing and high-resolution microscopy to directly ascertain the role
of phase separation in the assembly and function of Pins/Mud complexes in vivo.
Results from this project will provide insights into the biophysical properties
and cellular function of an evolutionarily conserved spindle positioning complex
and resolve long-standing knowledge gaps in the molecular underpinnings of
ACD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.