* 2205596
* OCE-PRF: Integrating high-throughput plankton imaging and DNA meta-barcoding to elucidate the prevalence and oceanographic determinants of diatom parasitism
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Dylan Catlett, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 11/30/2024
* USD 374,957.00

Diatoms, a group of algae, play an outsized role in supporting the productive
marine food webs and fisheries that coastal communities rely on for food and
other resources. Diatom “epidemics” caused by parasitic plankton have been
observed at times and likely have major impacts on marine food webs. However,
the difficult and time-consuming methods traditionally used to observe diatom
parasitism have limited our ability to understand how common these events are as
well as the environmental conditions that promote infection. This project will
leverage recent technological advances in plankton imaging and DNA sequencing to
develop efficient approaches that will enable sustained observations of diatom
parasitism across large areas of the coastal ocean. These approaches will be
applied to existing DNA sequence and plankton image data sets within the
economically important Northeast U.S. Shelf ecosystem to determine the
importance of diatom parasitism in this ecosystem. This work will advance
science and the field of biological oceanography by generating foundational
knowledge of diatom parasitism in the coastal ocean. This will enable
improvements in efforts to forecast changes in marine ecosystems in response to
climate change, thus advancing the prosperity, welfare, and security of the
nation’s coastal communities. This project will also broaden participation in
ocean science by providing paid, immersive research experiences for two
undergraduate students with additional opportunities to attend and present their
work at scientific conferences and to contribute to scientific publications. An
early-career postdoctoral researcher will gain invaluable professional
experience designing and implementing both the research and a strategic
mentorship plan targeted toward equitably recruiting and supporting the career
advancement of the two undergraduate researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will integrate large DNA meta-
barcoding and plankton imaging data sets to develop a generic, high-throughput
approach to infer and validate interactions between diatom hosts and eukaryotic
nano-parasites, and subsequently estimate infection prevalence for specific
host-parasite pairs. This approach will be applicable to other aquatic
ecosystems and will have the potential to be adapted to the study of other types
of interactions amongst the plankton. Further, it will contribute to ongoing
efforts to optimize analysis of DNA meta-barcoding, plankton imaging, and other
complex, observational, biological oceanographic data sets, and accelerate their
use in addressing novel scientific questions. Application of this approach to
extensive image and DNA meta-barcoding data sets available on the Northeast U.S.
Shelf will enable quantitation of population-specific and aggregated community-
level diatom infection prevalence and reveal the prevalence and spatiotemporal
distribution of infection events. Population-specific and community-aggregated
infection dynamics will then be related to physical, chemical, and biological
oceanographic processes to begin to disentangle the relative importance of
population-specific physiological niches and hypothesized community-level
forcings in governing diatom-parasite interactions from local and event scales
to regional and seasonal or longer scales. Overall, this project will establish
a framework for integrating diatom parasitism into predictive pelagic food web
models and assist in forecasting the impacts of anthropogenic climate change on
the structure and function of marine ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.