* 2205360
* SCH: Bringing Intelligence to Pulmonology: New AI-Enabled Systems for Pulmonary Function Tests Anytime and Anywhere
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Heng Huang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,100,000.00

Pulmonary diseases constitute a major public health challenge, and pulmonary
function testing (PFT) is the main method of evaluating the changes in human
airway mechanics, which are the key symptoms of pulmonary diseases. Due to the
possibility of frequent exacerbations in pulmonary diseases, it is important
that PFT is accessible to patients anytime and anywhere out of clinic, but most
of current in-clinic PFT techniques are too cumbersome and expensive to be used
out of clinic. This project addresses these challenges to enable PFT anytime and
anywhere, by developing new and integrated artificial intelligence (AI) and
sensing systems on commodity smartphones. As pulmonary diseases widely affect
the human society and result in billions of annual healthcare related costs,
this project has great potential to benefit society by enabling efficient
disease monitoring, diagnosis and management out of clinic. This project is also
contributing to society by producing datasets that help understand the disease
mechanisms, as well as developing new curricula, disseminating research for
education and training, and engaging underrepresented students in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to enable
highly accurate, adaptable and generic PFT out of clinic using commodity
smartphones. The project consists of four research tasks: (1) designing new
acoustic sensing systems on commodity smartphones that measure the humansâ€™
airway lumen dimensions and characteristics; (2) extracting appropriate
biomarker profiles from acoustic sensory data for disease evaluation; (3)
developing generalizable machine learning (ML) models that can be applied to
evaluating different pulmonary diseases; (4) exploring distributed and
asynchronous methods of training the ML models with new federated learning
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.