* 2205773
* Targeted Infusion Project: Collaborative Cloud-Edge Artificial Intelligence in Cyber-physical Systems
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Mohamed Saleh Zein-Sabatto, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 399,795.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP), through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation
and study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The research team identified Artificial Intelligence (AI) and cyber-
physical systems (CPS) as two strategic fields of research, education and job
opportunities for future STEM workforce in the United States. Thus, a proper
courses sequence combining AI and CPS in the Electrical and Computer Engineering
(ECE) curriculum will prepare students to face real-world engineering
challenges. The research team expects future students will consider careers in
AI-CPS professions, increase scientific workforce diversity and national
competitiveness, and ease the shortage of skilled professionals in this
demanding field. This project addresses the above issues by involving students,
including minority and underrepresented students, in AI-CPS research, education,
and training. Through this project, students gain skills in AI-CPS security and
eventually build a resume that improves their chances of being considered for a
highly in-demand job. Also, by disseminating the project as an open curriculum
to sister HBCUs could potentially attract students from different disciplines.
Finally, the project will show the research capacity and quality of HBCUs to a
broader audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project introduces a well-defined AI-
CPS curriculum enabling underrepresented engineering students to access the
knowledge and opportunities essential to the nation future. The developed
curriculum has AI, CPS, and cyber-security components, designed to target
infrastructure cyber-security applications that a growing city like Nashville
needs. The research emphasizes a project-based learning experience that has
proved to be an effective method to improve the skill set of engineering
students. The proposed research projects in collaboration with local government
agencies help to prepare students to deal with real-world challenges. The
interdisciplinary cooperation with different academic departments allows
students to brainstorm new solutions to address issues encountered by a modern
city in the United States. The pathway-to-success initiative of the work
prepares students to switch between academia and industry. In the long run, it
allows students to complete an undergraduate degree and pursue higher education
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.