* 2205441
* SCH: Statistical Foundation and Predictive Modeling for Personalized Diabetes Management: Continuous Glucose Monitoring (CGM), Electronic Health Records (EHR), and Biobanks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2026
* Hua Zhou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) allows near-continuous glucose measures
throughout the 24-hour cycle. Clinical trials have shown CGM use can improve
glycemic control of diabetes patients, such as reducing severe hypoglycemia. The
rapid advances in sensor technology, ease of use, and expanded reimbursement
dramatically promote CGM usage. However, despite increased CGM adoption,
successful utilization of CGM data in routine clinical practice still remains
low. Enormous amounts of data produced by CGM device and a lack of clear
translational value of CGM summary reports for patients’ long-term benefits
hinders its adoption. This severely limits realizing CGM’s full potential for
personalized diabetes care. In this project, by integrating CGM data with
patients’ health data, including medications, lab measures, and comorbidity
conditions, PIs propose to develop a set of new data science methods for
building robust and interpretable predictive models for early detection and
prevention of short-term and long-term adverse diabetes outcomes. Diabetes
disease heterogeneity, risk factor trajectories, and data uncertainty in modern
devices will be considered in modeling CGM data. Highly scalable algorithms will
further enhance the clinical value of CGM. The project will facilitate more
intelligent and automated assistance for diabetes patients and their physicians
to achieve optimal diabetes management. By harnessing the collaborative research
with clinicians and industry partners, the project has a potential to
substantially advance the field of wearable health sensors. The project will
also provide numerous interdisciplinary opportunities for professional
development of the next generation of statisticians and data scientists, by
exposing the involved mentees to state-of-the-art data science techniques for
smart health. The project will also actively promote more diverse and inclusive
climate in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; While CGM captures the dynamic glucose
profile and plays an increasing role in clinical practice, their measurements
are highly dependent on environmental and behavioral factors and subject to
measurement errors. Supplementary to CGM data, electronic health records (EHRs)
and biobanks offer additional information to quantify health conditions, disease
progression, and the associated time-varying risk factors. These large-scale,
multimodal data sources enable prospective studies with a detailed collection of
long-term time-dependent exposure information to assess risk factors influencing
disease onset. To date, there are no statistical methods that can simultaneously
analyze sensor data and disease onset at scale in real-time due to forbidding
computational costs. The specific thrusts of the project include robust joint
modeling of CGM trajectory, time-varying risk factors, time-to-event data at
scale; and recurrent events at scale. Furthermore, the new methodology will be
developed for dynamic prediction of adverse outcomes incorporating CGM
trajectories, patients’ medical history, and genomic biomarkers. The developed
tools and algorithms will be implemented in a form of publicly available
software as well as cell phone applications to facilitate the CGM usage. The
results of the project are expected to have a profound impact onto health and
wellbeing of our society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.