* 2205292
* Autonomous Fault-Tolerant Operation of Redundant Robotic Arms
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Biyun Xie, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2025
* USD 499,365.00

Environments with extreme temperatures, humidity, radiation, and other hazardous
conditions often escalate the potential risk of hardware failures of robot
actuators. A common root cause contributing to the frequent robot joint failures
is the faults with the joint motors and the associated servo drives.
Unfortunately, in unstructured, remote and dangerous environments, such as when
robots are deployed for space exploration, nuclear waste remediation, and
disaster rescue, not only are failures more likely to occur, but it is also
impossible to perform routine maintenance for these robots after a failure
occurs. Failures occurring in other safety-critical applications, such as
robotic surgery, rehabilitation, and human-robot interaction, could also lead to
very serious consequences or accidents. To improve robustness, this project will
develop autonomous fault-tolerant and fail-active strategies for redundant robot
arms based on predicted and identified joint faults, which will dramatically
improve the reliability and robustness of redundant robot
arms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the conventional fault-tolerant control
methods focus only on failure recovery, and unfortunately it is usually too late
to mitigate damages after failures occur. The kinematic design of optimally
fault-tolerant robots and fault-tolerant motion planning methods in anticipation
of all potential failures can guarantee task completion and optimal post-failure
performance. In particular, a novel efficient method is planned to compute the
six-dimensional fault-tolerant workspace that includes both the volume and shape
information. Then, the optimally fault-tolerant robots will be deigned based on
the volume and shape of the fault-tolerant workspace. Additionally, existing
fault-tolerant motion-planning algorithms assume that all the joints have equal
probability to fail, and they can only provide local optimal solutions. In this
research, the post-failure performance measures are developed based on predicted
joint failure probabilities, and a real-time motion planning algorithm will be
introduced to compute a globally optimal trajectory. Finally, the prognostic and
diagnostic algorithms differ from all the conventional approaches in that it
does not require any additional sensors or hardware, but still maintains high
accuracy and fast prognostic and diagnostic speed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics
program, jointly managed and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG)
and Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE). This project is
also jointly funded by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.