* 2205266
* Space-Time Structure Reconstruction in Cosmology and Lorentzian Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Yiran Wang, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 04/30/2025
* USD 160,000.00

This research aims to develop mathematical tools of use in cosmology and
Einsteinâ€™s general relativity theory. More specifically, the project intends to
advance techniques to recover spacetime structures such as gravitational waves,
black holes, and cosmic strings from observed astrophysical data. One type of
data is the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB), which was measured to high
precision through NASA projects such as Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe and
European Space Agency project Planck Surveyor. The CMB anisotropies contain
important information regarding the early state of the universe and its
evolution. The investigator will study the mathematical theory for recovering
such information and develop stable imaging methods and statistical inference
methods. The results are anticipated to also be applicable in medical imaging
analysis of moving organs. The research will provide opportunities for graduate
student training and interdisciplinary collaborations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research contains several projects involving a range of mathematical subjects
from integral geometry to partial differential equations, microlocal analysis,
and Lorentzian geometry. The first project deals with an integral geometry or
tomography question in Lorentzian geometry, which concerns recovering a function
or tensor from its integral over null geodesics, called the light ray transform.
The investigator will focus on important questions such as the injectivity,
stability, and microlocal properties of the transform to address applications to
inverse problems in Lorentzian geometry, such as the scattering rigidity
problem. The second project will be the determination of primordial
gravitational waves from the Sachs-Wolfe effects by exploring the connection of
the light ray transform and the theory of hyperbolic type differential
equations. The third project will focus on the CMB inverse problem using kinetic
models based on the linear Boltzmann equation. In addition, the project aims to
explore the stability of transport type equations from the microlocal stability
of the light ray transform and extend the analysis to nonlinear
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.