* 2205993
* OCE-PRF: Impacts of endolithic microbial sulfur cycling on coral holobiont ecophysiology, biomineralization, and geochemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Molly Moynihan, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 01/31/2025
* USD 355,153.00

Reef-building corals construct skeletons and build complex structures upon which
entire reef ecosystems depend. A diverse group of microbes, known as endoliths,
live in coral skeletons and are in close proximity to the coral host. Some of
these endolithic microbes could influence coral calcification, by changing pH
and alkalinity, and may also provide nutrients to the coral host. However,
little is known about the microbes inhabiting coral skeletons. Our limited
knowledge about coral endoliths leaves a large gap in our understanding of coral
physiology. Without a full understanding of coral physiology, it is difficult to
make predictions of how corals and the structure they create will respond to
climate change. This work will investigate diversity and activity of microbes in
coral skeletons, with a focus on microbes that could affect coral calcification.
In addition, as coral skeletons are often used to reconstruct past climate, this
work will determine how these microbes impact the chemical signatures of coral
skeletons and climate proxy interpretation. Through research programs at the
Marine Biological Laboratory, high school and undergraduate level students will
be involved in laboratory analysis and aquarium-based experiments. Findings and
products will be shared in open-access publications, open-access data and code
repositories, and through local and national (virtual) public outreach events.
By improving our understanding of microbial diversity and activity in coral
skeletons, this research will improve our understanding how corals will respond
to environmental change, allowing us to better preserve coral reef ecosystems
and the important economic services that they
provide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite decades of research on coral biology and
biomineralization, many basic mechanisms of coral growth and physiology remain
debated in the literature, including the role of biology in coral calcification.
Coral biology is known to affect calcification, and the skeletal microbial
community likely plays a role in calcification, bioerosion, and nutrient cycling
within the coral. By combining microbial physiology, biogeochemistry, and
geochemistry techniques, this research will take an integrative and
interdisciplinary approach towards understanding the coral skeletal microbial
community and its influence on coral physiology and calcification. Microbial
sulfur cycling rates in coral skeletons will be measured and paired with
taxonomic identification through a combination of amplicon and metagenomic
sequencing approaches. Key microbial taxa will be localized using fluorescence
in situ hybridization and confocal microscopy. Particular focus will be given to
the spatial distribution of specific functional groups within the skeleton,
including taxa performing anoxygenic photosynthesis and sulfate reduction, two
pathways known to affect pH and alkalinity. Microsensor and isotope tracer
experiments will be used to quantify microbial activity, as well as any
potential transfer of nutrients between endoliths or from endoliths to the coral
tissue. After constraining the diversity, distribution, and activity of these
microbes, geochemical signatures of coral skeletons containing known endolithic
communities will be used to study the effect of endoliths on coral paleoclimate
proxies. This work could lead to the development of new environmental proxies or
correction factors for existing proxies, by constraining how endolith-driven
changes in pH, alkalinity, and carbon cycling alter calcification and skeletal
geochemistry. By providing a deeper and more holistic understanding of coral
endolithic microbes, findings from this work will improve our understanding of
corals and their ability to create structure, recycle nutrients, and support
ecologically and economically critical ecosystems, as well as our understanding
of microbes adapted to extreme habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.