* 2205111
* SBIR Phase I:  Rapid Single-Use, Point-Of-Care, Disposable Lateral Flow Device for Detection Of Kennel Cough
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Paula Walker, CONTROLPOINT INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve the health and well-being of
animals, particularly respiratory infections in dogs commonly known as kennel
cough. More than 5 million veterinarian visits a year in the United States alone
are due to kennel cough. In 90% of those cases, dogs are treated based on
empirical data, which means veterinarians take an educated guess, and fewer than
10% are tested. Dogs are more likely to develop clinical signs of kennel cough
the longer they are in a group-housing environment. The 5 million cases in the
United States are underestimated and do not typically include cases from
kennels, shelters, and/or boarding facilities. With the current procedures,
veterinarians may send samples to central laboratories that take many days to
provide results. The proposed project will develop a diagnostic test that will
provide veterinarians with a cost-effective, easy-to-use single test that can
detect a wide range of organisms. The test will provide results within minutes
of sample collection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I will demonstrate the initial feasibility of detecting
several pathogens in a single test device. The selected pathogens will be a
combination of bacteria and viruses that have been identified to cause kennel
cough in dogs, a common but debilitating ailment. The proposed work will allow
test validation, prototype manufacturing, clinical sample evaluation, and
procedures to report results to both veterinarians and pet owners. The
innovation will help fill the extensive gaps in understanding the disease
ecology, prevalence, incidence, and geographic distribution of kennel cough,
facilitating faster and more efficient disease management decisions. The ability
to rapidly identify the contagious pathogens involved in an occurrence will
permit a rapid response to limit the dimensions of a possible
outbreak.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.