* 2205620
* Collaborative Research: Novel Plasma Physics of Trapped Antimatter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Timothy Tharp, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2025
* USD 129,059.00

This award enables an exploration of future experiments for studying asymmetry
between matter and antimatter. The prevalence of matter over antimatter is one
of the most important unexplained observations in physics. As currently
understood, the laws of physics obey symmetry properties that predict equality
between the two forms of matter â€“ at odds with our everyday experience as well
as detailed astronomical observations. Such an inconsistency suggests that our
current understanding of the laws of physics may be incomplete. ALPHA is an
interdisciplinary antimatter experiment at CERN that tests this notion by
producing antihydrogen and sensitively measuring its properties in comparison
with the hydrogen atom. Trapping antimatter to produce antihydrogen is a plasma
physics problem, consisting of collecting and manipulating large collections of
charged particles using electric and magnetic fields. This project conducted in
collaboration between the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor and Marquette
University will advance understanding of novel plasma physics processes that
occur in these experiments and develop protocols for possible future
experiments. The project also supports development of interactive science
exhibits for display at the Discovery World Science and Technology Center in
Milwaukee, WI and at the Plasma Expo during the American Physical Society
Division of Plasma Physics annual meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trapped
antimatter is novel from a plasma physics perspective, as well as a particle
physics perspective. These plasmas are so cold, and the magnetic fields of the
trap are so strong, that they exist in a state that is not well described by the
usual models of plasma physics. Specifically, the low temperature causes the
plasma to be strongly coupled, which means that it behaves more like a
supercritical fluid or a liquid, than the more common dilute-gas-like behavior.
The strong applied magnetic field, in combination with the low density, also
causes the plasma to be strongly magnetized. Currently understood methods of
plasma theory do not apply in either of these circumstances. The research to be
conducted will further develop recent theoretical approaches that extend plasma
theory into these domains. The work will apply a newly developed kinetic theory
and molecular dynamics simulations to advance understanding of three critical
plasma-related processes: electron and positron compression, antiproton cooling,
and mixing and recombination of antiprotons and positrons. Molecular dynamics
simulations will be used to test the model development. The advanced models will
be applied to explore more efficient ways to convert collections of positrons
and antiprotons into antihydrogen atoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.