* 2205819
* OCE-PRF Chemical Imaging for Molecular Detection and Classification of Microplastics and their Influence on Zebrafish
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Matthew Confer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 06/30/2024
* USD 307,754.00

Environmental impacts of plastic use are amongst the most concerning aspects of
modern society as they can not only destroy marine populations but also harm
human health. Microplastics (MP, plastic less than 5 mm) are common pollutants
in marine environments and are expected to increase in prevalence, and decrease
in size, with time. Bioaccumulation of MPs in marine life via direct ingestion
and trophic transfer (transfer up the food chain) degrades the health of the
oceans and, as a result, human food supply. The first goal of this project is
characterization of microplastic bioaccumulation and resulting tissue changes in
fish across different polymer material, shape, and size combinations. This
knowledge is important for determining which plastics are most harmful to the
environment. Current methods for determining MP polymer identity are inefficient
and time consuming. The second goal of this study is to decrease the time and
data required to identify plastics using the difference in intrinsic properties
between materials. This study will not only provide information regarding the
effect of MPs on fish health, but also provide preliminary information on how
MPs affect humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Current studies of MP bioaccumulation
in marine life decouple MP characterization and counting from chemical
variations in tissues caused by MP exposure. The primary goal of this project is
to use quantum cascade laser (QCL) based discrete frequency infrared imaging
(DFIR) to characterize not only the location of MP bioaccumulation in zebrafish
(Danio rerio), but also the resulting tissue changes in the same sample without
the use of histochemical staining. QCL based DFIR allows for time-efficient,
data-rich, stainless biomedical imaging but has largely been limited to proof of
concept using human tissue. QCL based DFIR is more time-efficient than standard
Fourier transform infrared microscopy as it allows only IR bands of interest to
be acquired. A library of control zebrafish tissue (including spleen, heart,
gills, kidney, intestine, liver, muscle, and brain) will be imaged with DFIR and
correlated with adjacent H&amp;E-stained sections in order to develop an
artificial intelligence (AI) pipeline to determine the types of cells and their
variation into a first of its hind comprehensive zebrafish tissue chemical
imaging (CI) database. The effects of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) MPs with different geometries (sphere and
fibers), average sizes (2 and 10 µm), doses (0.5 and 10 mg/L), and exposure
times (3 and 14 days) on zebrafish tissue will be studied relative to the
control tissue library. A secondary product of this project will be a time and
data efficient AI pipeline for DFIR based MP composition analysis that is
applicable to non-biologically associated samples. The overarching goal of this
work is to not only study MP bioaccumulation in a model species, but also to lay
the groundwork for expansion of QCL based DFIR imaging to MP characterization
and further zebrafish studies across biomedical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.