* 2205862
* Catalyst Project: Broadening Participation in Quantum Information Science and Engineering through Culturally-Relevant Experiential Learning
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Raymond Samuel, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 07/31/2024
* USD 175,000.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
undergraduate education and research. It is expected that the award will further
the faculty member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the
institution, and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This
award to North Carolina Agricultural &amp; Technical State University (NCAT)
aims to broaden participation of students underrepresented in STEM, particularly
in quantum information sciences, to contribute to a more diverse and quantum-
proficient workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing a combination of
culturally relevant pedagogy (CRP) and experiential learning activities, the
research team seeks to examine approaches to increase the interest in quantum
information science and engineering (QISE) among students enrolled at NCAT, a
historically black university. Efforts will be made to identify and relieve
barriers and leverage facilitators to spark and cultivate student interest in
QISE-related careers. Specifically, CRP will be infused into experiential
activities in collaboration with external industry partners (e.g., IBM, Google,
the IBM-HBCU Quantum Coalition, and new local start-up QC companies). This
project will engage educators in their design of creative activities that bridge
content knowledge to studentsâ€™ lived experiences, engage students in authentic
practices, and measure the extent to which participating students demonstrate
increased self-efficacy and interest in joining the quantum computing workforce.
It is anticipated that the outcomes of this project will identify both the
barriers and facilitators of choosing QISE as a career choice, as well as detect
the efficacy of CRP and experiential learning activities in relieving the
barriers and leveraging the facilitators to broaden participation in this new
computing paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.