* 2205707
* 2021 NSF Nanoscale Science and Engineering (NSE) Grantees Conference - NNI Retrospective
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Daniel Herr, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2022
* USD 32,665.00

This award provides supplemental support for the annual 2021 NSF Nanoscale
Science and Engineering (NSE) Grantees Conference. The project involves the
production of a retrospective video documentary chronicling the inception,
history, achievements and impacts of the National Nanotechnology Initiative
(NNI) over the last 20 years as well as the progress of nanotechnology presented
and discussed at the associated annual NSF-sponsored Nano-scale Science and
Engineering (NSE) Grantees Conference. The documentary is tentatively titled
"Creating a National Initiative: National Nanotechnology Initiative at 20
years." The production goal is to create a short video for distribution to a
range of audiences, nanotechnology trade press, social media outlets, and
educational institutions at all levels. Students, young faculty, women and
under-represented minority students and the general public will benefit from the
dissemination of nanotechnology and nanomanufacturing achievements and impacts
through this video.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The annual NSE grantees conference
serves as a program review and research networking event that highlights ongoing
research and educational activities in various NSF nanotechnology science and
engineering programs. The main theme of this conference is ‘nanomanufacturing’.
A need for creating media to disseminate nanotechnology and nanomanufacturing
achievements and impacts since the inception of the NNI was identified. To meet
this need, a documentary video will be professionally created. The video will
highlight how the NNI was created and why it was successful. It will also
present the evolution, challenges and results of the NNI since its inception in
January 2000. It will include interviews with selected contributors, experts and
thought leaders in nanotechnology and nanomanufacturing. This is a unique
opportunity to highlight achievements of 20 years of the NNI and associated NSF
Nano Grantees Conference series. This understanding of the NNI model could be
used to establish national initiatives in emerging and converging technologies
such as QIS, advanced semiconductors, modern biology, AI, advanced wireless, and
advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.