* 2205148
* Tools4Cells: Machine-learning aided morphodynamics characterization of stem cell differentiation using label-free microscopies
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Min Xu, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2025
* USD 391,289.00

It is a great wonder of Nature that an embryo can develop into an organism
composed with different types of cells, and different types of cells can
interconvert under certain conditions. Mechanistic understanding and
manipulation of conversion between different cell types emerge as an exciting
frontier of research. This area of research has the potential to contribute to
our understanding of development as well as to innovations in tissue and organ
regeneration. The goal of this project is to develop computational tools for
analyzing movies of cells to learn how individual cells change from one type to
another one. It is analogous to tracing the routes people take for driving from
one city to another one, so one can identify the dominant routes and try to
direct traffic to specific route. The Broader Impacts of the work include the
intrinsic merit of the research as the platform could prove useful to a number
of other projects. Research opportunities will be made available to
undergraduate and graduate students along with post-doctoral researchers.
Outreach effort will involve the use of YouTube to promote science to the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells of different phenotypes are
characterized by distinct morphology and gene expression patterns. When subject
to specific stimuli and microenvironments they can transit between distinct
phenotypes, reprogramming to become induced pluripotent stem cells. Mechanistic
understanding of such cell phenotypic transition (CPT) processes, however,
suffers from the challenge that snapshot data cannot provide temporal
information. Live-cell imaging provides an alternative approach for monitoring
transitions of individual cells continuously over time. The project aims to
develop a generally applicable platform and associated computer package that (1)
allows typical cell biology labs to apply the platform and study cellular
processes without requirements of a strong background in machine-learning, image
analyses, or dynamical systems theories; (2) extends to various imaging
platforms and modalities, especially quantitative phase imaging-based label-free
imaging that has gained popularity together with machine-learning approaches.
Beyond the traditional bioimage informatics approaches, the novelty here is for
mechanistic studies of CPT dynamics in the framework of dynamical systems
theory/systems biology. In addition, inspired by the critical role the image
database ImageNet has played on the recent advance of artificial intelligence
development, the researchers will provide annotated cell images generated from
this project as benchmarks for the community to develop and test image analysis
approaches. The developed framework will be generally applicable to study a
large number of cell phenotype conversion processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.