* 2205398
* Applying Year of Polar Prediction-Southern Hemisphere (YOPP-SH) Targeted Observing Periods  to Advance Winter Numerical Weather Forecasting for the U.S. Antarctic Program
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Jordan Powers, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 04/30/2025
* USD 844,359.00

The project aims to promote the progress of science and advance national
interests in improved numerical weather modeling capabilities for American
researchers and for the United States Antarctic Program. The effort consists of
atmospheric modeling work leveraging the international Year of Polar Prediction
— Southern Hemisphere program. This effort includes a field campaign component
in 2022 that features enhanced observations of the Antarctic atmosphere in
winter during Targeted Observing Periods. The project seeks to improve numerical
weather prediction capabilities for both research applications and weather
forecasting support for the US Antarctic Program. The project goals include
evaluating the use of special observations to improve atmospheric modeling,
determining whether the new technique is superior to existing techniques for
Antarctic atmospheric simulation and weather prediction, and assess how well the
model is performing in its prediction of polar clouds and precipitation. The
project will advance the field by applying an unprecedented dataset gathered in
an international collaboration and determining its benefit for future science
and forecasting. It will also advance the field by exploring a new method for
the use of such information in atmospheric models for the polar regions. The
benefits are increases in knowledge, improved weather modeling, and gains in the
model weather forecasting capabilities that the Antarctic Program relies on,
allowing for enhanced efficiency and safety for Antarctic operations. The
project will also advance education and outreach by supporting the education and
professional development of a graduate student along with interactive exposure
of diverse audiences to the challenging task of weather modeling and prediction
for the remote Southern Ocean and Antarctic regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on the value of special observations for improving Antarctic
atmospheric simulation and weather prediction, and evaluate how the model
performs in predicting polar clouds and precipitation. Specifically, within the
Year of Polar Prediction — Southern Hemisphere (YOPP-SH) framework, this project
has four aspects. First, the team will identify candidate Targeted Observing
Periods (TOPs) from East Antarctica to the Ross Sea. Second, the dataset of
special YOPP-SH radiosonde launches made in the TOPs will be assimilated into
model experiments using the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model, which
is run in the Antarctic Mesoscale Prediction System (AMPS), the numerical
weather prediction capability for USAP. These data assimilation experiments will
apply the AMPS framework to determine the impact of the observations on
predictions of major weather events affecting the US Antarctic Program (USAP)
McMurdo and Palmer Stations, and to identify the governing processes. Third, a
new data assimilation capability for the WRF Model— Multi-Resolution Incremental
4DVAR (MRI-4DVAR) —is being tested in these data impact experiments to determine
its effectiveness for real-time use in AMPS and thus for possible future
implementation as well as for research modeling. Fourth, cloud and precipitation
observations collected during the TOPs at Davis and Vernadsky Stations will be
applied to analyses of the WRF simulations to assess model weaknesses. This
project aims to enhance WRF’s handling of clouds and precipitation to improve
parameterization. The goal is to increase the accuracy of AMPS forecasts for
USAP operations and to improve the WRF model for the research community. This
project will ultimately promote the progress of science and advance national
interests in improved numerical weather modeling capabilities for American
researchers and for USAP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.