* 2205500
* Heavy-Metal Jupiters by Major Mergers
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Eugene Chiang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2025
* USD 427,234.00

A team from the University of California-Berkeley seek to understand the origin
of metal-rich Jupiters, asking specifically whether they can arise from
collisions between smaller protoplanets. Some Jupiter-mass extrasolar planets
contain as much as 100 Earth masses of 'metals', i.e. elements other than
hydrogen and helium. Such 'heavy-metal' Jupiters are not expected from the
conventional theory of gas giant formation, which predicts that a gas-dominated
planet originates from hydrogen and helium accreting onto a solid core having
only 10 Earth masses of rock and ice. This proposal asks whether metal-rich
giants can arise from collisions between massive rocky cores. During the planet
formation era, pairs of cores can successively collide and merge, with each
merger doubling the metal content of the merger product. Such a 'giant impacts'
phase of collisional growth has long been put forward to hold for rocky planets
like the Earth; this project seeks to extend this model to gas giants like
Jupiter. The project will simulate the merger history of forming planet cores as
well as their growth through disk gas to reproduce the observed metal contents
of gas giants. The work will provide context for how our Solar System’s Jupiter
may have been shaped by collisions. The work will train a graduate student to
join the scientific workforce, and train undergraduate research assistants with
ambitions to teach the physical sciences. The investigators will partner with
local K-12 programs and high school physics teachers to educate students and
teachers in modeling and research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Concurrent mergers and
gas accretion from the disk will be modeled with the open-source N-body code
REBOUND, outfitted with routines for gas accretion and disk torques. A 'sub-
grid' code that models protoplanet interiors will provide radii for use in
REBOUND’s collision algorithm. Different prescriptions for planetary gas
accretion, impact-generated atmospheric mass loss, and collisional mergers —
perfect vs. hit-and-run, to be modeled with fast machine-learning algorithms —
will be explored. The goal is to survey the range of possible outcomes in merger
+ gas accretion simulations, and to reproduce the mean trend and remarkably
large scatter in the empirical mass-metallicity relation for giant planets. The
work will also connect to varying extents with other exo-giant observables,
including semi-major axes, eccentricities, multiplicities, luminosities, and
spins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.