* 2205966
* OCE-PRF: Investigating ontogenetic shifts in microbe-derived nutrition in reef building corals
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Ariana Huffmyer, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 08/31/2024
* USD 370,100.00

Coral reefs are economically and ecologically valuable resources. Nutritional
partnerships between organisms (i.e., symbioses) have allowed for the ecological
success of reef-building corals. Dinoflagellate algae live within the coral
tissues and produce energy through photosynthesis. The nutrition produced by the
symbiont can be used by the coral to support growth, reproduction, and survival.
However, climate change-driven ocean warming damages this symbiotic relationship
and leads to coral bleaching and mortality. The survival of early life stages of
corals is critical for reef recovery, but young corals are particularly
vulnerable to stress. The fellow will investigate how ocean warming impacts the
symbiotic relationship in young corals and resulting capacity to survive and
recruit to reefs. Through experiments conducted in Hawaiʻi, USA and Moʻorea,
French Polynesia, the fellow will characterize the development of the coral-
algal symbiosis and investigate the effects of thermal stress on nutritional
exchange in early life history. Through this research, the fellow will involve
local students in the research process and develop public education resources to
strengthen connections between scientific knowledge and reef conservation
efforts. Addressing these critical areas of research paired with building
connections between public education and scientific discovery will advance
knowledge of coral reef recruitment and capacity to conserve reefs under climate
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will characterize symbiotic
nutritional exchange in early life history stages of dominant reef-building
corals in Hawaiʻi and Moʻorea using multi-omic approaches. First, this research
will track temporal dynamics of ontogenetic nutritional exchange across life
history strategies by integrating responses across molecular (i.e., gene
expression), metabolomic (i.e., stable isotope metabolomics), microbial (i.e.,
16S and ITS2 amplicon sequencing), physiological (i.e., energy expenditure and
reserves), and organismal scales (i.e., survival and growth). Second, the fellow
will apply these integrated tools and approaches to investigate the impact of
thermal stress on symbiotic stability and coral holobiont fitness outcomes by
exposing key developmental stages to high temperature and tracking subsequent
shifts in symbiotic nutritional exchange. This examination of coral-algal
symbiotic exchange in early life history will advance understanding of reef
recruitment under ocean warming. While working in Hawaiʻi and Moʻorea, the
fellow will work with local communities to develop public education displays
(e.g., posters, research showcase events) and educational tools (e.g., resources
for curriculum development) aimed to strengthen connections between communities
and scientific research. The fellow will also mentor students to support the
advancement of the next generation of women in science. Together, this research
and resulting broader impacts will advance knowledge of the impact of climate
change on coral reefs and capacity to conserve reefs by building science-
education connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.