* 2205953
* Instability, Chaos, and Mixing in Stochastic Fluid Mechanics and Related Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Samuel Punshon-Smith, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2025
* USD 138,732.00

This project concerns the study of models related to the motion of a turbulent
fluid. One of the defining characteristics of a turbulent fluid is its chaotic,
seemingly unpredictable behavior. A widely recognized way to describe this
chaotic behavior is by showing extreme exponential sensitivity with respect to
initial conditions, commonly referred to as the "butterfly effect," whereby tiny
changes in the state of the fluid lead to very big changes after a short amount
of time. Despite its fundamental nature, there are very few mathematical tools
available for rigorously verifying exponential sensitivity in a given system,
particularly in turbulent systems. This project aims to develop mathematical
tools to prove this sensitivity for various models in fluid mechanics in the
presence of a small amount of noise. Such noise is commonly used to model the
effect of unpredictable environmental effects or small-scale fluctuations of
particles. The goal of this project is to gain new insights into the unstable
nature of fluid motion in the presence of such noise and how this instability
manifests as chaotic and turbulent motion observed in nature. The project will
provide opportunities to involve undergraduate and graduate students and the
results of the research will be widely disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
rigorous analysis of positive Lyapunov exponents and the numerous unstable
phenomena in deterministic fluid models is a daunting task and mostly appears to
be out of reach of current mathematical analysis. Recently there has been
significant progress in proving instability for stochastic systems related to
fluid mechanics, including Galerkin truncations of the 2d stochastic Navier-
Stokes equations and the Lagrangian flow associated with stochastic fluid
models. This project focuses on several primary related directions: i) a study
of instability and positivity of the Lyapunov exponent in Galerkin truncations
for the stochastic complex Ginzburg-Landau equations ii) a study of cascading
instabilities and bifurcations in the stationary measures for stochastically
shear mode forced 2d Galerkin Navier-Stokes iii) a study of the emergence of the
Batchelor scale in the advection diffusion equation with random mixing
velocities. Each of these investigations requires developing tools from smooth
ergodic theory of random dynamical systems to answer questions about
instability. Several involve challenging hypoellipticity questions that can be
studied using recently developed techniques from computational algebraic
geometry. For instance, both the projects i) and ii) involve studying very
challenging degeneracies in the hypoelliptic structure unique to the equations
and require novel ideas and techniques to overcome these challenges. Project
iii) on the other hand aims to give some insight into the limitations of small-
scale formation in advection diffusion by smooth ergodic fluid motion. Overall,
these projects aim to bring new perspectives and new techniques into the study
of fluid instability and mixing in the presence of
noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.