* 2205852
* Collaborative Research:  Topics in Abstract, Applied, and Computational Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Vignon Oussa, BRIDGEWATER STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 05/31/2025
* USD 150,000.00

The underlying theoretical mechanisms supporting the digital world that our
societies benefit from today result from sophisticated mathematics developed
over many centuries. Among the mathematical tools employed in modern signal
processing, Fourier analysis stands as one of the key players. In particular,
the methods developed in Fourier analysis are instrumental in decomposing
complex signals into their elementary building blocks. This project will push
the current understanding of several modern tools related to Fourier analysis in
applications such as data science, signal processing, and quantum information
theory beyond their current frontiers. Moreover, this project's educational
component will allow the investigators to continue training students in the
underlying mathematics fields it covers. The investigators will also integrate
the outcomes of this research program into graduate and advanced undergraduate
courses offered at their respective institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will solve some fundamental and unresolved problems in time-frequency
analysis, especially the Heil-Ramanathan-Topiwala (HRT) conjecture (which
asserts that every finite collection of time-frequency shifts of a square-
integrable function must be linearly independent) and several other related
unresolved problems. These problems arise in time-frequency analysis and are at
the intersection of many areas of mathematics, applied mathematics, and even
engineering. The investigators will attack these problems from a multi-field
approach, bringing to bear techniques from abstract, applied computational
harmonic analysis, ergodic theory, Lie group, Lie algebra, complex, functional,
and real analysis. This research will build on recent successes of applied and
pure harmonic analysis, which include the wavelet-based JPEG standard, advances
in phaseless reconstruction, and the fundamental role played by Gabor (or Weyl-
Heisenberg) systems in the detection of the gravitational waves. A standard
paradigm in many of these applications consists of decomposing arbitrary signals
into redundant elementary building blocks. While the redundancy of these systems
might seem counterintuitive for their use, it is nonetheless responsible for the
robustness of certain algorithms for data transmission using unreliable
channels. It will play a vital role in noise reduction algorithms. Wavelets and
Gabor systems are examples of redundant systems, and such systems can represent
many natural signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.