* 2205921
* OCE-PRF: Constraints on the role of sediment diagenesis in chemical mass balance and Eocene climate using high-resolution pore fluids from IODP Expedition 396
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Vincent Clementi, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 11/30/2024
* USD 374,395.00

OCE-PRF Constraints on the role of sediment diagenesis in chemical mass balance
and Eocene climate using high-resolution pore fluids from IODP Expedition
396&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silicates are important minerals in ocean sediments and
Earth’s crust. The chemical changes (or diagenesis) of silicates in marine
sediments may play a key role in regulating seawater chemistry at modern and
geological timescales. Yet, our understanding of how silicate diagenesis
influences specific elements, such as magnesium (Mg), strontium (Sr), lithium
(Li) and boron (B), in seawater is incomplete. These elements are important in
both the modern ocean and as proxies for understanding changes in the ocean over
geologic time. For example, Mg, Sr, Li, and B are used as paleoclimate proxies
for temperature (Mg/Ca), weathering (Sr/Ca, Li/Ca), and the carbonate system
(B/Ca). PI Clementi will pair chemical analysis of fluids squeezed from new
sediment cores from the North Atlantic Ocean with modeling techniques to
determine which diagenetic processes are occurring in marine sediments, how
these processes influence seawater chemistry, and whether silicate diagenesis
has influenced global climate processes over the last 65 million years. The
research will be conducted at Rutgers University and Princeton University.
Themes from this project (e.g., solute sources and sinks, climate change) will
be incorporated into public lectures that the PI will give at New Jersey
community colleges. The PI will also develop summer research projects as part of
mentoring programs for current Rutgers undergraduate students and students from
under-represented groups at colleges across the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our ability to reconstruct past climate processes
using a range of paleoceanographic proxies (e.g., Mg/Ca, Sr/Ca, Li/Ca, and B/Ca)
is reliant on a fundamental understanding of the sources and sinks of elements
in the ocean. Despite substantial exchange of these elements during various
diagenetic processes, however, constraints on chemical mass balance for Mg, Sr,
Li, and B remains incomplete. Further, silicate diagenesis in marine sediments
has been suggested to have influenced Paleogene climate, but data-based
constraints on these model hypotheses is limited. Using a new suite of high
resolution pore fluid samples from recently implemented IODP Expedition 396 to
the Mid-Norwegian Margin, combined with numerical modeling, the work proposed
here will: (1) identify the mode(s) of silicate diagenesis controlling pore
fluid chemistry; (2) use data- and model-based approaches to determine the
influence of silicate diagenesis processes (e.g., ash alteration, reverse
weathering, marine silicate weathering, and crustal alteration) on the
geochemical budgets of Mg, Sr, Li, and B; and (3) elucidate the extent to which
silicate diagenesis contributed to climate changes during the Paleogene
hothouse. Pore fluids will be analyzed for their isotopic (𝛅26Mg, 87Sr/86Sr,
𝛅7Li, 𝛅11B) composition using the Neptune MC-ICP-MS facilities at Rutgers
University and Princeton University. The sampling resolution and proposed
analytical plan will offer unprecedented constraints on the extent to which
silicate diagenesis in marine sediments regulates seawater chemistry and
facilitates environmental change. Importantly, the work will provide critical
insight for proxy-based and proxy enabled model-based reconstructions of warmer
climates in Earth’s history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.