* 2205654
* OCE-PRF Beyond the light: ecological and evolutionary insights into RuBisCO from the dark ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Alexander Jaffe, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 07/31/2024
* USD 303,609.00

Atmospheric accumulation of greenhouse gasses like carbon dioxide plays an
important role in climate change and has major implications for food security,
extreme weather, and changing coastlines. Many living organisms, including
microscopic cells like bacteria and archaea, impact the accumulation of
greenhouse gasses by both producing and consuming them in nature. For example,
in many microorganisms, a protein called RuBisCO removes carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere and converts it into a source of carbon or energy for growth. This
protein is thought to be highly abundant on Earth, including in deep ocean
ecosystems that cover much of the planetary surface. Thus, RuBisCO may represent
an important way ocean microbes could help mitigate climate change. To fully
quantify this potential, a better understanding of which organisms use RuBisCO
in the deep sea, how common they are, and where they are found is highly needed.
In this project, we will address these key gaps in scientific understanding by
identifying bacteria and archaea with RuBisCO in the deep sea and
comprehensively characterizing their diversity, ecology, and distribution. This
knowledge will also help to describe the roles that organisms with RuBisCO might
play in supplying necessary carbon to other members of this habitat. On land,
the RuBisCO protein is used by plants to grow and produce biomass. By providing
new RuBisCO sequences with potentially novel biochemical features, our research
could also aid ongoing efforts to engineer land plants to more efficiently
uptake carbon and ultimately increase crop yields. More broadly, this project
draws heavily on principles of programming and applies them to the field of
marine microbiology. These skills will be shared with the broader public through
an introductory computer science course for high school students from
underserved communities. Outreach for this project will also include mentorship
and advising of undergraduate students interested in microbiology and marine
science, with a focus on those from historically excluded
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the proposed project will build a
comprehensive picture of RuBisCO diversity in the deep sea and shed new light on
the ecology of organisms that use it to fix carbon dioxide. First, a large set
of publicly-available metagenomic data from global mesopelagic and bathypelagic
microbiomes will be assembled to examine the phylogenetic and enzymatic
diversity of RuBisCO-encoding organisms (REOs). Next, metagenomic predictions of
carbon fixation potential will be experimentally assessed by testing the ability
of REOs to actively incorporate isotopically labelled bicarbonate. Third, the
results of these incubations will be used to identify and characterize active
REOs and subsequently explore the paired catabolism(s) energetically supporting
autotrophy, where it is occurring. Finally, the combined findings will be used
to examine the evolutionary origins of RuBisCO and the processes shaping its
sequence and functional diversity across the tree of life. These analyses will
address important outstanding questions around the origin of carbon fixation and
the processes shaping its distribution in the domains Bacteria and
Archaea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.