* 2205007
* Collaborative Research: Multiscale Analysis and Simulation of Biofilm Mechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Ying Li, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 02/28/2023
* USD 65,389.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Once thought to live as solitary units, bacteria
are now known to communicate with each other and live in lively microbial
communities called biofilms. Biofilms can cause severe problems, including
medical infections, fouling, and clogging in industrial applications. In
contrast, biofilms play beneficial roles in wastewater treatment and microbial
fuel cells. Scientists have been able to characterize the chemical components of
biofilms but donâ€™t know yet how an active, self-renewable, and self-healing
material emerges from these components and their interactions. How can
scientists use their vast knowledge of man-made polymers to understand these
natural polymers? Are there new physical mechanisms to be discovered in the way
bacteria build their biofilm communities? To answer these questions, this
project aims to reveal the secrets of how biofilms derive mechanical properties
from their individual components by integrating state-of-the-art mechanical
measurement, single-cell imaging, and computer simulations. Through these
fundamental studies, scientists can design better strategies that either
eliminate harmful biofilms or use beneficial biofilms to create useful
structures. By integrating multiple disciplines, this project will train a
diverse group of students in the areas of biology, physics, materials science,
and engineering, and prepare them for the next-generation workforce. The
educational objectives of the project will be realized through curriculum
development, undergraduate research opportunities, and K-12 outreach programs,
with special efforts to involve underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Biofilms are surface-
attached communities of bacteria embedded in a matrix made of extracellular
polymeric substances (EPSs). The overarching goal of this project is to
integrate state-of-the-art mechanical measurement, single-cell imaging,
mutagenesis, computer simulations, and soft matter theory to address how, at
different time and length scales, bacterial cells build communities with
emerging mechanical properties. Specifically, the three research objectives are
to (i) establish EPS as associative polymers crosslinked by matrix proteins,
(ii) reveal the contribution of bacterial cells to biofilm mechanics, and (iii)
measure the development of biofilm mechanics and heterogeneity at the single-
cell level. These objectives are accomplished via experiments involving
rheological testing, high-resolution imaging, protein biochemistry, bacterial
genetics, and multiscale modeling. The broader impacts of this work are to help
produce a diverse STEM-capable workforce by incorporating central concepts
addressed in this project into education and outreach activities that expose and
engage students in biology, materials science, physics, and engineering. The
education and outreach activities center on the following three objectives: (i)
expanding the Pathways to Science program for local high school students, (ii)
incorporating research findings into the curriculum for both undergraduate and
graduate courses, and (iii) providing research experiences to underrepresented
minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.