* 2205631
* Collaborative Research: Charting the Supernova-Gas-Stars Connection via a Major New VLA Survey of the Local Group
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Laura Chomiuk, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2025
* USD 322,258.00

Stars form from interstellar gas. In present-day galaxies, most of that
interstellar gas is atomic gas, called HI gas. Despite decades of study, major
mysteries still surround the interaction of HI, supernova explosions, and
massive young stars. The investigators are conducting a major new survey using
the NSF's Very Large Array (VLA). They are using the VLA to better measure the
structure of HI and radio emission from the nearby galaxies. The investigators
will answer a series of key questions about galaxiesâ€™ stellar life cycles. The
investigators study how ``stellar nurseries'' of cold, opaque gas form. At the
end of the short lives of massive stars, supernova explosions shape the gas in
galaxies, and the investigators will measure the resulting the interstellar
turbulence seen in galaxies. The research program will have a broad societal
impact through planetariums shows, a citizen science project, and a suite of
hands-on tutorials aimed at students at the middle school, high school, and
college levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will address these questions
by supporting the observation, processing, and scientific analysis of the Local
Group L-Band Survey (LGLBS): a major new Karl G. Jansky Very Large Array (VLA)
survey of the Local Group of galaxies. This survey uses 1,800 hours of VLA time
to observe the six northern Local Group star-forming galaxies, including
Andromeda, with an unprecedented combination of spatial resolution, spectral
resolution, bandwidth, and sensitivity. LGLBS simultaneously covers the 21-cm
line, which traces HI, and the 1--2 GHz radio continuum emission, which traces
past SN explosions and warm gas around massive stars. These are the only
galaxies close enough that the VLA can resolve the interactions between the
interstellar medium (ISM), star formation, and stellar
feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.