* 2205278
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Extreme disturbances/perturbations to coastal deposition systems
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2021,05/31/2023
* Jeffrey Krause, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 05/31/2023
* USD 70,747.00

This project will take advantage of the passage of Hurricane Ida across the
northern Gulf of Mexico shelf in August, 2021 to study important aspects of the
cycling of silica in coastal sediments. In coastal systems, water column primary
productivity is dominated by diatoms, a group of phytoplankton which produce a
shell of amorphous biogenic silica. This biogenic silica can either be buried in
its original unaltered form or undergo chemical reactions that convert it to
aluminosilicate minerals (e.g. marine clays). This latter process is important
in global chemical budgets for many elements, including carbon. One of the
factors that influences whether silicon is buried as biogenic silica or
converted to aluminosilicates may be the amount of oxygen in the sediments.
Storms mix the ocean waters and can add oxygen to sediments in shallow water,
potentially changing the silica balance. The investigators collected sediment
samples in early August, 2021, two weeks before Hurricane Ida. Sampling through
the year after the storm will allow them to test whether storms affect silica
cycling. This project will support an early-career investigator and
undergraduate student researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical and subtropical
coastal deposition systems sequester 25-40% of the global silica sink, a
disproportionately large impact relative to their area. In the northern Gulf of
Mexico seasonal water column stratification may impact how sedimentary biogenic
silica is processed and preserved by limiting oxygen injections into the
benthos, seasonally driving biogenic silica burial efficiency. Hurricane Ida
moved through the Mississippi Delta and adjacent Louisiana shelf at the end of
August 2021. Thirteen days prior to Hurricane Idaâ€™s landfall in Port Fourchon,
LA, in August 2021, the team collected sediment cores at 3 sites in the topset
delta sediment between the Southwest Pass (major Mississippi River distributary)
and Cocodrie, LA; all sites experienced Category 4 hurricane conditions from Ida
with maximum sustained winds of 130 knots (67 m/s). Ida, a much stronger storm
than either Hurricanes Harvey or Nate in 2017, likely introduced oxygen into the
sediment of the proximal coastal zone, perhaps enough to turn most of the top
meter or so of the sediment column oxic. The investigators hypothesize that the
storm-induced change in redox and diagenetic conditions initially favored burial
of biogenic silica rather than an authigenic aluminosilicate. Using a multi-
proxy approach, this project will analyze how this major storm event altered
biogenic silica burial over the course of ten months.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.