* 2205903
* Targeted Infusion Project: Spelman Skills &amp; Habits for Aspiring Physicists &amp; Engineers (SHAPE) Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Retina Burton, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2025
* USD 399,843.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based, innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The Spelman Skills &amp; Habits for Aspiring Physicists &amp; Engineers
(SHAPE) project creates a summer bridge program providing exposure to tools, and
content that will help physics students succeed in their first academic year. A
combination of asynchronous and in-person activities in the summer are
supplemented by academic year meetings designed to maintain the summer cohort
and highlight career choices. Working with college-level career guidance and
community support efforts, the project will give students confidence to include
being a physicist or engineer to their identity and resist imposter syndrome.
Researchers will investigate the effects of these efforts on shifts in student
identity, attitude, and self-efficacy through survey and interview
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of the SHAPE Program are to: 1)
increase the number of African American females pursuing and obtaining a degree
in Physics and/or Engineering at Spelman College by addressing STEM/Math
readiness and inclusivity, 2) demonstrate careers in Physics and Engineering by
providing access to practicing physicists, engineers, and alumna, and 3)
cultivate counterspaces and a Community of Practice (CoP) to create positive
changes in student attitudes toward science and identities in physics, as
evidenced in surveys, like the Colorado Learning Attitudes about Science Survey
(C-LASS), and semi-structured interviews. Participants will be invited to
virtual and in-person activities designed by physics faculty members that will
focus on scientific thinking and physics course content. A mixed-methods
approach will provide survey, interview, assignment, and participation data to
better understand what aspects of the SHAPE project benefit participant
participants academically while affirming their role as a scientist. The results
of this project will also lead to ways that other institutions can foster
counterspaces for historically marginalized students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.