* 2205321
* Conference: Support for 2022 Spring Technical Meeting of the Eastern States Section of The Combustion Institute
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2022,08/31/2022
* Subith Vasu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 08/31/2022
* USD 19,971.00

The objective of this award is to provide support for the 2022 Spring Technical
Meeting of the Eastern States Section of the Combustion Institute will be hosted
by the University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL, commencing the evening of
Sunday, March 6, 2022, and concluding at noon on Wednesday, March 9, 2022. The
broader significance and importance of this meeting is providing a forum for
graduate students, postdoctoral students, faculty and other researchers to
network and share progress in this area of research. This conference is a
gathering of combustion researchers in academia, industry, and government from
the East Coast region of the United States. The conference's technical program
consists of a series of plenary lectures, contributed oral presentations, and
information social gatherings. Many of the papers will be presented by students
and the meeting is an opportunity for students to network with their peers and
faculty from other institutions. A goal of the meeting is to expose students to
the latest research and offer opportunity for career development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference brings together leading experts to give
plenary talks in several areas. Sessions will include the topic areas of
Computationally and Data Intensive Research, Detonations and Supersonic
Combustion, Diagnostics, Fire Research, Heterogeneous Combustion/Spray and
Droplets, IC Engines, Gas Turbines, and Rockets, Laminar Flames, Novel Energy
Conversion Techniques, Reaction Kinetics and Fuels, Soot and Nanomaterials,
Turbulent Flames. A particular focus of this conference is on graduate and
undergraduate students: providing an opportunity for these students to present
and get feedback on their research and enhancing their oral presentation and
technical writing skills. The support from NSF will be used to award travel
grants to non-local students and registration support for local students in an
effort to increase student participation at the meeting, particularly students
from underrepresented institutions that may not have the financial means to
fully support student travel to conferences. Hence the conference will support
the training of future workforce in combustion and related
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.