* 2205553
* Singular-Enthalpic Limits in Polymer Morphology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Keith Promislow, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 08/31/2025
* USD 290,000.00

Polymers are among the most mutable and dynamic structures in nature and
science. Their uses range from the strongest components on airplanes to the
smallest sensors and proteins in living materials. When polymers are suspended
in solvent with ionic materials such as salt, as is typical in biological
applications, the resulting interactions are among the most complex in all of
nature. This investigation will derive and analyze models for the entropic and
enthalpic interaction of diblock polymers in suspensions as a prototype of
lipids in biology. It aims to identify the role of polymer substructure on the
self-adhesion tendencies of charged polymers that lead to self-assembly of
complex biological organelles, such as the thylakoid membranes that drive
photosynthesis in plants and the Golgi apparatus that is vital to protein
manufacture and transport in humans. The project is intended to illuminate the
role of hydrophobic-hydrophilic phase separation on the detailed structure of
lipid bilayers and its impact on membrane permeability. Most significantly, new
methods will be investigated for the casting of lamellar membranes destined for
water purification applications that combine microfluidic flow with the systems’
natural phase separation tendencies. The project includes training for
undergraduate and graduate students through involvement in the
research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Functional polymers contain charged or
polarizable groups that induce strong interactions with solvent and with other
polymers. System behaviors become increasingly complex when several types of
polymers or multiple solvents are combined. This project addresses a broad
scaling limit that renders fundamental systems amenable to analysis. This arises
from free energy landscapes of polymer systems that combine entropy, enthalpy,
and pressure. Pressure is large and enforced through incompressibility. Enthalpy
is smooth, entropy is singular in key regions. The singular enthalpy limit is an
approach that resolves the connection problem for optimal packings of diblock
polymers by patching linear enthalpic flows to the stable and unstable manifolds
of fixed points from a vicinity of the singular entropy domain to find points of
intersection. Robust families of connection solutions lead to novel interface
flows in the sharp-interface limits, including adhesion effects. Establishing
linear convexity will allow for rigorous sharp-interface reduction.
Incorporation of flux leads to weakly heteroclinic connections that parameterize
the response of bilayers to pressure gradients, leading to determination and
control of membrane permeability. The focus on self-assembly of charged polymers
and the stacking behavior of the associated bilayer vesicles have broad
application to photosynthesis, through thylakoid membranes, and the behavior of
organelles such as the Golgi apparatus. The formation of lamellar membranes at
interfaces between immiscible fluids is relevant to membranes for water
purification systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.