* 2205876
* Conference: Workshop: Microbial Diversity Molecules to Modeling Across Biological Scales; Summer in WoodsHole
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Linda Hyman, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2025
* USD 331,166.00

The impact of the microbial world on the planet has never been clearer. The
COVID-19 pandemic caused by the Sars-CoV-2 virus, and microbial responses to
ecosystem disturbance are examples of the significant impact that microbial
diversity is having on science and society. With this in mind, never has the
Microbial Diversity (MD) course at the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL),
established fifty years ago, been more relevant and of greater value. The course
provides a unique, immersive experience for twenty students, including advanced
graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and junior faculty. Initially
established to explore the microbial world through cultivation, as the field has
expanded, so have the techniques incorporated into the curriculum. Today, a
combination of training opportunities across disciplines is key to a successful
research career in microbiology, thus, the experimental focus goes beyond just
growing cells in the lab to include cutting-edge microscopy, genomics,
population genetics, and biochemistry. This grant will support the course's new
focus on genetic and cellular mechanisms of diversity as drivers of microbial
ecology and evolution. The intellecual goal will be through testing compelling
research questions at the scale of single cells, populations, or ecosystems that
will address global challenges. The course has a track record in broadening
partipation, is strongly committed to expanding opportunities for groups under-
represented in the sciences, and engages a diverse and inclusive community of
faculty and students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Microbial Diversity (MD)
research-training program at the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) offers Early
Career Researchers (ECRs) advanced training through an intensive 6-week,
experience that has served a unique role in training diverse scientists in
environmental microbiology for over 50 years. The overall objective is to train
ECRs in modern experimental approaches in MD, to empower them to ask and test
compelling microbiological research questions at the scale of single microbial
cells, populations, or ecosystems. In recent years, the advancement of culture-
independent (e.g., metagenomics) studies has ushered in a new era of data-driven
research, highlighting unique new challenges for training in MD. The course
integrates physiology, molecular cell biology, and evolutionary ecology at the
microbial scale to understand and predict the role of microbial communities in
ecosystem function. In the next three year funding period, using the wealth of
prior course-collected metagenomic data, the scope of research will be expanded
to highlight evolutionary and ecological processes that create and maintain
microbial diversity at various biological scales. Focused training includes: (i)
genome-enabled laboratory cultivation and pure culture isolation, emphasizing
the functional analyses of understudied bacteria, archaea, microbial eukaryotes,
and viruses (ii); in situ physiological and imaging approaches to quantify
spatial and temporal microbial dynamics in local habitats; and (iii) single-cell
and population-based approaches to quantify genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity
and evolutionary mechanisms creating and maintaining diversity in microbial
populations. The newly updated curriculum includes theoretical and practical
training in microbiology, cell biology, and microbial ecology and research in
genetic and environmental mechanisms that generate microbial diversity. To
extend the experience of collaboration and research training of the MD course,
trainees participate in: i) a Regional Outreach and Communication in STEM
program, designed to support teams of student alumni at their home institutions,
to increase science literacy and connections to the local community; ii) the MD
Ambassadors group, recruiting a diversity of students for the course; and iii)
hosting an Art-Science Exhibition, to inform and inspire local artists and
public in the visual aesthetics of the microbial
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.