* 2205753
* First Conjugate-Station Studies and Continued Satellite-Conjunction Studies of LF/MF/HF Auroral Radio Emissions at South Pole
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* James LaBelle, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 07/31/2025
* USD 231,383.00

The near-Earth environment (Geospace) is mostly organized by the Earth's
magnetic field, which interacts with the solar wind (charged particles, plasma,
flowing with a great speed from the Sun) and interplanetary magnetic field
(extended Sun's magnetic field). Geospace is populated by plasma that mostly
originates from the solar wind. Interaction of these two major players -
geomagnetic field and solar wind plasma produces many electromagnetic phenomena
such as beautiful ionospheric aurorae (Northern and Southern lights), natural
electromagnetic radiation, field-aligned and ionospheric currents, that
prominently appear and are observed in the polar areas where they are most
intense. Natural radio emissions are important in a broad range of space plasma
physics because they provide a means of remotely sensing plasma conditions and
processes, and in some cases, they control energy flows or determine boundaries
and energy exchange in space plasmas. Auroral radio emissions arise from the
same processes that produce emissions in magnetospheric, planetary, and
astrophysical environments, and therefore comprise a laboratory for studying
those processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will study the Auroral
Kilometric Radiation (AKR) observed by distant satellites and ground-level AKR-
like signals, as well as the relationship between escaping and leaked AKR, as
well as the other types of auroral radio emissions, via simultaneous high-
resolution wave measurements at South Pole and from satellites carrying high-
resolution wave receivers in the appropriate frequency range. One of the main
science objectives is to confirm a direct connection or lack thereof between
escaping AKR observed by satellites and leaked AKR observed at South Pole. Such
a connection would imply a new radiative mechanism of the cyclotron maser
mechanism, which plays a major role in many space-plasma environments and would
open new methods of remotely sensing the auroral acceleration region from ground
level. These investigations require Antarctic observations, most obviously for
the conjugate studies but also for study of leaked AKR which cannot be observed
at northern hemisphere locations due to radio frequency interference. This
project will incorporate its research and engineering aspects into introductory
courses to large numbers of pre-engineering and physics
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.