* 2205567
* PurSUiT: Systematics and species delimitation of the clownfish-hosting sea anemones.
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Benjamin Titus, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 02/29/2024
* USD 721,841.00

Tropical sea anemones are important members of coral reef communities and form
iconic symbiotic relationships with clownfishes and other invertebrates.
However, no major efforts have been made to understand tropical sea anemone
diversity since the advent of modern DNA sequencing. Compounding a lack of
research, sea anemones have few physical characteristics that are useful for
discerning between species and classic DNA sequencing approaches have been
ineffective for discovering new taxa. Thus, it is likely that tropical sea
anemone diversity is vastly underdescribed, and new genomic approaches are
needed to simultaneously discover species, place them into broader evolutionary
context, and determine what physical sea anemone characteristics are informative
at every taxonomic level. This study will explore the evolutionary processes
that have given rise to tropical sea anemone diversity by focusing on the
clownfish-hosting sea anemones. The clownfish-sea anemone symbiosis has been a
model for exploring fundamental biological processes, but prior research has
focused almost exclusively on clownfish. The presence of undescribed sea anemone
hosts will re-write our understanding of the clownfish-sea anemone symbiosis,
shed light on the origin of tropical anemone diversity, and transform the
interpretation of dozens of studies across scientific disciplines. This research
will result in modern natural history collection resources for tropical sea
anemone diversity. Outreach and educational opportunities for undergraduate
students and the general public will take place at the American Museum of
Natural History. Citizen science initiatives will result in the formation of the
first long-term data platform to track the distribution and abundance of the
clownfish sea anemones. Updated sea anemone species descriptions will be
valuable for establishing scientifically-based conservation initiatives in the
ornamental aquarium trade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will conduct major
field research collecting expeditions to Madagascar, Western Australia, Papua
New Guinea, and the Marshall Islands. All individual sea anemones sampled in
this study will be photographed underwater. Resulting images and ecological
metadata will be uploaded to public digital biodiversity databases. New sea
anemone species will be discovered using restriction-site associated DNA
sequencing and newly developed bait-capture probes for Class Anthozoa targeting
Ultra Conserved Element loci. Resulting genomic data will be used for testing
three key questions regarding tropical sea anemone diversity and the clownfish-
sea anemone symbiosis: 1) What is the true species-level diversity of the
clownfish-hosting sea anemones? 2) Do host sea anemones share a common
biogeographic origin with clownfishes? 3) Are the tropics a center or origin, or
accumulation, of sea anemone biodiversity? These data, which will be shared in
public repositories, will provide the first comparative genomic systematic study
on tropical sea anemone diversity, the clownfish-hosting sea anemones, and the
anemone superfamily Actinioidea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.