* 2205743
* Collaborative Research: AF: Small: Phase Transitions in Sampling Related Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Eric Vigoda, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2024
* USD 208,276.00

Graphical models are a widely used tool to succinctly represent high-dimensional
data and to understand the fundamental building blocks and interactions of
physical and biological systems. These models have appeared in a variety of
scientific fields. In physics they are used to understand the thermodynamic
properties of ferromagnetic materials and are integral in the study of phase
transitions in physical systems. In biology these models are a fundamental tool
for inferring evolutionary history using genetic data in phylogenetic models.
Graphical models are ubiquitous in machine learning for computational tasks such
as Bayesian inference. This project addresses fundamental computational tasks
that are crucial for studying, constructing, and utilizing graphical models. The
project will involve undergraduate students in research involving graphical
models in social science settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two core tasks
for studying graphical models: learning and sampling. The learning problem is
focused on inferring the inner structure of the underlying graphical model from
the macroscopic behavior of the system. In contrast, the goal of the associated
sampling problem is to efficiently simulate the thermodynamic behavior of a
learned or inferred graphical model. This project will develop new algorithms,
and more generally understand the computational complexity of sampling and
learning as well as several related problems. A common theme in this project is
connecting the computational complexity of these sampling- and inference-related
problems with statistical-physics phase transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.