* 2205084
* SCH: Improving Patient Health and Equity through the Digital Transformation of Diabetes Care Delivery
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Emily Fox, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

This Smart and Connected Health (SCH) award will contribute to the advancement
of the national health and welfare by developing the scientific foundation of
using digital technology to improve the quality and reduce the cost of diabetes
management. Increased adoption of remote activity trackers, continuous glucose
monitors, other types of sensors, and telehealth (precipitated by the COVID-19
pandemic) have transformed diabetes care. The typical standard of care for
diabetes revolves around a few “finger poke” glucose measurements per day and a
few in-clinic visits with the care team per year, with many missed opportunities
to detect and remedy deteriorating glucose management. The digitization of
diabetes care holds the potential for as-needed measurement, monitoring, and
personalized patient care. In a best case scenario, these technological advances
promise to narrow gaps in health care access, by providing limited care
resources to those most in need. Achieving this outcome requires novel
scientific progress to leverage sensor data to better understand patients; to
develop algorithmic techniques to allocate care resources efficiently to
patients; and to help both providers and patients develop and implement care
decisions together. This award specifically develops algorithms, platforms, and
decision support tools to address these challenges in the context of care of
type 1 diabetes in pediatric populations, by connecting engineers, computer
scientists, and statisticians with clinicians in an interdisciplinary effort. A
key component of the project involves deployment at two sites (Lucile Packard
Children’s Hospital at Stanford, and Children’s Mercy Hospital at Kansas City)
to capture the real-world constraints the theory must tackle and to validate the
real-world efficacy of the scientific innovations
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives are to: (1) develop
methods to identify patient types from sensor data, informing the health care
team's understanding of differentiated needs and behaviors across the patient
population; (2) develop methods to allocate scarce provider resources to those
patients most in need of care; and (3) design interpretable treatment planning
recommendations to facilitate interactions between providers and patients,
including both provider-facing and patient-facing “dashboards” that visualize
progress and disease management, and guide discussion of interventions. These
thrusts both leverage and advance the state of the art in time-series modeling
and machine learning; behavioral psychology; and data-driven operations
research. Data and real-world understanding from the clinical context serve to
define the problems the theory must tackle and as a benchmark to validate the
models and methods developed. The models developed will be deployed and
evaluated in clinics caring for pediatric patients with type 1
diabetes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.