* 2205519
* Characterizing Low-Mass Galaxies with Spectroscopy Through Cosmic Time
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Michael Maseda, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2025
* USD 476,066.00

While dwarf galaxies are the least massive of all galaxies, they are also by far
the most common type in the current epoch. There is compelling evidence that
massive galaxies, including the Milky Way, were built up at least in part
through the cannibalization of large numbers of such low mass galaxies in the
early universe. Therefore, to reconstruct how a galaxy like our own Milky Way
grew, we must characterize dwarf galaxies in the early universe. These young
versions of today's dwarf galaxy population are also prime candidates for the
sources largely responsible for ionizing the intergalactic hydrogen left over
from the Big Bang, ending the universe's so-called "Dark Ages." This award will
support spectroscopy from ground-based telescopes and the James Webb Space
Telescope. The team of researchers will use these data to improve our
understanding of galaxy formation. This award will support the PhD work of a
graduate student as well as a seminar series/mentoring program for astronomy
undergraduates at the PI’s home institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together,
Multi-Unit Spectroscopic Explorer and Near Infrared Spectrometer will allow the
detection and spectroscopic characterization of the faintest and youngest
galaxies ever discovered at redshifts of 4-7. In particular, the team will
measure chemical abundances for galaxies over a large range in mass and
redshift, and study the tight correlation between a galaxy’s stellar mass and
its degree of chemical enrichment, which is not well-constrained either at low
masses or high redshifts. This will help inform future large-scale studies of
the local universe with the 4MOST Hemisphere Survey (4HS). The team will also
study the impact of short, violent bursts of star formation on the stellar mass
buildup in dwarf galaxies. Finally, the James Webb Space Telescope will be used
to determine the ionizing photon output from extremely young dwarf galaxies that
are expected to exist just beyond the limits of traditional observational
techniques. This will have implications for the contribution of low-mass
galaxies to the last major phase change in the universe: cosmic
Reionization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.