* 2205637
* OCE-PRF: Do wildfires drive phytoplankton blooms in the California Current System?
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Jordyn Moscoso, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 07/31/2024
* USD 262,917.00

The frequency and spatial extent of wildfires along the US West Coast has
substantially increased over the last fifty years. As a consequence of fire,
large plumes of ash, black carbon, and other aerosols are injected into the
atmosphere and transported away from burn areas where they often land on the
surface of the ocean. Despite the geographical proximity to large fires, there
is little understanding of how the deposition of these byproducts of biomass
burning affects the nearby marine ecosystem in the California Current System
(CCS). This project would investigate, using satellite, in-situ and historical
data, and 2-D idealized and 3-D realistic modeling. If wildfires indeed induce
blooms in the CCS, there are likely impacts on subsurface hypoxia and
acidification, which can feed back into higher trophic levels. The efforts
proposed in this project will facilitate improved understanding of the feedbacks
between the terrestrial-ocean system, which can further be used to inform IPCC
assessments of the impacts of future climate forcing on the CCS and other
coastal systems with large wildfires. This work may additionally be important
for the long-term management of marine protected areas. The PI is a first-
generation college student and a woman of color, who will serve as a visible
role model within the ocean sciences community, mentor undergraduate students
and graduate researchers at UCSC, engage in guest lecturing and teaching, to
help promote the retention of students from historically marginalized groups,
and participate in local outreach events to engage with the community and
aspiring young scientists at UCSC's Seymour Marine Discovery
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major hypothesis in this project is that the
first order effects from ash deposition drive strong phytoplankton blooms as a
consequence of nutrient and iron fertilization. Goals are to: (1) identify the
presence of wildfire induced blooms in the CCS, (2) parameterize wildfire
forcing through ash deposition in models, and (3) provide a mechanistic
understanding of ecosystem responses. With mentor Dr. Christopher Edwards at the
University of California â€“ Santa Cruz, the project would use a combination of
atmospheric and oceanic observational data sets to first identify the observed
impact of biomass burning on the marine ecosystem. To further the results from
the observational work, idealized 2D modeling will be used to create a new
wildfire parameterization to understand ecosystem responses. Finally, high
resolution 3D models will be used to investigate the 2017/2018 wildfire season
in a realistic framework. Overall, the project will provide quantitative
assessments and simple theories explaining the ecosystem responses to biomass
burning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.