* 2205698
* Uncovering the Hidden Ice Reservoir During Planet Formation
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Lauren Cleeves, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2025
* USD 406,504.00

Water ice plays a key role in the formation of planetary disks and planets.
Protoplanetary disk ices facilitate the growth of dust grains and planetesimals.
Understanding the physical and chemical processes that drive ice chemistry is
essential, because it is believed that icy planetesimals delivered bio-critical
volatiles to the early Earth. Upcoming ground- and space-based observatories
will probe ice in planetary disks, but interpreting ice observations will be
challenging. This research team will model ice reservoirso, which will shed
light on the detectability of ice features in disks under various conditions.
These models will be invaluable for interpreting upcoming observations of disks'
chemical abundances, physical state, evolutionary trajectory, and propensity for
habitable planet formation. The team will conduct outreach to three different
targeted age groups: middle schoolers, undergraduates, and the general public.
They will collaborate on developing new programs with the Universty of
Virginia's “Girls Exploring the Universe” summer program for middle school girls
where the principal investigator serves as co-director. The team will also
support the training of undergraduates. In partnership with local outreach
organizations including Charlottesville's Astronomy on Tap, they will also
engage the public on the topic of habitable planet formation and the important
role played by ices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will create detailed time-
dependent gas-grain chemical models to simulate the distribution and evolution
of ices in planetary disks, followed by radiative transfer models to simulate
observations of ice spectral signatures. The proposed work will provide the
necessary theoretical underpinning to understand disk ice by: 1) Incorporating
grain growth and material transport processes into the chemical evolution
modeling; 2) Adding simulations of ice feature polarization to the radiative
transfer modeling; 3) Conducting a sensitivity analysis of ices in various
regions of the disk to better interpret which ice reservoirs are observable; 4)
Exploring a parameter space of stellar, dust, and disk properties (including
radial substructure) to predict their effects on disk ices; and 5) Studying the
effect of a disk’s external environment (UV and cosmic ray fields) on observable
ices. Thus, this investigation will explore the diversity of observable (and
unobservable) disk icy reservoirs and their connection to the diversity of
planet formation processes and outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.