* 2205474
* An Undergraduate Group Research Project: Large Scale Mapping of the Structure and Kinematics of Filaments and Cores in Nearby Molecular Clouds
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Yancy Shirley, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2025
* USD 410,294.00

Astronomers have known since the 1960s that molecular clouds are the star
forming "engines" of galaxies, but because of their complexity, we still lack a
complete understanding of how they evolve to eventually form small, dense clumps
and then stars. This is especially true for larger molecular structures called
"filaments", which are dominated by dense but starless gas clumps. The PI will
lead a team of undergraduate researchers to conduct the first large-scale
mapping study of the internal structure, physical conditions, and gas motions
for two nearby molecular clouds utilizing a variety of molecular line
transitions to trace gas at intermediate to high densities with sufficient
angular resolution to probe filaments and the embedded dense cores where stars
should eventually form. This award will result in a valuable legacy dataset for
the astronomical community and simultaneously provide a unique group-learning
research experience for a large and diverse group of undergraduates, as well as
engaging the public through lectures and star parties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
team will use the Arizona Radio Observatory 12m telescope (ARO 12m) to map the
Taurus and Aquila Rift molecular clouds from multi-parsec filamentary scales
down to sub-0.1 parsec core scales. Since there is no single tracer that can
simultaneously probe these various scales and physical conditions, observations
of a complementary set of line transitions capable of probing intermediate to
high gas densities (HCN, H13CN, CS, SO, NH2D, c-C3H2 and CH3OH) will be used to
constrain the co-evolution of molecular filaments and cores. A key intellectual
merit of this award is in providing a legacy dataset to the community for
studies of intermediate and high-density molecular gas in two large, nearby
molecular clouds that will address fundamental questions about how mass flows
within molecular clouds and help constrain the most important physical processes
controlling them. The molecular gas properties revealed by these resolved
observations will impact our understanding of unresolved extragalactic studies
of star formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.