* 2205604
* OCE-PFR Understanding macroalgal community structure: a trait-based and phylogenetic approach
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Martine Wagstaff, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 11/30/2024
* USD 288,017.00

Macroalgae forests, such as the giant kelp beds off the Pacific coast of North
America, are highly productive ecosystems yet we do not know much about how
component algae species perform ecologically, which is necessary to predict how
species, or groups of species, might respond to climate change. This is
important to understand because climate change has already caused an increase in
environmental stressors such as more intense storms, larger waves, increased
run-off from terrestrial sources, and changes in temperature, disturbance,
nutrient availability, and light levels in coastal habitats in the Santa Barbara
Channel and around the world. This study will measure functional traits of algae
species, traits that affect an organism’s performance, which can then enable
predictions about how species distributions might vary with climate change. For
example, suppose toughness is identified as an important functional trait, as
wave height and wave force increase with more frequent and powerful winter
storms, it could be predicted that algae assemblages might shift from weakly to
firmly attached species. As well as being highly productive, macroalgae at
temperate latitudes form the basis of food webs and provide habitat for rich
ecological communities. It is important that we understand community structure
in these key marine ecosystems which provide goods and services for many at the
regional and global level.&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage undergraduates who
will help with field and lab work, conduct honors theses, and receive scientific
diver training. Aspects of this project will also inform the LTER Schoolyard
program which educates K-12 students and teachers via school visits, field
trips, and an on-campus residential program. Additionally, there will be
opportunities to share the results of the project via public lecture series held
at the Santa Barbara Natural History Museum and the Channel Islands National
Park. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kelp forests are key marine ecosystems yet the
community structure of macroalgae in these assemblages is little understood. By
measuring an extensive suite of functional traits of key algae species that span
important ecological performance axes—resource acquisition, grazer resistance,
and tolerance to disturbance—macroalgae will be assigned to functional groups.
Hypotheses can then be tested about how functional groups and community
structure vary along an environmental gradient, which, in turn, can then enable
predictions to be made about how community structure might vary with climate
change induced environmental stressors. Using a molecular phylogeny, it will
also be investigated if there is an evolutionary component to the functional
groupings and if closely related species have similar functional traits. Results
will enable general statements to be made about community structure, general
statements being more&lt;br/&gt;useful than species specific ones. The results
will facilitate our understanding of how key ecosystems will respond to climate
change and will also bring our understanding of these important primary
producers in-line with that of their terrestrial angiosperm counterparts and
more recently, marine phytoplankton, where measurements of meaningful traits
have enabled predictions to be made about community-level responses to
environmental stressors. Indeed, a more holistic understanding of the forces
driving these diverse and critical ecosystems is necessary if we are to predict
change due to human impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.