* 2205239
* DISES: Decentralized management of integrated water resources: Understanding cross-scale decision feedbacks to support coordinated sustainability
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Tyler Scott, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robyn Smyth
* 03/31/2027
* USD 1,600,000.00

In many water-scarce regions of the U.S., surface and groundwater resources are
managed by a combination of institutions at the federal, state, and local scale.
This decentralized structure allows flexible decisions regarding water storage
and allocation, but also creates challenges for long-term coordination. Planners
and water users must anticipate the actions of others in the system, which
intensifies the challenge of managing for variability in future hydrology. Water
availability, infrastructure management, regulation, and patterns of water
consumption all depend on each other in complex ways. These cross-scale
interactions must be captured in engineering models of water resources planning
to better understand the impacts of decentralized management and plan
accordingly. This project focuses on California’s Central Valley, where surface
and groundwater are managed through an evolving network of infrastructure and
regulation to support agriculture, cities, and the environment. The team aims to
provide findings to advance the critical challenge of water sustainability,
while also training students in interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance quantitative
understanding of the feedbacks governing decentralized water resources systems,
and the system-level dynamics that result. This will be achieved through data-
driven approaches to describe interactions among infrastructure operators,
regulators, and local/regional water districts, enabling a broad evaluation of
emergent behavior and opportunities for coordination. Specifically, this work
will make three primary scientific contributions addressing knowledge gaps in
socio-environmental systems related to scale, heterogeneity, and uncertainty.
First, it will advance data-driven approaches to characterize the structure of
decision-making relationships in a multi-scale system of heterogeneous water
users and institutions. Second, it will develop a data-driven framework to
quantify the drivers and consequences of dynamic water management decisions to
support prediction of bi-directional feedbacks. Third, it will quantify and
attribute the uncertainty in simulated system-level outcomes to uncertainty in
exogenous hydroclimate, social dynamics, and their interactions. This work will
culminate in the production of open datasets and models to support transfer to
water systems facing similar challenges in prediction and management arising
from the decentralized context, in which multi-level institutional decisions
regarding water allocation and regulation co-evolve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.