* 2205265
* SCH: A physics-informed machine learning approach to dynamic blood flow analysis from static subtraction computed tomographic angiography imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Amirhossein Arzani, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,100,003.00

Recent investigations have shown that interactions of blood flow with blood
vessel walls plays an important role in the progression of cardiovascular
diseases. Accurately quantifying blood flow or hemodynamic interactions could
lead to methods for patient-specific therapies that result in better treatments
and reduced mortality. In this project, the researchers will develop techniques
to non-invasively inferring the complex, dynamic hemodynamic behavior using a
commonly used medical imaging modality that is typically used to produce static
anatomical images for analyzing blood vessel structure. In this project, the
researchers propose to develop a novel physics-informed model of the blood flow
using a deep-learning based processing method. This will allow the researchers
infer dynamic time-resolved three-dimensional blood velocity and relative
pressure field. The results will be used to accurately compute relevant
hemodynamic factors. This project will train a cohort of graduate students in
the latest data-driven deep learning techniques in engineering. It will engage
undergraduate students in research through well-established programs at UW
Milwaukee and Northern Arizona University. Outreach to high school students,
particularly those belonging to under-represented communities will be
accomplished through summer programs at UW Milwaukee.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is accurate image-based hemodynamic analysis using commonly
available images. Contrast concentration, three-dimensional blood velocity, and
relative pressure will be modeled as deep neural nets. Training the neural nets
will involve a loss function that matches actual data from time-stamped sCTA
sinograms with predicted sinograms generated using line integrals computed from
forward evaluation of the neural net used to model the contrast concentration.
Additionally, blood flow and contrast advection-diffusion physics will be used
as constraints in the solution process. System noise will be handled through a
Bayesian formulation of the deep learning algorithm. The neural net formulation
will allow high resolution sampling of the blood velocity and relative pressure
fields and accurate computation of velocity-derive hemodynamic parameters using
automatic differentiation. The methods will be validated using numerical and in
vitro flow experiments using particle image velocimetry. By enabling the
estimation of hemodynamic data from what, until now, has been considered to be
static data, the proposed research maximizes inference that can be derived from
sCTA imaging data without the need for additional computed tomography hardware
or new scan protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.