* 2205950
* ACE IMPLEMENTATION PROJECT – Toward Equity in STEM (ProjecTEST): Linking Faculty and Student Perceptions of Success Through Novel, Continuous, Evidence-based Assessment
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Glake Hill, Jackson State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,454,284.00

Implementation Projects in the Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) provide support to design, implement, study, and
assess comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the numbers of students
and the quality of their preparation by strengthening science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) education and research. This implementation
project at Jackson State University (JSU) provides an innovative approach to
broaden outcomes for STEM students. The project will explore the links between
STEM faculty and student perceptions of talent and potential for STEM success
through innovative assessment of practices and outcomes. The project focuses on
linking evidence-based teaching and learning strategies with student outcomes
and experiences to help assess and refine course activities in the Department of
Chemistry, Physics, and Atmospheric Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;JSU’s
ProjecTEST is designed to improve faculty implementation of pedagogy and
mentoring strategies by establishing professional development opportunities and
providing access to new assessment tools that extend faculty knowledge of race,
culture, social, and historical factors that impact student interest and
engagement in STEM fields. Faculty-student teams work together on assessment
metrics to examine student experiences with course activities. The goal of the
project is to improve the use of novel, fine-grained assessment tools, increase
STEM learning outcomes, self-efficacy, and sense of belonging among STEM
students, offer research opportunities that support the development of STEM
workforce skills, and disseminate models of faculty and student engagement to a
broader audience. An exploratory research project called Cave Scientia will
examine the potential links between standardized assessments in admissions and
placement and how those assessments impact faculty perceptions of their own
standing and effectiveness in STEM and how they impact student perceptions of
their potential to contribute and advance within a STEM discipline. This project
promises to have wide-reaching broader impacts at the institution and larger
HBCU community. The project is guided and informed by an on-going evaluation, as
well as by internal and external advisory committees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.