* 2205797
* I-Corps:  Computational Synthesis of 3D Printed Composite Lattice Structures
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Ali Tamijani, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an integrated software for geometrical modeling, design
optimization, simulation, and the generation of 3D printing input for composite
lattice structures. Using the proposed software technology stronger parts will
be designed, the analysis of composite additively manufactured (AM) parts will
be automated, and the fabrication of various designs will be more efficient. The
preliminary results of the proposed technology suggest that it has the potential
to design advanced composite structural concepts that are an order of magnitude
stiffer than the state-of-the-art laminate composites with the same weight. The
integrated software will prompt the ubiquitous adoption of the 3D printing of
fiber reinforced polymers in various sectors, such as the medical, aerospace,
automotive, and energy sectors, which can benefit from the high-performance
composites. The optimized composite AM may be utilized for a variety of
applications, some of which are tooling, molding, primary and secondary load-
bearing structures, and high-rate, large-volume manufacturing. By addressing the
critical design and analysis issues, the integrated software technology will
contribute to the growth of composite AM from the current level of 1.5 billion
USD to the predicted 9 billion USD in 2028.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of multiscale design optimization by
utilizing the effective properties of lattices obtained by numerical
homogenization. Due to the use of spatial harmonics, the construction,
homogenization-based optimization, and projection of various types of lattices
with different degrees of anisotropy are possible. The published experimentally
validated results of proposed framework demonstrated that the optimized
additively manufactured (AM) composite designs are 100% stiffer and 50% stronger
than current composite structures. This project includes the following new
features: 1) combined continuous fiber paths and ply layout design optimization
in 3D printed composite laminates; 2) constructing a coherent shape-preserving
orientation to establish an interconnected microstructure; and 3) incorporating
printed fiber and printing resolution constraints in the design process.
Composites lattice structures with arbitrary fiber patterns can be difficult to
model because the fiber angle varies from element to element. Thus, the proposed
automated modeling framework is developed to create a 3D printed fiber polymer
and interfaces with finite element analysis to perform and return the weight,
displacements, stresses, and local failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.