* 2205103
* Collaborative Research: SCH: Quantifying Cardiac Performance by Measuring Myofiber Strain with Routine MRI
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Daniel Ennis, Palo Alto Veterans Institute for Research
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 08/31/2026
* USD 453,666.00

The goal of this research is to develop a new method to quantify cardiac
performance in patients affected by cardiac diseases. Current strategies to
evaluate cardiac performance often rely on inadequate global measures, such as
ejection fraction, which are non-specific and often late outcomes. Cardiac
motion is driven by billions of heart cells acting together, whose contraction
and relaxation can be measured using myofiber strain. Myofiber strain is
therefore a direct measure of cardiac function and is an ideal candidate to
evaluate cardiac performance, improving diagnosis and therapy planning. However,
there are three main obstacles that hinder the deployment of myofiber strain in
a clinical setting: (i) There is no method to reliably compute myofiber strain
from images that are routinely acquired; (ii) There are no reliable error
estimates for the evaluated strains, preventing their use to distinguish between
health and disease; and (iii) There is no framework to compute myofiber strain
on demand without hardware and technical barriers. This project aims at
overcoming these obstacles by combining computational modeling and artificial
intelligence with readily available magnetic resonance imaging. The transition
to the clinic will be highly facilitated by deploying the proposed framework in
a completely online platform leveraging on-demand cloud computing. Investigators
around the globe will be able to test remotely the newly proposed technology
without the need for specific hardware or additional software. The
multidisciplinary research carried out in this project will train the next
generation of scientists, who will be capable of carrying out projects in smart
health and biomedical research at the forefront of medical imaging, artificial
intelligence, and computational modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
approach will estimate myofiber strain by minimizing the difference between
computed and measured surface cardiac motion. Measured surface motion is
extracted from cine Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), which is routinely
acquired in a clinical MRI setting. Computed left ventricular surface motion is
obtained by solving a computational kinematics model based on the biomechanics
of myofiber shortening and relaxation. Uncertainty in myofiber strain
predictions will be evaluated based on imaging data noise and model assumptions.
Fast and accurate high-fidelity models and Bayesian error estimators will
propagate experimental and model uncertainties to establish confidence in
myofiber strain estimates. As a results, the generated models will allow to
characterize strains’ uncertainty and variation in healthy and diseased
individuals. The proposed approach will be demonstrated and validated in a pilot
study to aid therapy planning in patients affected by aortic stenosis. This new
approach paves the way to improve diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy planning for
patients affected by a wide range of cardiomyopathies resulting in compromised
left ventricular function and therefore myofiber
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.