* 2205457
* Collaborative Research: Revealing the Interactions and Dynamics in Framework-Polymer Composite Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Klaus Schmidt-Rohr, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2025
* USD 123,555.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, Professor
Seth Cohen of the University of California, San Diego, and Professor Klaus
Schmidt-Rohr of Brandeis University are studying the intersection of polymer and
porous solid materials. Advanced materials are essential to nearly every aspect
of modern life, including transportation, infrastructure, information
technology, health, national defense, and many others. Combining two disparate
materials, such as relatively soft polymers (e.g., plastics) and hard solids
(e.g., ceramics, clays, etc.), can be advantageous for making new composites
combining the best properties of both materials. However, because of their
different chemical compositions, thoroughly combining such materials is often
difficult to achieve. In this effort, a series of highly advanced experimental
and simulation techniques are used to elucidate the interactions of polymers
with a class of solids known as metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). Insights into
the interface and interactions between polymers and MOFs will enable their more
effective combination for making hybrid materials with intriguing and
unprecedented properties. In addition to these studies, this program supports
undergraduate students from across the University of California system to travel
to Washington, DC, where they can participate in internships at the interface of
public policy and science through the Science Policy Internship Program
(SPIP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining
organic polymers and metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) has proven an important
area of research for the development of hybrid, composite materials that possess
favorable properties of both components. However, little is known about how
these two disparate materials interact at the molecular scale. This effort
explores the interactions between soft, organic polymers and hard, inorganic
MOFs using a combination of synthesis, spectroscopy, advanced imaging, and
simulations. State-of-the-art solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
techniques, coupled with scanning- and transmission-electron microscopy (SEM,
TEM) as well as advanced computational methods, are used to examine the
interactions of polymers with MOFs in three types of composites: mixed-matrix
membranes (MMMs), MOF brush polymers, and polymer-derived MOFs (a.k.a.
polyMOFs). Ultimately, the findings from these studies will be among the most
detailed investigations of MOF–polymer interfaces and will be essential to
guiding the development of these hybrid materials toward technological
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.