* 2205189
* Collaborative Research: GOing GREEN at High Resolution - Spatially Deconstructing Environmental Quenching over 9 Billion Years
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Gillian Wilson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 09/30/2025
* USD 420,240.00

Principal Investigators (PIs) Rudnick and Wilson are investigating how star
formation is suppressed (quenched) in galaxies residing in distant massive
clusters. The team will apply new analysis techniques to images from The Gemini
Observations of Galaxies in Rich Early ENvironments (GOGREEN) Survey. By
correcting for the blurring effect of the earth’s atmosphere the new images will
be sharp enough to see if galaxies quench from the inside-out, outside-in, or
everywhere simultaneously, and how this depends on the location of the galaxy
(near a cluster center or in the outskirts). PI Wilson will develop and host
astronomy workshops at the California School for the Deaf, Riverside,
emphasizing senses other than hearing e.g., “Smelling the Universe” and
“Touching the Universe.” PI Rudnick will continue his year-long high school
research program that includes a capstone mini-symposium at the University of
Kansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will use the Finite-Resolution
Deconvolution (Firedec) code to robustly increase the resolution of their sub-
arcsecond ground-based images by a factor of approximately 2.5 without requiring
any morphological priors. They will use the resulting high resolution multi-
color GOGREEN images to identify which regions of each galaxy have colors
consistent with quenching, thus determining the mode (inside-out, outside-in, or
everywhere simultaneously), and how this depends on environment and time since
entering a cluster. The team will also measure the stellar mass profiles of
galaxies identified as transitioning from star forming to passive to determine
how the distribution of stellar mass within galaxies, and hence their
morphology, changes as star formation quenches. All data products will be made
publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.