* 2205573
* Broadening Participation Research Project: How Social-Emotional Learning (SEL) State Policy Influences STEM Education: Examining Equity, Investigating Implementation
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Ashley Griffin, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 07/31/2025
* USD 349,707.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Broadening Participation Research (BPR) in STEM Education projects
supports the development, implementation, and study of new theory-driven models
and innovations related to the participation and success of underrepresented
groups in STEM undergraduate education. It is expected that the award will
further the faculty member's research capability, as well as improve the
recruitment, retention, and success of underrepresented groups in STEM education
and the workforce. This project at Bowie State University seeks to examine P-12
social-emotional learning (SEL) education policy and its potential impact on
equity in STEM Education. The researchers plan to conduct policy analyses and
qualitative interviews culminating in recommendations to inform state-level
policy focused on ensuring equity and excellence in STEM Education and SEL for
Black students. Moreover, the recommendations will offer ways to implement
policies that promote equity in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has one
overarching research question: To what extent do states implement education
policy that supports Black student social-emotional learning and drive district-
level implementation toward equitable STEM education? To address this question,
a qualitative document analysis study of state and district social-emotional
learning education and STEM policies, as well as a thematic analysis will be
conducted. This study has five objectives: (1) to conduct a state and district-
level policy analysis to assess equity and SEL (Transformative SEL (TSEL)); (2)
to examine how state SEL policy aligns with school district-level policy; (3) to
understand how state and district policy provides guidance on the implementation
of TSEL into the STEM curriculum; (4) to understand the factors that contribute
to or prohibit the integration of TSEL into STEM curriculum; and (5) to
contribute to the STEM and SEL policy knowledge base with concrete
recommendations geared toward ensuring Black students thrive in STEM and beyond.
This work has the potential to expand knowledge about equity in social-emotional
learning policy, provide an understanding of how social-emotional learning
policy intersects with state standards in STEM policy, and document policy links
(or missing links) between state and local education agencies that are essential
for shaping STEM education to ensure all students, and particularly Black
students, thrive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.