* 2205923
* Catalyst Project: Integrating Water-Energy-Food-Climate Nexus into Undergraduate Engineering and Science Education
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Pradeep Behera, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. The University of
the District of Columbia seeks to develop and implement a multi layered
innovative model to engage undergraduate students and train next generational
workforce in Civil Engineering and other STEM majors giving exposure to novel
courses, research, and outreach activities on the water, energy, food and
climate nexus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives and activities have been
designed to meet the goal of the project by 1) Integrating interdisciplinary
knowledge, hands-on exercises, and skills related to the water-energy-food-
climate nexus into Civil Engineering (CE) and other STEM programs; 2) Enriching
the undergraduate research experiences of CE and additional STEM disciplines
through creation of an interdisciplinary year-round research program related to
the water-energy-food-climate nexus; and 3) Increasing enrollment and retention
of students in CE and other disciplines by engaging high school and community
college students through engineering design. This project will create well
versed students with a wide variety of multidisciplinary design tools prepared
for 21st-century challenges and careers in the water-energy-food-climate
nexus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.