* 2205001
* Research Initiation: Peer-led, Student Instructed, Study Groups: A Formation of Engineers Framework for Understanding Self-Efficacy and Persistence in Transfer Students
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Ryan Milcarek, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,999.00

The 2012 President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology report
advocated for one million new STEM graduates in the next decade and noted that
increasing the retention of STEM majors to just fifty percent alone would
generate approximately three-quarters of the targeted one million additional
STEM degrees needed to maintain our nation’s economic competitiveness. Transfer
students, who are disproportionately first-generation college students and
students of color, are a target population for boosting engineering retention.
Transfer students matriculate into their new universities and commonly
experience transfer shock while taking gateway courses, often with limited
social support. Low achievement and poor experiences in these early courses can
result in transfer students leaving engineering all together. The project team
proposes to research the effects of a PEER-led, Student Instructed, STudy group
(PEERSIST) model in thermodynamics to promote student achievement, engineering
self-efficacy, and identity formation, all of which are variables linked to
engineering persistence. This study is led by a PI that has limited experience
in the field of social science and engineering formation research, with
mentorship from a team of experienced engineering education researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PEERSIST model promotes academic competence through
peer dialogue, in which disciplinary knowledge is socially co-constructed and
refined over successive sessions. The project will explore four primary research
questions: 1) To what extent does peer and near-peer support in a gateway course
promote engineering students’ self-efficacy and identity formation?; 2) Do these
effects, if any, accrue differently between transfer and first-time full-time
students?; 3) To what extent does peer and near-peer support in a gateway course
promote student course achievement and engineering persistence?; 4) Do these
effects, if any, accrue differently between transfer and first-time full-time
students? The study is grounded in social cognitive career theory (SCCT), which
researchers have used extensively to understand student persistence in the
pursuit of engineering degrees. This work will extend research into social-
cognitive factors that influence STEM retention and persistence by
operationalizing social-cognitive variables in an applied setting to promote
engineering persistence. While prior research documents relationships between
these variables, few studies have conducted quasi-experimental research that
uses social-cognitive theory to cause STEM persistence, nor do such studies
include one-year follow-up data. This quasi-experimental study will use a
sequential explanatory quantitative to qualitative mixed-methods design in year
1 followed by a convergent quantitative and qualitative mixed-methods design in
year 2. Course progress, survey measures, and interviews will be collected on
students in the peer-led study groups and a comparison group that receives
conventional recitation pedagogy. Dependent variables are cognitive (test
grades) and social (engineering identity and self-efficacy). In the second year
of the project, follow-up interviews and institutional data will be collected
from the same students to assess persistence in engineering and the institution.
Study results will have strong implications for research into student retention
and persistence, particularly among transfer students. The one-year follow-up
component provides a rare opportunity to identify the effects of social-
cognitive factors on engineering persistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.