* 2205033
* Research Initiation: Mapping Identity Development in Doctoral Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Mario Beruvides, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2024
* USD 198,413.00

A multitude of factors affect the ability of individuals to become effective
professionals in their chosen field of work. Identity, the sense of self and
belonging, is one critical factor receiving heightened emphasis in society. The
engineering profession is not immune to the angst, inquiry and opportunity that
this “evaluation of self,” both at the individual and collective whole, has
created. Understanding “researcher identity,” the personal identification with
the critical knowledge and responsibilities associated with the role of being a
successful researcher, is important focal point in both the education and
management of engineering doctoral students. Yet knowledge of the process by
which doctoral students develop their professional identity is limited. This
study addresses, evaluates, and digests several critical areas of concern
regarding professional identity formation, including professional experiences,
gender, ethnoracial background, identity formation process, and critical “self-
referential” identifiers. The findings can assist educators in the development
of researcher identity of individuals that are new to the engineering research
endeavor, and may help improve student mental health, attrition rates, and
bridge the gender and ethnoracial gaps in graduation rates. Of particular
interest are three key gaps: 1) the limited existing longitudinal research on
the topic of researcher identity development; 2) the limited existing research
on researcher identity development in doctoral students, and 3) the limited
existing research on the process of researcher identity development. Further, no
previous research has addressed potential differences in identity development
between on-campus and online doctoral students. With the growing popularity of
online graduate engineering education, and opportunities to further expand
access through additional online engineering doctoral programs, examination of
researcher identity in online doctoral students is of particular interest. In
pursuing these aims, this research will create great benefit for students,
educators, researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address current
research gaps in the process of engineering doctoral student identity
development by implementing a longitudinal study at a large state university. It
will explore the application of user experience (UX) methods as a novel research
approach to generate new insights on the process/processes through which
engineering doctoral students develop (or fail to develop) their identities,
specifically as researchers. It uses phenomenological data analysis as its
analytical framework. Four research questions provide the focus for this
research: 1) What is the process of developing engineering identity in doctoral
students (primarily, researcher identity)? 2) What differences, if any, exist in
the process of identity development for on campus (usually full-time, usually
traditional) vs. online (distance, usually part-time, usually non-traditional)
doctoral engineering students? 3) What factors (e.g., gender, ethnoracial
background, previous professional experience, etc.) influence the identity
development process for doctoral engineering students? 4) How can the insights
generated from longitudinal user experience (UX) methods, such as journey
mapping, and other insights, inform doctoral program design and assessment? In
addition to providing the findings on the process of researcher identity
development in doctoral students, the project validates the utility of UX
methods in this context for the purposes of future research. By illuminating the
processes of engineering doctoral student identity development, this research
impacts the way engineering doctoral programs are designed and how this design
may improve student mental health, attrition rates, and bridge the gender and
ethnoracial gaps in graduation rates, making doctoral education a more viable
career path. Given the growing popularity of online graduate engineering
education, and opportunities to further expand access through additional online
engineering doctoral programs, examination of researcher identity in online
doctoral students is of particular interest. In pursuing these aims, this
research will create significant benefit for students, educators, researchers,
and society as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.