* 2205954
* OCE-PRF: The Biogeochemical Importance of Marine Particles: Connecting Production and Export in the Northern Gulf of Alaska
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Thomas Kelly, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2024
* USD 250,811.00

The biological carbon pump buffers carbon dioxide concentrations in the
atmosphere by sequestering organic particles in deep ocean waters.
Simultaneously the biological carbon pump supplies food to twilight zone
ecosystems as sinking particles are ingested. Although the biological carbon
pump consists of many different processes, the focus of the current project is
on physical transport of particles and their transformations. Marine particles
are primarily formed through biological and physical processes within the
ocean’s sun-lit layer. Physical transport can then carry them in to the deep
ocean. Even after decades of research, estimates of how much material is
transported remains largely unknown. This uncertainty is a challenge to our
predictions of how the Earth system is changing. Indeed, Sea Change (2015)
identifies “What is the ocean’s role in regulating the carbon cycle?” and how
might “the efficiency of carbon export to the deep ocean be better quantified?”
as priority science questions for 2015-2025. This study seeks to improve data
coverage in a high latitude coastal region while developing modeling tools to
improve our local estimates and understanding of ecological and physical
processes with respect to particle production, transport, and
decay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While global and regional carbon budgets have been
developed and refined over more than 5 decards of research, disagreement between
these synthesis (+/- 50%) continues to be a source of frustration and research
within the broader oceanographic community. To reduce uncertainty in current
estimates of the biological carbon pump within a high latitude coastal biome, we
propose to investigate the mechanistic relationships between marine nutrient
uptake, particle production, and export processes through a combination of field
work (3 cruises yr-1), data analysis, and cross-site collaboration. The core of
this effort will involve the collection and integration of new datasets,
including (1) standing stocks and tracers: biogenic silica, (2) productivity:
silica production and nutrient uptake, and (3) export: carbon, nitrogen,
biogenic silica, trace elements, and isotopes, with synthesis via Lagrangian
tracer simulations, linear inverse ecosystem modeling, and biogeochemical
parameter estimation. The geographical focus of this work will be in the
Northern Gulf of Alaska where physical circulation and strong seasonality drive
high variability in ecosystem processes in a region important for commercial and
subsistence fisheries. Finally, efforts to standardize methods and collaborate
across NSF Long Term Ecological Research sites will help to develop datasets and
inter-comparisons of coastal export production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.