* 2205493
* Regularity and Asymptotic Behavior in Fluid Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Igor Kukavica, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2025
* USD 313,002.00

Partial differential equations are essential for studying natural phenomena such
as fluid flow, heat transfer, and wave propagation. They help model the dynamics
of the atmosphere, ocean, stars, and other physical phenomena. The aim of this
project is to study partial differential equations that model fluid dynamics and
other complex systems that involve fluids, allowing for improved understanding
of fluid properties and control. Mathematical models describing fluid
interactions with solid and elastic bodies are also of interest, with
applications to engineering and other scientific fields. This project also
provides training and research opportunities for graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the existence, regularity, and
qualitative properties of solutions to partial differential equations and
systems modeling fluids interacting with elastic bodies. The project considers
fluid-structure interaction models that involve fluids interacting with elastic
solids, for both compressible or incompressible fluids, and in viscous and
inviscid settings. The primary focus is on establishing global existence,
uniqueness, and asymptotic behavior of the solutions. Additionally, the project
addresses the existence and qualitative behaviors of solutions to fluid-
structure interaction models involving plates and elastic membranes.
Furthermore, the project studies the inviscid limit problem and other singular
limits, either for the Navier-Stokes equations in bounded domains or in more
involved physical settings. The project shall also address existence and
regularity issues related to fluid models with evolving boundaries. One
important example is the Euler system with a free interface, both with and
without surface tension. Finally, the project will consider questions concerning
the Boussinesq system, including those relating to the persistence of regularity
and the long-horizon behavior of solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.