* 2205665
* Protein dynamics: from the marginally to the extremely stable
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Martin Gruebele, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 05/31/2026
* USD 795,135.00

We live in a world where the environment is becoming more extreme, and yet much
remains to be learned about how organisms successfully adapt to extreme
conditions. Dehydration, high pressure, temperature changes are all variables
that resilient organisms can cope with to survive, and proteins play a
particularly important role. This research project looks at how some proteins
protect other proteins when the temperature goes up too high for survival, how
proteins that are barely able to fold can fold in the right environment, and how
microorganisms that live at high pressures and temperatures cope by harnessing
the adaptability of proteins critical for survival. This project will support
the training of high school, undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate
researchers on state-of-the-art techniques and instruments, helping the nation
be prepared with qualified scientists who can solve problems at every level when
we encounter our own extreme scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project,
focused on protein dynamics inside living cells and organisms, has the goal of
understanding how protein evolution optimizes flexibility, develops novel
structure and function, and adapts proteins to subtle differences even between
different cell types in a single organism. This will be accomplished through
three distinct but related subprojects. A class of intrinsically disordered
proteins with low charge/hydropathy ratio will be studied to determine if
quinary structure and crowding in cells may be sufficient to induce structure.
Using zebrafish as a model organism, heat shock chaperoning will be studied in
vivo to determine how protein-chaperone interactions can be differentiated in
different tissues. Extremophiles tune the native state fluctuations of enzymes
to allow function under a wide range of temperatures, pressures, and other
solvent variables. To elucidate how organisms tune the phase diagrams of their
proteins to maximize function, experiments and simulations will be conducted on
enzyme phosphoglycerate kinase from eight different mesophilic and extremophilic
organisms covering a wide range of environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.