* 2205608
* Helical Instability Evolution in Dynamic-Screw-Pinch-Driven Plasma Implosions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Nicholas Jordan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 586,041.00

This award supports an effort to understand a plasma compression technique
called the dynamic screw pinch, which has been demonstrated to reduce plasma
instabilities. The knowledge gained in this project could enable more powerful
x-ray generation, higher-pressure materials properties experiments, more
efficient nuclear fusion generation, and a better understanding of astrophysical
processes. The project will benefit society by advancing basic scientific
knowledge, enabling future energy sources, and improving national defense
capabilities. This project will also help train a diverse group of undergraduate
and graduate students in plasma science and engineering while building stronger
partnerships between academia, industry, and national laboratories. The project
is awarded by the NSF Division of Physics with support from the National Nuclear
Security Administration within the Department of Energy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the way in which cylindrical
plasmas become unstable and break apart when they are strongly compressed by a
magnetic field. Recently, a plasma compression technique called the dynamic
screw pinch (DSP) has been demonstrated to reduce plasma instability growth in
initially solid-metal thin-foil liner implosions on 1-MA, 100-nanosecond pulsed
power facilities. The DSP technique uses a helical magnetic field with a time-
dependent pitch angle to compress the cylindrical plasma. Despite the success of
the DSP technique, questions remain as to how DSP-driven instabilities initially
form and evolve relative to those driven by a standard z-pinch with a purely
azimuthal magnetic field. This project will evaluate competing theories
computationally and experimentally. Specifically, this project will investigate
the roles of the electrothermal instability, coronal plasma dynamics, and
magnetic field pitch angles in the seeding and evolution of the magneto-
Rayleigh-Taylor instability (MRTI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.