* 2205537
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusing Data Science into the Computer Science Undergraduate Curriculum
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jonathan Graham, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2025
* USD 399,827.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP), through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation
and study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Norfolk State University seeks to increase data
scientists in the work force by exposing students from computer science,
chemistry, and other STEM disciplines to the study of data science. The Project
Investigators will utilize cognitive constructivism learning theory and the
Elaboration Theory paired with experiential learning to infuse data science
modules into existing curricula. The project has clear metrics and a strong plan
for summative and formative evaluation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses the shortage of data scientists in the workforce by increasing the
number of students and faculty exposed to data science. The Project Team is
developing and infusing into the curriculum, twenty-four modules into four
computer science classes, CS1, CS2, Java Programming and Computer Security I.
The infusion is based on cognitive constructivism and Elaboration Learning
Theories with experiential learning, approaches which are known to be
successful. These courses expose all Computer Science majors to the field of
Data Science in CS1, CS2 and Java Programming (all required courses) and expose
many students taking cybersecurity to the applicability of machine learning to
the field of cybersecurity. To help expose non-Computer Science STEM majors to
the field, there are two summer bootcamps for faculty from STEM departments such
as Chemistry, Biology, Technology, and Mathematics. These faculty will be
exposed to data science, create two modules each for their specific disciplines,
and infuse these modules into these courses. To expose students to industry
needs and to foster collaboration with industry, nine students will participate
in summer internships jointly supervised by industry staff and the Project
Investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.