* 2205972
* Dynamical Approaches for Some Complex Stochastic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jin Ma, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2025
* USD 320,000.00

The principal investigators will undertake several research projects with a
special focus on dynamic optimization/game problems involving complex stochastic
systems, as well as effective mathematical tools for solving these problems. The
research on the general mean field master equations introduces new methodologies
that will lead to a powerful tool for studying large interacting particle
systems appearing in numerous applications in economics, finance (especially
systemic risk), social science, and engineering. The research concerning the
set-valued stochastic dynamical systems develops some new technical tools and
has intrinsic connection to front propagation and mean curvature motions. Some
new concepts in the project are expected to fundamentally change the current
framework of set-valued stochastic analysis. The part concerning the Kyle-Back
strategic insider equilibrium model brings new perspectives to an important
problem in the market macrostructure theory as well as the concept of dynamic
Markov bridges. All the projects that will be pursued have direct connections to
applied fields such as stochastic control/game and stochastic finance/economics.
The PIs will continue actively involving Ph.D students and postdoc fellows in
research, disseminating research findings through conferences, and strengthening
the connections with local financial communities through a colloquium
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the research introduces new
methodologies to find the crucial monotonicity conditions for general mean field
games, which will ensure the uniqueness of the mean field equilibrium and lead
to the global well-posedness of the associated master equation, an infinite
dimensional PDE or PDE system that characterizes the dynamics of the value
function. The second part of the research focuses on the characterization of
stochastic dynamic systems whose values are “sets”, motivated by several
signature cases including the problems in the first part when uniqueness of
equilibria fails, the time-inconsistent problems studied in previous research,
and the issue of dynamic multivariate (systemic) risk measures. The new theory
of set-valued PDEs and set-valued Backward SDEs, along with several new notions
such as Itô’s formula for set-valued functions and a new set-valued stochastic
integral desirable for the set-valued martingale representation will be
considered, and are expected to have fundamental impact to the existing set-
valued stochastic analysis. The third part of the research concerns the Kyle-
Back equilibrium model with dynamic information. A new stochastic two-point
boundary value problem will be considered, as a theoretical basis for finding
the equilibrium under a fairly general model of underlying assets that allows
interaction among the different agents in the market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.