* 2205864
* Collaborative Research: A Better Measurement of the Primordial Helium Abundance
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Evan Skillman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2025
* USD 409,587.00

Within five minutes after the Big Bang, during primordial nucleosynthesis,
almost all of the helium in the universe was produced. The production of that
primordial helium depends on the content and interactions of the universe at
that time. This makes a precise measurement of the amount of primordial helium
of fundamental importance for testing models of new physics. Using observations
of more than 40 metal-poor dwarf galaxies, this collaboration between scientists
at the University of Minnesota, Gonzaga University, and The Ohio State
University, will determine the primordial helium abundance with unprecedented
precision, providing a fundamental test of models of new physics beyond the
standard model. This program will have broader impacts through training graduate
students, engaging undergraduates in research, and inspiring public interest in
science. The public outreach components of this program consist of continuing
the Universe in the Park program in the state of Minnesota, the use of the Ohio
State University Arne Slettebak Planetarium to reach economically disadvantaged
(and minority-majority) urban schools in Columbus and many rural schools in
Ohio, and enhanced participation in the Science in Action! program for
elementary school students in the Spokane, WA area, targeting schools with the
most underserved and disadvantaged populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on
several recent investments and breakthroughs, it is now possible to reduce the
observational uncertainty on the primordial helium abundance to below 1%,
translating to an uncertainty of approximately 3% on the number of neutrino
flavors. The Multi-Object Double Spectrographs (MODS) on the Large Binocular
Telescope (LBT) enable the simultaneous observation of multiple hydrogen and
helium recombination lines necessary for high-fidelity measurements of nebular
helium abundances. This program will combine LBT/MODS spectra of metal-poor
galaxies with near-infrared spectra and use an improved, sophisticated analysis
methodology to determine helium abundances of individual targets with
uncertainties of approximately 2%. With new observations of more than 40 metal-
poor galaxies, the team will measure a value for the primordial helium abundance
with an uncertainty of approximately 0.5%. This project takes advantage of the
recent discoveries of many extremely metal-poor galaxies, access to sensitive
new instruments on large telescopes, and increasingly sophisticated abundance
analysis methodologies. A higher precision measurement of the primordial helium
abundance will provide a strong constraint on many proposed models extending the
standard model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.