* 2205536
* Catalyst Project: Increasing Access and Inclusiveness in Cybersecurity through Lab Experiences
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Robert Holland, Shaw University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,797.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. Shaw University
seeks to establish a dedicated Cyber Operations Lab on campus. The lab will
consist of workstations capable of hosting virtualized environments where
students can engage in simulated cyber operations, such as, red-team/blue-team
exercises, vulnerability assessments, capture-the-flag-competitions, etc. The
lab will also provide students a secure and isolated environment to practice
skills which should not be exercised in public domains, such as vulnerability
scanning and penetration testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cyber Operations Lab
will support the Cyber Operations 12-course concentration of the Bachelor of
Science in Computer Science degree at Shaw University. The Cyber Operations
concentration provide students with a foundation in programming, data
structures, networks, security policy and risk, virtualization, malware
analysis, and ethical hacking. A physical lab is required for students to learn
those skills on actual hardware and software they can expect to encounter in
their future cybersecurity roles. Accordingly, this project will support the
establishment of a lab with hardware capable of running multiple virtual
machines with isolated network environments and software, such as Packet Tracer,
WireShark, Process Hacker, and ProcDot, to conduct network and malware analysis.
In addition, the Cyber Operations Lab will be used to offer cybersecurity-
related events for high school students to increase interest and build a
pipeline for them to enter the workforce through Shaw University. Finally, the
Cyber Operations Lab will house the Cy(Bear)security Research Group which is
focused on Internet of Things intrusion detection using Artificial Immune
Systems and Deep Neural Network for dynamic network monitoring and medical
device penetration testing to identify any vulnerabilities or weaknesses. This
project will give students the opportunity to learn desirable skills in
cybersecurity and help to close the minority representation gap that exists in
the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.