* 2205695
* The Diffuse Interface Method and Applications to Coupled Systems in Fluid Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Martina Bukac, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2025
* USD 229,965.00

Systems involving moving domains in which a fluid interacts with a neighboring
region are often modeled using partial differential equations with coupling
conditions that hold across a common interface. Such systems occur in medicine
(liver perfusion, lymphatic circulation, the closing and opening of heart
valves), geomechanics (fracture propagation, coupling between the surface and
groundwater flows), and other applications. Numerical simulations of such
systems are based on discrete approximations to the governing equations. To
accurately describe the dynamics, interface tracking methods, in which the nodes
of the computational mesh are aligned with the parametric representation of the
interface, are often used. However, interface-tracking methods rapidly become
difficult to apply when domain deformations are large. To prevent numerical
failures, computationally expensive mesh regenerations or similar techniques are
necessary when mesh elements become highly skewed. The diffuse interface method
is an alternative strategy based on a fixed mesh approach. For this method, the
model is reformulated using a phase-field function that smoothly transitions
from zero in one region to one in the other region. The computational mesh nodes
do not have to be aligned with the interface, whose location is now captured
using the phase-field function. This approach is useful even when the domain
does not change in time, or in cases where the interface between the two regions
is difficult to determine exactly, or when the geometry of the interface is
complex. However, the diffuse interface method introduces an additional error at
the interface, which needs to be carefully controlled. This project aims to
establish mathematical foundations for application of the diffuse interface
method in fluid dynamics. The techniques developed in this work are expected to
be applicable to other coupled systems involving fluids and poroelastic and/or
elastic structures as well. The project includes training of graduate students
through involvement in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on the development of mathematical theory and numerical methods for the diffuse
interface method applied to coupled systems in fluid dynamics. This will be
achieved by studying a hierarchy of coupled flow models, including the fluid-
porous medium interaction, fluid-poroelastic structure interaction, and fluid-
elastic structure interaction. For each model, the work entails proving the
well-posedness of the underlying diffuse interface problem, showing the
convergence of the diffuse interface model to the corresponding sharp interface
model as the width of the interfacial layer goes to zero, and calculating the
rate of convergence including the modeling error and the approximation error of
the discrete solution based on the finite element method. The analysis will be
performed using weighted Sobolev spaces. Numerical methods will be developed and
implemented for each model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.