* 2205306
* Collaborative Research: SCH: Machine Learning Driven User Interfaces for Information Gathering and Synthesis from Medical Records
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Steven Horng, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Goli Yamini
* 08/31/2026
* USD 598,676.00

Clinicians have to search through a patient’s past medical records to
contextualize the patient’s condition and reach a personalized diagnosis and
treatment plan. However, user interfaces in healthcare are unwieldy to navigate
and are largely a digitization of static paper forms from legacy clinical
workflows, a paradigm that has contributed to poor usability and clinician
burnout. This project brings together experts in machine learning and human-
computer interaction to develop a novel dynamic contextual user interface that
transforms the medical note-taking interface from a simple recording device to a
tool that can help clinicians quickly find and synthesize information. The
project’s novelties are in advancing the foundations of human-AI interaction and
in advancing the state-of-the-art in artificial intelligence for health care
with novel methods that autonomously retrieve, summarize, and surface relevant
information for clinicians, at the right time. The project’s impacts are in an
area of national priority, health IT, as it aims to modernize electronic health
records. The resulting system will help prevent subtle findings from being
overlooked, patients from being misdiagnosed, and critical interventions from
being missed, ultimately resulting in a decrease in morbidity, mortality, and
overall cost of health care. It will additionally decrease documentation burden
and mitigate physician burnout. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior attempts at
developing contextual displays of patient information were manual, labor-
intensive processes that relied on domain expertise and were neither scalable,
maintainable, nor customized to individual users. Automating contextual displays
is challenging because what information is relevant highly depends on the user,
patient, and specific clinical context. Traditional machine learning approaches
are infeasible because of the lack of labeled training data. This project
develops new user interfaces that enable the large-scale collection of implicit
usage-based training data as part of routine user workflows. Specifically, this
project develops a novel information foraging interface, the ‘semantic
clipboard’, which clinicians will use while reading patients’ past medical
records and while writing notes. Using the data collected through this new
interface, the investigators will develop new machine learning methodologies to
predict the relevant pieces of information that should appear in these
contextual displays, customized to the clinical scenario as well as the user.
Through this project and the investigators’ academic teaching, a new generation
of cross-disciplinary researchers will be educated: graduate students who
understand the fundamental challenges of human computer interaction, machine
learning, and clinical medicine, and medical fellows who understand machine
learning and the subtleties of deploying machine learning in health
care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.