* 2205934
* Electro-Thermally Integrated Traction Inverter
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Bongtae Han, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2025
* USD 449,999.00

This NSF project aims to design and develop an innovative and high power-density
traction inverter for next generation of electric vehicles. The project will
bring transformative change in the ways traction inverters are designed
currently. This will be achieved by using wide bandgap power semiconductor
devices in an electro-thermally integrated design framework to achieve an
extremely power-dense traction inverter for future electric vehicles. The
intellectual merits of the project include innovative switch module assembly,
electro-thermo-mechanical co-design framework and multi-objective parameter
optimization for the design of next generation electric vehicle traction
inverters. The broader impacts of the project include integrated education and
research to meet the emerging workforce and educational needs of the U.S.
electric vehicle industry by educating young and talented graduate and
undergraduate students. The results of this project will lead to advancement of
innovative technologies required to advance next generation of electrified
transportation technologies and widespread adoption of electric vehicles. The
research team will broaden the participation of female and minority students in
this research project. The outcomes will be used to revise and update the
contents of undergraduate and graduate courses in two departments. In addition,
the results will be disseminated through technical conference and journal
papers, industry presentations, and workshops and
tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project presents a new paradigm for the
design and development of ultra-high power-density and high reliability traction
inverters for electric vehicles. The main objective of this proposal is to
investigate and develop a transformative technology using wide bandgap (WBG)
bare-die Silicon Carbide (SiC) power semiconductor devices, along with compact
multi-functional coolers in an electro-thermally integrated design framework, to
build an extremely power-dense traction inverter for future electric vehicles
(EVs). The underlying foundation behind the proposed research is to provide
transformative solutions to overcome current limitations in the power module
designs, thus fostering multidisciplinary collaborative research. This important
work will lead to theoretical advancements and generic methodologies for
obtaining electro-thermo-mechanically optimal switch module design. It will
involve interdisciplinary research in power electronics, control, packaging, and
thermal management, and realize design for reliability in a holistic co-design
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.