* 2205314
* Collaborative Research: Constraining Supernova Progenitor Systems and Explosion Mechanisms Through 3D Reconstruction of Supernova Remnants
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Tea Temim, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2025
* USD 193,864.00

Supernova explosions are dramatic events, releasing huge amounts of material
back into the space between stars. The investigators will study the remnants of
these explosions to better understand the stars that exploded. The team has
selected 5 relatively nearby supernova remnants (SNRs) and will combine a
variety of observations to create 3-dimensional models of the locations, and
velocities, of parts of the exploded stars. Because the SNRs contain many
elements, each brightly radiating at specific wavelengths, the investigators can
deduce the composition of the stars just before explosions. These observations
will help us understand the remarkable processes leading up to the explosions.
The investigators will share their research with the public by creating
3-dimensional (3D) reconstructions of SNRs using their Virtual Reality (VR)
technology. The investigator has already demonstrated success with the VR
technology. These dynamic visualizations will extend the research experience
well beyond the home university, as valuable additions to a variety of public
outreach settings. Students from local schools are invited to the Purdue
University Envision Center to experience the 3D visualization and learn about
astronomy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supernovae are ideal multi-messenger
laboratories that play a key role in the structural and chemical makeup of the
universe. The suite of 3D reconstructions they developed will directly address
uncertainty in fundamental topics pertaining to supernova explosion dynamics and
their evolution to remnant phases that have serious ramifications in many areas
of physics and astronomy. The investigators will organize the observations into
formats useful for reliable tests of increasingly complex simulations. They will
use the reconstructions to predict gravitational wave and neutrino signals of
supernovae, and unravel competing effects of dynamical instabilities, rotation
and magnetic fields, and pre-supernova stellar interior structure for a variety
of supernova types. Purdue University is a member of the NSF-funded Supernova
Early Warning System, which will benefit from these 3D reconstructions as it
seeks to detect and characterize neutrinos from the next Galactic
supernova.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.