* 2205550
* Compact Binaries and the Origin of Millisecond Pulsars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jay Strader, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2025
* USD 280,902.00

Neutron stars are formed when a massive star reaches the end of its life: the
outer layers of the star are ejected in a violent explosion (a supernova) but
the core of the star collapses to form a small, dense remnant. When neutron
stars are formed, they are spinning rapidly – if the neutron star is isolated it
will gradually spin down. However, neutron stars that are in a binary system
with another star can be “spun up” if material from the companion star is
deposited onto the neutron star surface. Neutron stars that have been “spun up”
by a companion can rotate hundreds of times per second and are known as
millisecond pulsars. Although many millisecond pulsars have been identified, the
evolution of these systems, and how they fit within the family of other
binaries, is not well understood. A team from Michigan State University (MSU)
will undertake a survey of unidentified high energy sources that are likely to
contain millisecond pulsars using the 4.3m Southern Astrophysical Research
(SOAR) telescope. The goal of the survey is to find new millisecond pulsars,
especially those with companions that may be in process of “spinning up” the
pulsar. The Principal Investigator (PI) will expand a program at Michigan State
University designed to give first year undergraduates from underrepresented
groups the opportunity to participate in summer research. In addition, he will
continue a pilot program to provide hands-on activities near the tailgating area
for MSU football games. The goal of this program is to engage a wider range of
people than is typically reached by traditional observatory
nights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations with the NASA Fermi Gamma Ray
telescope has shown that many millisecond pulsars are bright gamma-ray sources.
More than a thousand Fermi gamma-ray sources remain unassociated with known
sources, and many of these are undiscovered millisecond pulsars. The team will
continue a program to target unidentified Fermi sources with the SOAR telescope.
They will use low resolution optical spectroscopy to separate galactic from
extragalactic sources and follow up candidate compact binaries with high cadence
photometry to search for variability. Follow-up radio and X-ray observations
will be used to confirm that a candidate source is indeed a millisecond pulsar.
The SOAR observations have proven effective at not only classifying unassociated
Fermi but also providing measurements of the orbital properties of gamma-ray
emitting binaries: periods, inclinations, distances, and component masses. A
major goal of the program is to find “transitional” sources: a low mass binary
that transition to a rotation powered state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.