* 2205539
* OCE-PRF: Structural controls on fault slip behavior and deformation at the Queen Charlotte oceanic-continental transform
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Andrew Gase, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 12/31/2024
* USD 282,410.00

Dr. Andrew Gase has been awarded an NSF Ocean Sciences Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship to examine seismicity and crustal structure along the Queen Charlotte
Fault (QFC) with marine seismic datasets. This work will be conducted at Western
Washington University with mentor Dr. Emily Roland and in collaboration with co-
mentor Dr. Lindsay Worthington from the University of New Mexico. The QCF is a
~900 km-long oceanic-continental tectonic plate boundary offshore Southeast
Alaska and British Columbia that accommodates ~5 cm yr-1 of motion between the
Pacific and North American Plates and hosts large earthquakes. Despite the
importance of understanding the characteristics of this fault for earthquake
hazard mitigation, the structure, properties, and slip behavior of the QCF are
poorly determined. Seismic monitoring networks near the north-central QCF are
sparse; a new temporary array of seafloor seismometers along the fault provides
a key opportunity to explore seismicity and mechanical properties. This project
will integrate seismic data from earthquake and human-generated sources to
address the questions: 1) How is slip distributed across the QCF system in time
and space? and 2) To what extent is the nature of fault slip controlled by the
crustal architecture of the Pacific and North American Plates? The proposed
research will advance our understanding of fault slip behavior at oceanic-
continental transform systems through a collaborative mission with U.S. and
Canadian scientists who are focusing on related research objectives offshore
British Columbia. In addition to the broader impacts of the research, this
project will support research assistantships for undergraduate students in
seismology at Western Washington University and will enable the PI to
participate as an instructor in a 2-week long summer research and STEM education
experience for undergraduate students in New Mexico. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
QCF exhibits along-strike variations in obliquity and crustal structure that may
influence the nature of its seismicity. Convergence angles decrease northward of
Haida Gwaii from &gt;10° to ~0° and the north-central QCF is thought to be
entirely localized to a narrow ~1 km-wide fault zone along the continental-
oceanic crust boundary. These observations conflict with expectations that slip
should be more broadly distributed within the weaker plate. Likewise, along-
strike variations in crustal structure and fault damage could affect large
earthquakes and slip behavior. This project will evaluate two hypotheses: 1)
Active deformation along the north-central QCF is localized along a bimaterial
fault bounded by oceanic crust and continental crust, and 2) Slip behavior is
controlled by along-strike variations in fault damage and oceanic crustal
structure. Oceanic plate structures may contribute geometric complexity or
variations in material properties that influence local slip behavior. Advanced
event detection and location techniques will identify small magnitude
earthquakes and swarms that are not currently observable with regional seismic
monitoring networks. Seismic tomography using local seismicity recorded on an
array of 28 broadband ocean-bottom seismometers and controlled-source seismic
data along the north-central QCF will provide unparalleled seismic velocity
constraints on fault-zone and crustal properties with three-dimensional
tomography. The expected results will provide important constraints on fault
properties, crustal structure, and slip behavior that will inform our
understanding of oceanic-continental transforms worldwide while also providing
new insights into regional earthquake hazards in Southeast
Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.