* 2205650
* CAREER: Linking macroecology and traits to predict mycorrhizal fungal dispersal
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Bala Chaudhary, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 04/30/2024
* USD 402,540.00

Plants rarely live in isolation. In fact, all plants on Earth live in close
association with diverse microorganisms that greatly impact plant health. As a
result, the microbial communities that associate with plants can have large
implications for agriculture, forestry, and ecosystems. Mycorrhizal fungi are
among the most common beneficial fungi, mining soil nutrients and delivering
them to plants in exchange for sugars. However, the impact they have on plants
depends on the type of fungal species present. Environmental factors and
dispersal determine microbial community structure, but little is known about how
microbes disperse long distances. This CAREER award combines multiple approaches
using data science, laboratory, and large-scale field experiments at the
National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) to study fungal dispersal. This
proposal will involve high school students in science activities and improve
graduate education in ecological data science. Finally, this project will study
barriers that limit the participation of minority students in ecology to develop
recommendations to improve recruiting and retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
nearly 100 years, the "everything is everywhere" hypothesis has dominated
microbial ecology, suggesting that microbial dispersal is unlimited and
community assembly mechanisms are primarily deterministic. However, certain
fungi vary with respect to traits that could impact their long-distance
dispersal capabilities. Coupling knowledge of traits with physical laws that
govern movement could provide a powerful framework to predict dispersal, a key
component of biogeography. Arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi form no aboveground
structures, and reproduce via asexual spores with substantially varying traits
(e.g. size, surface ornamentation) that are likely to impact long-distance
dispersal. The mechanisms and extent of AM fungal dispersal are poorly
understood, yet, to manage AM fungal communities for improved symbiotic
functioning, taxon-specific information regarding dispersal capabilities is
required. This study combines trait-based ecology, macroecology, and physical
laws to study aerial dispersal of AM fungi through the following research
objectives: 1. Create an AM fungal trait database to examine conservatism among
phylogenetic groups in all spore traits that potentially facilitate aerial
dispersal, 2. Examine community structure and spore traits of aerial AM fungi at
NEON sites and Chicago urban sites to identify eco-climatic properties that
predict aerial dispersal, and 3. Compare the observed terminal velocity to that
predicted by Stokes's Law for movement of a smooth sphere for AM fungal spores
with different morphological traits. This CAREER award will illuminate the thus
far speculative role of dispersal in driving continent-scale patterns in
microbial biogeography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.