* 2205835
* Elliptic Cohomology, Geometry, and Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Daniel Berwick Evans, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2025
* USD 240,670.00

In the last forty years, ideas from theoretical physics have frequently driven
important advances in pure mathematics. The story often begins with calculations
in seemingly unrelated physical and mathematical theories that by coincidence
give the same answer. Careful investigations then reveal a deep structure
linking the disciplines. Such discoveries open new vistas and prompt novel lines
of research. A nascent example of this phenomenon relates a certain type of
quantum field theory to an object in algebraic topology called elliptic
cohomology. The deep structure explaining the relationship between these areas
remains elusive. However, the expectation is that the answer will illuminate
important objects in several branches of mathematics and physics. In particular,
a resolution should provide insight into foundational questions in string
theory, while also revealing the geometric meaning of elliptic cohomology. The
projects will develop new tools to study this problem. The award supports
graduate students working with the PI whose research will contribute to this
area. The PI will continue mentoring and advising activities along with his
involvement in mathematics education for incarcerated people through the
Education Justice Project in Illinois.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the
work is to leverage 2-equivariant elliptic cohomology to reduce the key
questions to the study of a few structures in geometry and quantum field theory.
The methods utilize a filtration on field theories mimicking the chromatic
filtration, allowing one to break the larger problem into smaller and more
manageable pieces. Success in lower stages of the filtration already offers
several long-anticipated geometric applications of elliptic cohomology, as well
as new deformation invariants of quantum field theories. Prior work shows that
the first step of the filtration affords a geometric model for equivariant
elliptic cohomology over the complex numbers. The proposed research builds upon
this existing model and moves beyond characteristic
zero.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.