* 2205152
* SCH: Intelligent Radiology Through Human-Machine Cooperation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Ali Adibi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Scott Acton
* 09/30/2026
* USD 800,000.00

With unprecedented progress in the development of advanced imaging tools for
medicine, accurate interpretation of medical images has become essential in
diagnosis and treatment of several diseases in a wide range of medical
disciplines. Nevertheless, studies show large variability between
interpretations of different radiologists, especially using newer developed
quantitative scales. Recent computational and algorithmic advances in Artificial
Intelligence (AI) promise effective tools to learn the relationship between
medical images and clinical data to diagnose diseases and predict progression
and outcomes based on the past history of each patient. However, the AI tools
for medical analysis are usually developed based on radiologist interpretations,
not considering the between-person variations. Vice versa, there is very limited
data on how AI can affect radiologists’ readings and offer additional value to
their daily workflow. This project is focused on the creation of a trustworthy
reference standard for AI using the interpretation of multiple radiologists
while investigating how AI can reduce the variability in interpretation and
improve the clinical workflow to optimally benefit patient care. It will
considerably reduce the variations among radiologist readings by proving the AI
assessment while improving the AI algorithms using radiologists’ reading
strategy. It will be helpful in training radiologists as well as mitigating the
adverse effects of physical, psychological, and environmental conditions (e.g.,
noise, fatigue) on the radiologists’ readings of medical images.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to develop a novel
paradigm based on human-AI cooperation in intelligent computational analysis of
medical imaging data by using state-of-the-art AI algorithms to develop an
accurate labeling tool for medical images to maximize the accuracy and minimize
the inter- and intra-reader variability. The tool also provides the decision-
making rationale in the AI algorithm through a series of filtered images to help
radiologists in their interpretations. In parallel, an eye-tracking system is
used to learn the decision-making patterns of expert radiologists and trainees
with and without knowing the AI assessment. This knowledge is fed back to the AI
algorithm to improve its performance. This will result in the most reliable
labeling tool with superior performance compared to conventional AI tools or
individual radiologists. Using this platform, an AI tool is developed for
combining the medical imaging data with all relevant clinical, social, and
demographic data for accurate diagnosis and prediction of the course of a
disease with and without treatment for each patient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.