* 2205705
* DISES: Co-produced modeling of socio-environmental dynamics of financialized forestlands and alternative future scenarios
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Jesse Abrams, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,522,080.00

This research addresses the past socio-environmental dynamics and future
trajectories of forests in northern Maine. Timberlands in northern Maine were
owned by integrated forest products companies for much of the twentieth century,
but more recently their ownership has changed as a result of the emergence of
new corporate timberland organizations, principally Real Estate Investment
Trusts (REITs) and Timber Investment Management Organizations (TIMOs). This
ownership change comes at the same time that forests are being included as
carbon solutions in state-level climate policies. The researchers on this
project will work directly with Maine’s policymakers, tribal and non-tribal
forest users, and other key stakeholders to analyze the social and ecological
consequences of the timberland ownership transition. These same stakeholders
will be included in participatory workshops to assess possible trajectories of
these forestlands under different climate and policy scenarios. Ecological
analyses and future scenarios will be conducted using spatial science tools that
have previously been applied to family forest dynamics elsewhere in New England.
The result of this project will be a better understanding of the social and
ecological consequences of the timberland ownership transition and the
engagement of key stakeholders in assessing the future of these
lands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is the first major effort to analyze
financialized timberlands as integrated socio-environmental systems. The
research focuses on financialized timberlands, defined as those owned and
managed by financial investors such as the timber investment management
organizations (TIMOs) and real estate investment trusts (REITs) that
collectively own and manage over 20 million hectares of forestland nationwide.
Research efforts integrate qualitative social science, remote sensing-based land
change detection, and participatory scenario simulation modeling methods that
collectively illuminate the feedback and causal relationships driving timberland
system dynamics. Spatial and causal process models representing the consequences
of three decades of forest financialization will be developed, then used to co-
design future landscape scenarios for collaborative evaluation by key
stakeholders. The research builds upon advances in land detection technologies
via application of the LandTrendr tool to landscapes that have undergone
ownership transitions. It also builds upon scenario modeling tools developed by
Harvard Forest that have previously been applied to family-owned forested
landscapes in New England and to other forest systems worldwide. The social
science component includes a multi-scalar data collection process to inform
construction of a causal process model that integrates ecological and
sociopolitical variables. By investigating the relationships among human actors
(financial firm executives, mid-level governance actors, and tribal and non-
tribal forest users) and environmental patterns and processes (forest
conditions, disturbances, species distributions, and carbon balances), this
research will advance land system science and identify leverage points for
effecting systemic change. Research efforts will focus on timberlands in Maine
in order to build both place-specific and more generalizable models. The
research will provide combined spatial and socioeconomic insights to inform
policy and practice deliberations regarding the future ownership and management
of these lands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.