* 2205998
* OCE-PRF: Biomediated corrosion of methane-derived authigenic carbonates in the deep ocean and its implications for carbon fluxes from methane seeps
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2024
* Kira Homola, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 10/31/2024
* USD 286,876.00

This research fellowship investigates the amount of carbon released back into
seawater by biological processes that dissolve the carbonate rock structures
formed at oceanic methane seeps. Throughout the worlds’ oceans, methane rises
through seafloor sediments from subduction zones and old organic material buried
below the seafloor. Most of this methane is consumed by unique microbial and
chemical activity before it can reach the ocean or atmosphere. Within this
“methanosphere”, rocks form in the soft sediments near the seafloor when
dissolved or gaseous carbon seeping up from below precipitates as solid
carbonate. These rocks provide a hard surface for deep-sea organisms to inhabit
and store carbon that would otherwise contribute to increased carbon dioxide in
the ocean and atmosphere. Carbonate will dissolve back into seawater when the
acid content of surrounding waters increases, which can be caused by the
complicated biogeochemical reactions occurring on and around the carbonate
rocks. Without accounting for this dissolution of carbonate, the amount of
carbon that reaches the atmosphere from the subseafloor on timescales relevant
to anthropogenic climate change cannot be fully quantified. This research will
support two undergraduates and provide training in Geographic Information
Systems; image processing software; database management; and peer-reviewed
manuscript development and publication. In addition to training for
undergraduate students at UCLA, the investigators are collaborating with the
Alaska Native Science and Engineering Program and SoCalSeas, the Southern
California network of teachers from 2-year and 4-year colleges designed to
bridge education in oceanography. Results of the project will be disseminated to
public and academic groups, including the Center of Diverse Leadership in
Sciences at UCLA, as a variety of media content for a range of learning styles
designed to inform and inspire participation in deep-sea science and related
fields. For example, the seafloor maps from this project will be adapted to GIS
exercises for high school, community college, and university classroom
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the NSF-funded METHANOSPHERE project
aims to redefine the footprint of deep ocean methane seepage for benthic
ecosystems, the role of biomediated carbonate corrosion is not addressed. This
study aims to directly evaluate the carbon loss over time associated with
corrosion-driven dissolution of methane derived authigenic carbonate through
U-series chronology to date carbonates; incubation of carbonates inoculated with
living microbes to determine the carbon flux associated with different
microbiological corrosion processes; scanning electron microscopy to quantify
carbonate surface corrosion and identify its source; and geochemical modeling
that combines these results with the relevant METHANOSPHERE project results to
calculate the carbon loss over time from biomediated carbonate corrosion under
canonical deep ocean conditions. The METHANOSPHERE sites will allow the
comparison of methane derived authigenic carbonate corrosion under the
representative conditions of higher oxygen levels with lower photosynthetic food
input (Aleutian) and lower oxygen with higher productivity conditions
(California). Carbon fluxes associated with carbonate corrosion at these sites
will be calculated and related to the organisms responsible to estimate a flux
associated with a given environment and corrosion process. The goals of this
study are to produce 1.) An erosion mass balance of the Southern California
Borderlands Seep, including experimental data, seafloor photomosaics, and
substrate maps, 2.) An erosion mass balance of the Aleutian Margin Seep
including experimental data, seafloor photomosaics and substrate maps, and 3.) A
methane derived authigenic carbonate corrosion pattern identification guide
(including data from both sites). The investigators are addressing these goals
by surveying, sampling, and characterizing carbonates through shipboard and
laboratory incubations and analyses. Insights from the study will be presented
at least once annually at an international conference; and as a guest lecture in
the UCLA Freshman class "Methane the other greenhouse problem”, which targets
non-STEM students, and the undergraduate/graduate course "Aquatic
Geomicrobiology". As methane seeps and relic carbonates are widespread along the
continental margins, carbon cycling through seep carbonates is likely a
substantial component of the global subseafloor methane budget and its
quantification is crucial to estimate long-term burial of methane-derived
carbon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.