* 2205837
* Learning Using Thinned Networks: A Crowd Sourcing Phenomenon in Reservoir Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Benjamin Webb, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2025
* USD 193,155.00

The world of machine learning has quickly come to the forefront as a tool to aid
numerous decision-making processes in areas of business, government, research,
etc. A fundamental feature common to machine learning algorithms, and other
real-world systems that process information, is an internal network structure.
The challenge is to understand how this network structure affects an algorithmâ€™s
ability to process and learn from incoming data. The specific machine learning
algorithms considered in this project are reservoir computers, which are used to
learn and make predictions regarding dynamic processes. Recent discoveries
indicate that improving reservoir performance can be achieved by using a network
with few internal connections, i.e., a thinned network, which results in
reservoir responses that are highly diverse. This is similar to phenomena
observed in crowdsourcing where the decisions made by a group improve when group
members respond independently and where decisions worsen when group pressure
homogenizes individual responses. The goal of this project is to develop a
mathematical framework describing how extremely sparse networks can be ideal for
processing information and how the aggregation of this processed information
results in structures that are ubiquitous in real-world networks. Having an
explanation that untangles the impact of structure on learning in reservoirs
will give the much broader area of machine learning a mathematical foothold for
doing the same, contributing to basic scientific research and advancing the
goals of machine learning. The project will also support the education and
training of graduate and undergraduate students from different backgrounds to
help foster a new generation of applied mathematicians working at the
intersection of dynamics, machine learning, and network science. This will be
done in a stratified research environment where mathematical scientists and
domain experts will mentor both graduate and undergraduate students and graduate
students will help mentor undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;More concretely,
the project will lay the groundwork for building a rigorous framework describing
the effect of network structure on reservoir accuracy with the goal of removing
as much of the black-box nature of reservoirs as possible. Taking inspiration
from the social dynamics of crowdsourcing, one of the new perspectives the
project hopes to infuse into this area of research is that collections of
independently or nearly independently acting entities can be highly accurate in
recreating the dynamics of complex systems. Towards this end the project aims to
understand the distinction between processing data and aggregating data to train
systems, which are often conflated in the analysis of machine learning
algorithms but are easily separated in reservoir computers. A specific goal is
to understand how response diversity is related to prediction accuracy and how
to tune this diversity to improve learning in reservoir computers. The expected
scientific benefit of the project is to provide new methods to analyze and
specifically build reservoirs with decreased cost and increased predictive power
using extremely sparse networks and to extend these principles to a larger class
of machine learning algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.