* 2205019
* The Effects of Socio-Cultural Context on Human Bio-Markets.
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Diane Tober, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 04/30/2023
* USD 78,962.00

The research supported by this award will investigate the effects of socio-
cultural context on the governance of human bio-material donation and sale. Over
the past few decades, medical science has increased the potential uses of human
bio-materials. However, as innovation has increased, so have questions about
costs, outcomes, and ethics. In response, a variety of different regulatory
policies have been adopted globally. This variation across countries provides an
excellent opportunity for comparative research to see to what degree policy
differences produce different outcomes for donors, recipients, and other
stakeholders. In this project, researchers will focus on one area of bio-
material donation -- compensated donation of human eggs -- in two different
cultural contexts. Results from this research will benefit policy makers,
medical professionals, and patient and provider advocates. The project also
provides research training opportunities for graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out by Dr. Diane Tober, a
medical anthropologist from the University of California, San Francisco, in
collaboration with researchers from the Spanish University of Distance Education
and from Complutense University, both in Madrid, Spain. These research sites
were chosen because the United States and Spain are the two primary locations
for donor egg fertility treatment, but their bio-material markets operate within
dramatically different cultural and regulatory environments. The U.S. has
comparatively few regulations limiting donor selection, compensation, and
identification, while Spain is highly regulated, limits donor compensation, and
requires donor anonymity. The researchers will collect data through ethnographic
observation in two or more clinics in each country; interviews with medical
professionals in the fertility industry and other key informants; and interviews
and surveys of women in each country who provide eggs for pay, including both
experienced and first-time donors. The quantitative data will be analyzed with
standard statistical methods; the qualitative ethnographic data will be examined
using computer-assisted qualitative data analytical techniques and through
narrative analysis. Results, presented in professional publications and at
conferences, will help social scientists understand how underlying cultural
logics inform the crafting and regulation of medical markets and the
commodification of human bio-materials. Results will also be made available
through policy briefs and public fora to assist policy makers who need to
understand how regulatory differences affect outcomes, as well as patients and
donors who participate in bio-material markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.