* 2205848
* OCE-PRF Comparing the genomic bases of adaptation to seasonal and spatial temperature gradients in a widespread marine copepod
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Matthew Sasaki, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 11/30/2024
* USD 314,090.00

Copepods are some of the most abundant animals on the planet and play important
roles in marine food webs and biogeochemical cycles. Ocean warming may
negatively impact copepod populations, with cascading disruptions throughout
marine ecosystems. However, in many regions, this warming occurs against a
background of large seasonal shifts in temperature. Adaptation to the different
conditions experienced over this annual temperature cycle may increase genetic
diversity in copepod populations, better enabling them to cope with long-term
warming. Understanding the effects of seasonal temperature fluctuations on
copepod populations will enhance our ability to predict, plan for, and mitigate
the effects of climate change on coastal fisheries and the communities that rely
on them. Based at the University of Vermont, this project will provide
opportunities to work with marine animals in a landlocked state, engaging
students who may not otherwise have the chance to participate in the marine
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine field work, laboratory
common garden experiments, and population genomics to investigate the prevalence
and adaptive significance of seasonal thermal adaptation in a dominant coastal
copepod (Acartia tonsa) across a large latitudinal thermal gradient. This
integrative approach will provide important insights into the genomic bases of
thermal adaptation, how concordant these patterns are over spatial and temporal
scales, and the potential for seasonally fluctuating selection to enable marine
copepods to respond to long-term warming. This project has three specific
objectives: 1) Examine seasonal variation in thermal limits in populations of
Acartia tonsa from sites across a large latitudinal thermal gradient; 2)
Quantify and compare seasonal and spatial variation in allele frequency; and 3)
Determine if seasonally adapted genotypes differ in key fitness-related traits
(thermal limits, body size, and the temperature sensitivity of egg production
and hatching success). Because of their important roles in marine ecosystems,
this mechanistic understanding of how copepod populations respond to spatial and
temporal temperature gradients will help us better predict their responses to
climate change, and provide key insights into the future of marine
ecosystems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.