* 2205569
* Targeted Infusion Project: Integration of microbial enrichment, physiology and genomics via extended course-based undergraduate research experiences (eCURE)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Shawn Dash, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based, innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. This project seeks to provide STEM students at Hampton University with
education and training in modern principles and techniques of microbial genomics
by infusing microbiology and genomics into the university STEM
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to 1) build
computational infrastructure that focuses on experiential learning with hands-on
instruction in techniques and methodologies related to microbial genomics; 2)
bridge three sequential courses via extended course-based undergraduate research
experiences (eCURE) where students will contribute meaningful data; 3) empower
the next generation of scientists in microbial genomics and to support this
population of students as they enter the STEM workforce; 4) provide faculty
professional development to integrate current trends in undergraduate teaching;
and 5) introduce undergraduate students to notable African American (and other
underrepresented) scientists through a dedicated seminar series. Of note, the
integration of microbial enhancements, physiology and genomics via extended
course-based undergraduate research experiences (eCURE) into the undergraduate
STEM curriculum will better prepare undergraduates, primarily African American
students, for graduate study and the STEM workforce. The findings from this
project will serve as a model for other Historically Black Colleges and
Universities and 4-year institutions that seek to educate and maintain a diverse
STEM workforce in microbial genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.