* 2205026
* Asteroseismic analyses of the physics red-giant interiors
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Sarbani Basu, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Luca Rizzi
* 07/31/2025
* USD 308,712.00

The study of stars is of paramount importance in astrophysics: almost all
investigations of our Galaxy and other galaxies are done through the observation
of starlight. Properties of stars in our Galaxy — their chemical abundances,
ages, and dynamics — are used to study its chemical and dynamical evolution.
While chemical abundances can be obtained from spectroscopy and dynamical
properties can be measured by specialized observations such as those provided by
satellites like Gaia, ages are much more complicated, because they are model
dependent. Using a cutting-edge technique called asteroseismology, the study of
the seismic behavior of stars, and combining both observational and theoretical
methods, this project will significantly improve and enhance the basic theory of
stellar structure and evolution by clarifying some of the most important
physical processes that take place deep within stars. In turn, this will make
stellar properties, including age estimates, more precise. The results will also
allow better calibration of the relation between stellar ages and the abundance
of various elements. The project is enriched by an ambitious outreach program
based on public lectures, workshops, and summer internships, three components of
a scaffolded approach aimed at increasing participation in STEMS for young
students and supporting their transition to college. The plan is supported by,
and is part of, the well-established and successful “Yale Pathways to Science”
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on evolved stars,
subgiants and red giants, the ages of which are vital in studying the chemo-
dynamical evolution of the Galaxy. The primary goal is to examine the mixing
processes, such as overshoot and turbulent mixing, that affect red giant
structures, using the individual asteroseismic frequencies and period spacings
of these stars. The first part of the project is a theoretical study of the
observable seismic signatures produced by different mixing processes; the second
is a seismic study of evolved stars with asteroseismic data from Kepler to
examine what are the processes that actually take place in
stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.