* 2205720
* Collaborative Research: WoU-MMA: The Benchmark Measurement of Quasar Spectroscopic Variability and Implications for Supermassive Black Hole Binaries and Changing-Look Quasars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Michael Eracleous, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2025
* USD 234,319.00

Most, if not all, reasonably massive galaxies host supermassive black holes in
their centers, with masses of millions to billions of times the mass of the Sun.
The most luminous non-exploding objects in the Universe, quasars are the result
of gas falling onto these supermassive black holes and they can outshine all of
the stars in their host galaxy. They are important because they appear to play a
key role in shaping how galaxies came to look the way that they do today.
However, because of their large cosmological distances, they appear as pinpricks
of light on the sky and we cannot spatially separate the environment around the
black hole to study its characteristics. Fortunately, quasars are intrinsically
variable with frequent changes in brightness, making time-domain observations a
powerful tool in revealing their central regions, akin to using a movie to tell
a story instead of a single photograph. The research team at Vanderbilt and Penn
State Universities will leverage these brightness changes and big data
techniques to make the first measurement of how gas around supermassive black
holes moves over a timescale of years to a decade. This will enable searches for
exotic sources, like supermassive black holes in binary (SBHB) systems which
have never been detected before, and changing-look quasars (CLQs) which turn on
and off much faster than theory can explain. The investigators will also conduct
a three-day data mining workshop for students in the Fisk-Vanderbilt Bridge
Program and develop a series of introductory astronomy exercises using the
popular Zooniverse interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will constitute
the benchmark measurement of multi-year quasar spectroscopic variability and
apply it to searches for SBHBs and CLQs. This work will use a sample of
approximately 5000 quasars from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey that have been
observed spectroscopically more than once to measure the parameters of the broad
H-beta line and their variability over times scales of 1-18 years. These will be
used to define a statistical model for regular quasar variability, appropriate
for many applications, including searches for SBHBs and CLQs. With this
statistical tool the team will (a) compare the ensemble variability properties
of SBHB candidates to a control sample for the first time, (b) test the nature
of the best sub-pc separation SBHB candidates, (c) predict the necessary
duration for SBHB monitoring campaigns to bear fruit, (d) constrain the masses
that SBHB candidates can have, (e) determine for the first time whether CLQs
represent extreme examples of normal quasar variability or a distinct
phenomenon, and (f) define the CLQ class rigorously and
quantitatively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award addresses and advances the goals
of the Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.