* 2205891
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusing 5G and IoT Learning and Practice into Electrical and Computer Engineering Curriculum
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kelvin Kirby, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based, innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. This project seeks to enhance the curriculum and student training at
Prairie View A&amp;M University (PVAMU) by incorporating state-of-the-art 5G and
Internet of Things (IoT) technologies that are critical to people’s lives and
the nation’s economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project strives to intrigue
students’ learning passion by systematically designing/redesigning Electrical
and Computer Engineering (ECE) curricula at PVAMU through incorporating state-
of-the-art technologies and much needed practical skills. Furthermore, the
project will collaborate with industrial partners to bridge the gap between the
academy and industry to ensure that the skills and knowledge of PVAMU STEM
students is up-to-date and relevant in current 5G and IoT technologies. In
addition, the results of the activities will be disseminated to the broader
communities through publications and conference presentations, and project
outcomes, such as the created courses, modules, and learning materials will be
held at a dedicated website and be made available for other educators to use.
This project will have significant impact on the education and research in the
ECE department, and greatly improve students’ knowledge in emerging
technologies, better preparing them for graduate study and the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.