* 2205100
* Collaborative Research:  Measuring the physical properties of darkmatter with strong gravitational lensing
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Tommaso Treu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Alison Peck
* 08/31/2025
* USD 395,272.00

A gravitational lens is created by a massive object, such as a galaxy or cluster
of galaxies, that lies between a distant astronomical source and an observer.
The object might not be directly detectable, but it will bend the light from the
distant source as the light travels toward the observer. This project will
provide a new measurement of the properties of dark matter in quadruple the
current number of strong gravitational lenses, significantly enhancing our
understanding of the nature of dark matter. In addition, the program will
improve the robustness of the dark matter measurement method in preparation for
the thousands of gravitational lenses expected to be discovered in the Legacy
Survey of Space and Time (LSST). The results will provide new modeling
techniques that will reduce the uncertainty associated with the existing dark
matter models, and provide a framework to test parameters for a variety of
theoretically motivated dark matter models. This project also involves the Cal-
Bridge program, which prepares undergraduates from historically under-
represented groups for admission to graduate school in physics and astronomy.
The investigators will also support the Bobcat Summer STEM academy, a weeklong
course which teaches the basics of dark matter and gravitational lensing to K-12
students in the Merced region, an extremely under-served population with only
14% college attainment. This project also involves public talks and the
production of new YouTube material for the online “Physics of Sustainable
Energy” course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will achieve the following
objectives: (1) Significantly increase the sample of known gravitational lenses,
improving constraints on the half-mode mass of the halo mass function by a
factor of 10 in the case of a Cold Dark Matter (CDM) model; (2) Use the
multiply-imaged host galaxy of the lensed active galactic nucleus to constrain
the deflector macromodel, which will improve our constraints on a turnover in
the halo mass function by 0.5 dex; (3) Test a variety of theoretically motivated
dark matter models, including several flavors of warm and self-interacting dark
matter, and primordial black holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.