* 2205603
* OCE-PRF: A submicron scale investigation of foraminifera-bound organic matter: implications for preservation and the paleo-δ15N proxy
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Sandi Smart, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 09/30/2024
* USD 272,065.00

This project dives into the microscopic world of planktic foraminifera, tiny
shelled zooplankton that inhabit oceans across the globe. As foraminifera build
their shells, they incorporate tiny amounts or organic matter and, with it,
information about their surroundings and ecology. When their shells sink and
gather on the seafloor, they add to an ever-growing archive of Earth history.
Exactly how well the organic matter and its original signals are preserved in
shells during sinking and early burial is a key uncertainty for its use in
reconstructing past climate. To address this, the PI will use ultra-high
resolution crystal and chemical mapping to compare shells before and after this
crucial transition to the fossil record. Understanding the feedbacks that have
regulated Earth’s climate in the past is an essential part of our future
response and preparedness as a nation to face the challenges of a warming
planet, and is thus well aligned with NSF directives. Furthermore, by
characterizing the biomineral structures of modern shells, this work will assist
with monitoring ocean acidification, which can compromise fisheries, tourism and
the natural buffering of coastal communities from storms (e.g., by coral reefs).
As a female scientist and immigrant from a developing country, the PI is
dedicated to encouraging other young women and underrepresented groups to pursue
a career in science. By partnering with a local Alabama middle school that
serves underrepresented students, she hopes to inspire those who might not
otherwise consider science as a career path, to take STEM subjects in high
school. In this way, students will be better equipped to take on the challenge
of climate change, and be made aware of the need for their talents in building a
more sustainable future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nitrogen (N) isotope
composition (δ15N) of organic matter within the shell walls of planktic
foraminifera is emerging as a promising new tool for tracking the amount and
partitioning of nitrogen, an essential nutrient for life, in the ocean. The
number of foraminifera-bound δ15N records has grown rapidly in recent years,
yielding tantalizing insights into the interplay between ocean fertility, oxygen
concentrations and atmospheric greenhouse gas levels. Yet, fundamental questions
remain about the mechanism of N incorporation into calcite, taxonomic
differences in N uptake, and the preservation potential of the organic matter to
which N is bound, particularly in the earliest stages of sinking and burial. The
utility of bulk geochemical analyses (which require combining hundreds of
shells) in answering these questions is limited by inherent issues of scale.
Hence, the PI proposes to use electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) and
nanoscale secondary ion mass spectrometry (NanoSIMS) on individual shells from
living (tow-caught) and dead (seafloor sediment) assemblages to evaluate changes
in the biomineral structure, organic matter distribution and relative N content
of foraminifera shells from life in the surface ocean to burial on the seafloor.
The PI expects her investigation will also provide insight into the role of
organic matter in the formation (i.e., biomineralization) and behavior (e.g.,
susceptibility to breakage/dissolution, mineral-fluid exchange) of biogenic
calcite, a geologically important material of interest to a broad range of
scientists. Thus while her specific motivation for this work is the N isotope
paleo-proxy, the implications extend beyond N to other systems of organic matter
and associated tracers (e.g., δ34S, I/Ca, Na/Ca), and to fundamental research
areas like habitability and the co-evolution of life and planet. Already, the
paleo-δ15N proxy is yielding high-impact results concerning the often-complex
feedbacks between the marine biosphere and climate. Thus, by seeking to inform
these interpretations, the proposed work has the potential to help predict the
unintended consequences of a rapidly warming and acidifying
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.