* 2205542
* Targeted Infusion Project Development of a CRISPR Cas9 based gene editing technology curriculum at Tennessee State University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Suping Zhou, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 08/31/2025
* USD 397,565.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based, innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. This project seeks to incorporate cutting-edge gene editing
technologies with a focus on CRISPR-Cas9 (Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short
Palindromic Repeats)-based genome editing into the curriculum at Tennessee State
University (TSU) and train a generation of students well-versed in the
principles and ethics of gene editing, who go on to become future agricultural
policy makers, scientists, and agribusiness managers in keeping with the
National Science Foundation’s mission to promote the progress of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CRISPR-Cas9 course will (1) offer a dedicated
course to train undergraduates in this cutting-edge technology, (2) increase the
matriculation of students into agricultural and biological sciences graduate
programs, and (3) provide a two-day workshop for faculty from other Historically
Black Colleges or Universities to be trained on-site at TSU so that they can
adapt the material to their own degree offerings. In addition, the results of
the activities will be disseminated to the broader communities through
publications, conference presentations, and via the TSU College of Agriculture
social media channels and personal social media accounts of participating PIs
and senior personnel. This project will have significant impact on the education
and research in the agricultural and biological science departments, and greatly
improve students’ knowledge in emerging technologies, better preparing them for
graduate study and the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.