* 2205093
* SCH: MS-ADAPT: Multi-Sensor Adaptive Data Analytics for Physical Therapy
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2026
* Sara Gombatto, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,199,930.00

The current project addresses the needs of the US population that suffers from
low back pain (LBP). Chronic recurrent LBP is a significant public health
problem that results in functional limitations and disability, as well as
financial burden for the individual and society. Up to 80% of people will
experience LBP at some point in their lifetime, and the total costs of LBP in
the U.S. exceed 100 billion dollars per year, including lost wages resulting
from an inability to work. Physical therapy is effective for managing chronic
LBP and improving patient outcomes. However, patient adherence to physical
therapist (PT) recommendations is low, and research suggests that real-time
personalized feedback on posture and movement throughout the day can improve
outcomes. However, there are major limitations of existing sensor systems.
Additionally, there is a need to integrate these sensor data with existing
sensor technologies and clinical measures. To address this need, this project
will design and develop a sensor system that supports remote monitoring of
posture and movement in patients with LBP, patient adherence to PT
recommendations, and the impact of adherence on outcomes. This system will both
advance the science through development of non-invasive, low-profile sensors to
measure low back posture and movement in a real-life setting, and connect this
novel sensor information with existing devices and clinical measures that are
used to monitor activity and the impact of pain in patients with LBP. Further,
new diagnostic and treatment information gathered from these novel sensors could
be used to advance treatments and improve outcomes for people with LBP. This
research could also be extended to management of other serious health
conditions, such as amputations, spinal cord injury, and stroke. This work will
result in innovations in wearable technologies, deep learning, system
integration, and human-computer interfaces. Notably, we will validate the fabric
sensors for distributed motion monitoring using Electrical Impedance Tomography
and develop algorithms to capture not how much strain the wearer is experiencing
but also the direction of these strains. For predictive modeling, we will use
mathematics and a statistical approach that maps the received data to the
category of strain being experienced. In addition to advancing the science and
clinical practice, this project will contribute to the training of a new
generation of interdisciplinary researchers at the intersection of engineering
and health sciences across PhD, Masters, and undergraduate students, and health
professional trainees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MS-ADAPT system is proposed as a
human-in-the-loop cyber-physical system that integrates data from novel fabric
sensors with data from wrist accelerometers and app-based patient-reported
outcomes, and uses machine-learning analytics to enable predictions in support
of personalized physical therapy. The work is structured into five research
aims: 1) fabric sensors for functional movement assessment of the lumbar spine:
distributed sensing is achieved by forming a network of smart “K-Tape sensors”,
which are strain-sensitive nanocomposites integrated with commercial kinesiology
tape for characterizing skin strains, movements, and muscle activity, 2) data
integration and visualization: a platform for integrating multi-model data
(changes in skin resistance and strain maps from smart K-Tape sensors;
accelerometry from Fitbit; and patient-reported outcomes from apps) and PT
visualizations to support decision-making; 3) laboratory assessment to interpret
smart K-Tape data for objective assessment of lumbar spine movement and muscle
activity, 4) novel machine-learning models that reflect lumbar spine
biomechanics: create both physics-based models and deep learning models to
predict posture and movement type, muscle activation, movement magnitude, and
quality, and 5) clinical evaluation: assess posture and movement in a free-
living environment, adherence to PT recommendations, and the association with
improvement in terms of LBP symptoms and function. Many technical challenges
exist with respect to characterizing new sensors and using novel data streams
for precision medicine insights. Both physics-based models and CNN-LSTM models
will be created and compared for predicting the movement type and quality and
assessing adherence to PT recommendations throughout the
day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.