* 2205900
* Collaborative Research: Exploring reionization and the cosmic dawn through cross-correlations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Steven Furlanetto, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2025
* USD 269,690.00

Over the next several years, new astronomical observatories are poised to
revolutionize our understanding of the earliest generations of galaxies to form
in our Universe. The James Webb Space Telescope will provide an unprecedented
census of these galaxies, while instruments such as the Simons Observatory and
Hydrogen Epoch of Reionization Array will explore their impact on the
surrounding Universe. However, maximizing the science return of these telescopes
requires sophisticated modeling of this first generation of galaxies. This
project is a collaboration between scientists at the University of Nevada, the
University of California, Los Angeles, and Arizona State University, to develop
a suite of flexible, powerful models for interpreting the up-coming observations
from these powerful telescopes. As a part of this project, the team will also
focus on providing research training for undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups, and thus help diversify the next generation of
astronomy researchers. In addition, the team will develop online teaching
materials to engage children in the scientific
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three principal aims. First, the
proposing team will develop a series of new galaxy modeling tools to improve
semi-numeric simulations of the Epoch of Reionization. Beginning with their
existing analytic models of these galaxies, the team will add prescriptions for
Lyman-alpha emission lines, which will then be combined with large-volume
numerical simulations of the galaxy field. The team will use these models to
study how reionization impacts the Lyman-alpha lines, not only in an average
sense but also when applied to specific galaxy populations. Second, this project
will develop tools for "cross-comparisons" between data sets. The goal is to
explore how galaxy surveys can measure the large-scale density and ionization
fields to inform measurements of the intergalactic medium, and the team will
examine how low-frequency radio measurements can identify ionized regions to
inform galaxy measurements. Finally, this project will forecast the results of
cross-correlations between measurements of high-redshift galaxy surveys, the
21cm signal, line intensity mapping signals, and the cosmic microwave
background.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.