* 2205937
* Optimal Transport Applications to Probability, Machine Learning, and Kinetic Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Matias Delgadino, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2025
* USD 229,021.00

The project aims to transfer recently developed insights in mathematical
analysis to other areas of interest including stochastic modelling, artificial
intelligence, and kinetic theory. Stochastic models have recently become
ubiquitous in physical science and social sciences to describe phenomena ranging
from the evolution of political opinions to policy-driven segregation in urban
environments. Artificial intelligence is a fast-growing field, relying on
algorithms that have not yet been thoroughly studied mathematically. Kinetic
theory has been studied in the context of many important applications such as
space shuttle design, and it has become more relevant due to efforts to develop
clean energy fusion reactors. The project will focus on developing mathematical
frameworks and advancing the state of the art in those important fields. The
project will also provide research training opportunities for graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop mathematical frameworks for
particle interactions, machine learning algorithms, and kinetic theory. The
investigator will exploit theories developed in optimal mass transportation and
gradient flows in metric spaces for complex dynamics by studying the associated
free energy. For stochastic models, in particular weakly interacting diffusions,
the project aims to develop a variational structure capturing the effect of
phase transitions. For artificial intelligence, the project will focus on
obtaining mean-field limits of parameter training and providing the functional
structure of successful algorithms, such as Wasserstein generative adversarial
network (GAN) and AlphaGo Zero. For kinetic theory, the project will exploit
newly developed gradient flow formulations for the Landau and Boltzmann
equations to obtain new insight into the behavior of these
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.