* 2205648
* 2022 Frontiers of Engineering Symposia (US FOE, China-America FOE, and EU-US FOE)
* ENG,EFMA
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Janet Hunziker, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 02/28/2023
* USD 110,000.00

The Frontiers of Engineering (FOE) Symposia, organized by the National Academy
of Engineering, provide emerging engineering leaders from academia, industry,
and government laboratories the opportunity to share research insights to
facilitate an interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge and research
methodologies. The nature of emerging technologies and how they fit together to
create products and processes that drive economic growth makes it essential that
engineers understand research developments, techniques and approaches beyond
their own discipline. The FOE symposia serve as a catalyst to spur engineering
innovation and foster collaborative networks of researchers within the United
States and between engineers from the United States and partnering countries.
The FOE symposia are also expected to increase the visibility of engineering and
to highlight the key roles through which engineers serve
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide partial support for three
Frontiers of Engineering (FOE) symposia, to be held in 2022. These symposia,
organized by the National Academy of Engineering (NAE) in concert with
international partner organizations, are for early career researchers. The
meetings to be funded by this award in 2022 are: China-America FOE (CAFOE; July,
2022; Chengdu, China); US FOE (September, 2022; Seattle, Washington); and EU-US
FOE (October, 2022; Bled, Slovenia). The 2022 CAFOE will focus on: Additive and
Subtractive Manufacturing; Food Safety in the Context of Big Data and Genomics;
Water Sustainability; Wearable Electronics and Human Health. Topics for the 2022
US FOE symposium are: Advances in Infectious Disease Diagnostics and Treatment;
The Hydrogen Economy; Technology and Racial Justice and Equity; Conversational
AI. The EU-US meeting will cover: Post-Lithium Batteries; Prosthetics and AI;
Supply Chain/Logistics; Sustainable Buildings. Approximately 100 outstanding
young engineers for the U.S. symposium and 30 from each country for the
bilateral symposia will participate. Each 2.5 day symposium will include plenary
sessions, break-out and poster sessions, and opportunities for developing
collaborative research partnerships. Sessions will consist of presentations on
cutting-edge research, innovations, and emerging research opportunities in
engineering fields relevant to the symposium. As the scheduled dates for each
symposium approaches, pandemic status assessments will be conducted to determine
whether to hold each meeting in-person or convert to virtual or hybrid formats.
FOE symposium papers, abstracts, presentation videos, and slides will be made
available on the FOE website (www.naefrontiers.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.