* 2205617
* Collaborative Research: The Evolution of Gas in Protoplanetary Disks
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ke Zhang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2025
* USD 444,232.00

The objective of the proposed work is to build understanding of the behavior and
evolution of gas in protoplanetary disks. Up to 99% of the mass of a
protoplanetary disk consists of gas. However, astronomers do not have even a
basic understanding of the evolution of the gas component or what factors drive
such evolution. Observations of protoplanetary disks, collected with the ALMA
radio observatory, will be used to test the two leading theories of disk
evolution. The UW-Madison group will design and provide a regular 1-hour long
hands-on session on the topic of radio waves for student group visitors at the
UW-Madison Space Place, a local outreach and educational center. In Tucson, AZ,
the UA group will develop a one day workshop for K-12 teachers on the topic of
radio waves, by collaborating with the Pima County School Superintendent's
Office. In addition, this work will provide research experience to graduate
students, undergraduates, and a post-doc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide a legacy library of robust measurements of gas disk masses and sizes in
a well-defined sample spanning over the whole disk lifetime (0.1-10 Myr). Such
library will be critical to test any current and future theories of disk
evolution. This project will gather breakthrough data to map the evolution of
gas in protoplanetary disks, through the ALMA survey of Gas Evolution in
PROtoplanetary disk, AGE-PRO, an accepted ALMA Cycle 8 large program (103 h, PI.
Zhang). They will collect and analyze deep ALMA observations of a comprehensive
sample of disks throughout the typical disk lifetime. By combining AGE-PRO
observations and state-of- the-art thermo-chemical models, the team will provide
accurate gas mass measurements of these disks (10-20 times better accuracy than
existing constraints), as well as detailed surface density distributions of gas
in these disks. They will then run a large grid of disk evolution models under
different disk evolution mechanisms. Comparing their gas distribution
measurements from observations with that of disk evolution models, they will
provide critical tests to the two leading theories of disk evolution: turbulent
viscosity and magneto-hydrodynamical disk winds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.