* 2205575
* Broadening Participation Research Project: Genre Theory as a Catalyst for Broadening Underserved Students’ Participation in STEM Discourse Communities
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Richard Foreman, Albany State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 349,270.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Broadening Participation Research (BPR) in STEM Education projects
supports the development, implementation, and study of new theory-driven models
and innovations related to the participation and success of underrepresented
groups in STEM undergraduate education. It is expected that the award will
further the faculty member's research capability, as well as improve the
recruitment, retention, and success of underrepresented groups in STEM education
and the workforce. This project at Albany State University seeks to examine
genre theory, the spoken and written text with specific communicative purposes
in the context of a discourse community, to deepen STEM teachers’ knowledge of
language and confidence to design effective instruction for linguistically and
culturally diverse students. It is anticipated that students who participate in
a multi-year program will demonstrate increased mastery of scientific literacy
and develop a sense of belonging within the biological sciences, thereby having
the potential to increase the number of biology graduates at Albany State
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to develop a
process which applies the genre theory through a combination of instructional
interventions, research mentorship and hands-on experiences, allowing students
to decipher the academic language code in STEM and apply it to individual
research projects. The focus is to design and pilot a systematic procedure using
the teaching and learning cycle (TLC) across specific biology courses to provide
access to academic literacy in discourse communities so that underserved
students will have greater access to careers in STEM fields. This project
intends to immerse Albany State University biology majors in a scaffolded series
of curricular and experiential activities which are expressly designed to expose
majors to what will be at its core, a “Research Pathway.” While enrolled in this
pathway, the students will be rigorously mentored and guided in a variety of
settings including the classroom, laboratory, field, and other professional STEM
environments thereby ensuring the development of scientific literacy as well as
the knowledge and skills required by practicing scientists. The discourse
community will allow the faculty to apply the TLC as the student researchers
learn from modeling research activities, practicing STEM discourse, and applying
the knowledge and skills they acquire to individualized long term research
projects. This design and development study involves the creation and testing of
an intricate web of high impact practices for Albany State University biology
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.