* 2205984
* OCE-PRF:  Towards Quantifying Calcium Carbonate Sediment Dissolution During Marine Diagenesis
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Mohammed Hashim, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 11/30/2024
* USD 376,504.00

OCE-PRF Towards Quantifying Calcium Carbonate Sediment Dissolution During Marine
Diagenesis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to investigate
dissolution of calcium carbonate (CaCO3) in sediments below the seafloor and
determine its importance to the chemistry of seawater. This project uses
sediment samples and chemical data collected from different parts of the ocean
during the past five decades by scientific ocean drilling programs. Sediment
dissolution of carbonate can lessen the impact of ocean acidification, the
process that causes the pH of the ocean to decrease due to the uptake of carbon
dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere. Ocean acidification threatens the survival of
marine organisms, such as oysters, clams, and coral reefs, which could alter
marine food chains and food supply to humans. By improving understanding of
carbonate dissolution in the ocean, results from this project will enable better
predictions of the effects of ocean acidification on marine organisms. This will
advance the progress of science and contribute to the knowledge that can inform
public policy. In addition, understanding carbonate sediment dissolution serves
other important purposes. For example, dissolution can create small spaces
between sediments that may get filled with groundwater once sediments convert to
rocks over millions of years. Thus, understanding the occurrence and spatial
distribution of spaces within rocks may help determine the volume and movement
of groundwater in subsurface aquifers. This project provides support for a
postdoctoral research fellow and research training opportunities for students
through the Summer Student Fellowship and Woods Hole-wide Partnership Education
Programs at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbonate mineral dissolution is an integral part of the
alkalinity and carbon cycles in the ocean and is expected to play an
increasingly significant role in mediating changes in ocean chemistry as
atmospheric CO2 continues to rise. The goal of this project is to provide
thermodynamic constraints necessary for quantifying carbonate sediment
dissolution in marine diagenetic environments. Specifically, the CaCO3
saturation state of pore fluids will be calculated in 365 globally distributed
sites from previous scientific ocean drilling expeditions using a specially
developed Pitzer ion activity model which is particularly useful for calculating
activity coefficients in high ionic strength solutions such as those that
characterize most diagenetic environments. These calculations will be
substantiated with geochemical and textural analyses of sediment samples from
four representative sites to identify the specific diagenetic processes (e.g.,
dissolution, precipitation, and recrystallization) and document the conditions
responsible for their occurrence and prevalence. The immediate advantage of
calculating the saturation state of pore fluids is that such data can be used to
estimate carbonate sediment dissolution below the seafloor and quantify its
contribution to the alkalinity and carbon cycles, which will lead to more
accurate predictions of the consequences of ocean acidification. Another benefit
of the global saturation state dataset is that it will improve our understanding
of authigenic carbonate precipitation and its link to the carbon cycle over
Earth history, which has been proposed as a significant sink for carbon.
Furthermore, by complementing the thermodynamic calculations with textural and
geochemical analyses, this project will parse out various diagenetic processes
and identify the sedimentological and geochemical conditions responsible for
their occurrence. Such knowledge is crucial for evaluating the impact of
diagenesis on the carbonate-hosted paleoenvironmental proxies. Collectively,
this project will pave the way towards a mechanistic understanding of carbonate
diagenesis. This will provide important constraints on the oceanic alkalinity
cycle, carbon burial rates, and geochemical proxies, which ultimately help us
better understand the future of our ocean system in the context of climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.