* 2205991
* Relativistic Asymmetric Magnetic Reconnection: Theory and Kinetic Modeling
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Colby Haggerty, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 239,033.00

This project will explore the process of magnetic reconnection in magnetized
astrophysical plasmas. Most space and astrophysical systems, including the sun
and stars in and out of the milky way, are made up of hot, ionized gas -- a
plasma permeated by magnetic fields. Frequently, high energy light and particles
are rapidly generated by these systems through a process known as magnetic
reconnection. An improved understanding of magnetic reconnection and the
radiation it generates will be developed by this project using computer
simulations and by including more realistic conditions motivated by
astrophysical observations. The simulations will be used to connect the
conditions of the plasma to the characteristics of the radiation. The research
effort will improve our understanding of how astrophysical plasmas behave and
what are the sources of high energy radiation from our galaxy and beyond. This
project is jointly funded by the Division of Physics, the Division of
Astronomical Sciences, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental plasma process of
magnetic reconnection will be studied in the relativistic and asymmetric limit,
in regimes where the magnetic energy per particle is larger than the rest mass
energy and the plasma properties of the interacting magnetic structures differ
from each other. The project will attempt to achieve three key goals: (1)
develop scaling predictions for relativistic, asymmetric magnetic reconnection;
(2) identify relationships between the initial asymmetric plasma parameters and
the energetic, non-thermal particle distributions generated by reconnection; and
(3) explore the contribution of magnetic reconnection to the non-thermal
particle distribution in a global astrophysical system. The first two goals will
be approached by performing a survey of plasma simulations of magnetic
reconnection, which will be analyzed and compared with derived theoretical
predictions. The third goal will be achieved by examining relativistic jet
simulations of active galactic nuclei to estimate the reconnection-generated
non-thermal spectrum of energetic particles. The parameter regimes to be
explored, along with the application to relativistic jets is directly relevant
to the growing field of plasma astrophysics and can provide insight into the
origin of accelerated high energy particles and the associated impulsive
emission in astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.