* 2205454
* Collaborative Research: SCH: An AI Coach to Enhance Surgical Teamwork in the Cardiac Operating Room
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Vaibhav Vasant Unhelkar, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Martin
* 08/31/2026
* USD 349,683.00

Cardiac surgery is often needed to address some of the most serious heart
problems, resulting in administration of more than 900,000 cardiac procedures
each year. The cardiac Operating Room (OR) is a complex environment where
healthcare professionals from multiple disciplines -- including surgeons,
anesthesiologists, perfusionists, and nurses -- collaborate to administer this
life-critical care. To successfully administer care, all members of the surgical
team are expected to perform their tasks in lockstep and with full awareness of
dynamic situations encountered during surgery. However, achieving such ideal
teamwork is difficult in the complex environment of cardiac OR, where human
performance is adversely affected by factors such as high workload, fatigue, and
interruptions or disruptions during surgery. This project addresses an urgent
need for mitigating these preventable human errors and improving patient safety
through the design of an Artificial Intelligence (AI)-enabled coaching system
(AI Coach) for monitoring, assessing, and enhancing surgical teamwork in the
cardiac OR. Central to the functioning of the AI Coach will be a set of novel
machine learning and explainable artificial intelligence algorithms to
computationally generate interpretable feedback and interventions for enhancing
surgical teamwork based on multimodal sensor data. The project will train
students in the multi-disciplinary research area of Smart Health. The project
will increase public engagement with AI, by incorporating the research results
into a planned museum exhibit on human-AI collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project’s overarching goal is to design the AI Coach system
comprised of multimodal sensing hardware, data-driven algorithms, and a user
interface to enhance surgical teamwork in the cardiac OR. AI Coach will achieve
its objectives by pursuing two parallel strategies: (i) addressing the problem
of modeling surgical teamwork; (ii) computationally generating feedback to
improve this teamwork. The project team will first develop a novel Team Markov
Model (TMkM) that reflects the surgical team’s mental model. Then, the
computational core of the system will be realized through the development of (a)
machine learning algorithms based on novel multi-agent imitation learning
methods to arrive at predictive models of teamwork that explicitly depend on
latent performance-shaping factors, such as mental models, and (ii) explainable
AI techniques to computationally generate interpretable feedback and
interventions for enhancing teamwork. Due to the challenge of collecting large
data sets of surgical teamwork, the algorithm development will emphasize sample-
and label-efficient techniques. The project team will prototype and test
usability of the integrated system by employing iterative, user-centered design
approaches. The solutions will be developed and evaluated using multi-modal
expert-annotated data of surgical teamwork and prototyped in a state-of-the-art
OR simulation facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.