* 2205914
* Characterizing exoplanet host stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Tabetha Boyajian, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2025
* USD 339,316.00

The parent star in any exoplanet system dominates the system in every respect:
it comprises most of the mass and represents the principal energy source. For
most exoplanets, the only light observed is that emitted by the star. This light
is then modified by the influence of the exoplanet through, for instance,
occultation or Doppler shifting. Planetary parameters -- including mass, radius,
radiation environment, and equilibrium temperature -- are inferred from the
measured stellar parameters. The team will use Georgia State University’s CHARA
(Center for High Angular Resolution Astronomy) Array, the longest baseline
optical/infrared interferometer in the world, to study exoplanet host stars.
They will determine astrophysical parameters, including empirical values for the
system parameters such as planetary radius for transiting systems, and
calculated parameters such as the boundaries of the system habitable zone (HZ).
The team will also use their interferometric observations to determine radii for
stars with and without planets. This project will support a graduate student’s
thesis research, as well as enable research experiences for several
undergraduate students at LSU. The proposal team will maintain a public presence
by giving talks open to the community and through collaboration with dozens of
amateurs from the American Association of Variable Star Observers. They will
maintain an online presence through their education program hosted on Reddit and
communication through various other media channels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researdh team will directly determine physical radii and effective temperatures
of a large number of nearby stars with a special emphasis on exoplanet hosts.
The high angular resolution attainable via long-baseline optical interferometry
(LBOI) is routinely used to directly measure the angular sizes of such nearby
targets. Combining angular sizes from LBOI, trigonometric parallaxes from
Hipparcos, and bolometric fluxes via photometry and spectral energy distribution
fitting allows for largely model-independent determinations of stellar radii and
effective temperatures. Atmospheric properties for interferometry targets are
also possible to measure as they are nearby and very bright, thus allowing for
high signal-to-noise observations. The same data serve to establish semi-
empirical, predictive relations that tie stellar observables to fundamental
properties, such as surface brightness relations, which relate stellar broad
band color to angular radius. The team will continue their interferometric
survey of nearby dwarf stars with an emphasis on exoplanet host stars. Their aim
will be to establish direct and indirect characterizations of all applicable
exoplanetary systems. Data from this program provide empirical system parameters
where applicable and improve the predictive accuracy of stellar models and
parameter relations for the characterization of exoplanetary
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.