* 2205624
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Atomic, Molecular, and Biological Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Gregory Faris, NUMENTUS TECHNOLOGIES INC.
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 06/30/2024
* USD 285,454.00

The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at the Molecular Physics
Laboratory at SRI International provides six undergraduate students the
opportunity to participate in twelve weeks of summer research on topics in
atomic, molecular and biological physics in a non-university research
laboratory. This program produces students who understand the process of
performing research, starting with the development of the problem and continuing
with evaluation of the approach, performing measurements, and drawing
conclusions. This training helps prepare the Nation's future well-trained
workforce required to continue to lead an increasingly technological world. The
program has also incorporated an ethics training class and has actively pursued
field trips with summer interns to local Silicon Valley startups to showcase
scientific research and development in its most nascent and challenging
phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to participating in research with an
experienced mentor, the REU students will engage in weekly activities such as
seminars, ethics training, safety training, and visits to other research
laboratories, to ensure not only that their research stays on track but that
they have an engaging collegial and scholarly experience. By the end of the
program, every student will have presented the results of the work in a thirty-
minute seminar. The host laboratories, known for research in physics and
interdisciplinary offshoots of physics based research, have a proven record of
undergraduate research as evidenced by the number of student coauthors in
journal publications. SRI will assign a Ph.D. mentor to each student, conduct an
extensive program that includes field trips and seminars, provide training in
laboratory safety, and develop a social program for the
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.