* 2205241
* Unifying Rigid and Soft Grippers for Assistive Eating
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Dylan Losey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2025
* USD 640,790.00

Over one million American adults living with physical disabilities need help
eating. Robots can assist these people by reaching for, picking up, and carrying
bites of food to the user's mouth. Today's assistive robots pick up foods using
traditional utensils (like forks), but these utensils fall short when the user
wants to pick up small, slippery, and irregularly shaped foods. On the other
hand, soft robotic grippers are strong candidates for grasping these foods ---
but soft grippers may struggle to hold large, heavier items (such as a glass of
water). This award aims to develop new fundamental understanding of object
manipulation by combining soft, tunable adhesives and rigid, parallel mechanisms
into a single rigid-soft robotic gripper. The team of researchers will explore
how human operators use these grippers, and how these grippers can learn from
humans to automate the process of reaching for and grasping items. The resulting
rigid-soft gripper paradigm will expand the range of foods and other objects a
robot can pick up. In addition to improving quality of life through assistive
eating, this technology has applications in manufacturing factories, food
processing, and fruit harvesting, where it can enable robotic arms to grasp
objects of diverse textures, sizes, and shapes. To inspire and train K-12
students for future careers in engineering, the team will host live and remote
robotic demonstrations where students control a robot arm and rigid-soft
gripper.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project introduces a physics and algorithmic
formalism for object manipulation that unifies rigid and soft robotic grippers
along a continuous spectrum. The key insight is that --- instead of developing
grippers that are either rigid or soft --- designers can leverage recent
advances in active adhesives to coat rigid grippers with an array of soft
materials. The team of investigators will: i) Characterize how best-case robots
and everyday humans utilize rigid, soft, and rigid-soft grippers, ii) Learn from
human inputs to autonomously and robustly pick up new items with rigid-soft
grippers, and iii) Unify the spectrum of rigid and soft grippers under a physics
equation that predicts gripping forces as a function of gripper design, object
criteria, and human control patterns. The combination of a physics-based
adhesion formalism with learned operator models will provide new insights into
how adhesion phenomena and user inputs can enhance gripping capacity. The
contributions will be evaluated through user studies where disabled and non-
disabled participants teleoperate a robot arm and rigid-soft
gripper.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-directorate
Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and funded by the
Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.