* 2205990
* OCE-PRF: Lighting up the ocean: resonant nanophotonic metasurfaces for autonomous in situ measurement of aquatic phycotoxins
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2022,09/30/2022
* Halleh Balch, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 09/30/2022
* USD 46,979.00

OCE-PRF: Lighting up the Ocean: resonant nanophotonic metasurfaces for
autonomous in situ measurement of aquatic biotoxins &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
changing climate is driving fundamental shifts in marine and freshwater
ecosystems. Phytoplankton are microscopic organisms responsible for half of the
global photosynthetic carbon fixation and at least half of the world’s oxygen
production. However, certain kinds of phytoplankton can produce powerful
biotoxins that harm humans and wildlife, contaminate water sources, and damage
local economies. Sensors for phytoplankton toxin production are a critical
infrastructure needed to advance both fundamental research and climate
resilience. However, current methods of studying phytoplankton toxins and their
genes are based on methods that are costly, require sophisticated
infrastructure, and lack remote, real-time detection capabilities central to
understanding the dynamics of the coupled water/climate ecosystem. This project
addresses this gap by developing a new optical measurement technique that uses
nanostructured silicon surfaces to amplify light for sensitive detection of
target molecules. This project will support the postdoctoral research fellow,
includes training of undergraduates from primarily undergraduate institutions,
and seeks to contribute key resources and data for better resource management
and public water stewardship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microscopic photosynthetic
organisms, phytoplankton, are an essential part of the earth’s carbon cycle and
are critical to driving biogeochemical cycles. But under certain conditions,
phytoplankton can undergo explosive growth forming dense blooms called harmful
algal blooms (HABs) that can cover hundreds of square kilometers and produce
powerful biotoxins. Understanding how environmental drivers impact plankton
nutrient cycling and toxin production is key to advancing climate resilience but
remains an outstanding measurement challenge. Methods of monitoring HABs and
understanding toxin dynamics are largely based on microscopy, mass spectroscopy,
and PCR; techniques that are time consuming, require sophisticated
infrastructure, and lack the real-time in situ detection capabilities necessary
to understand how the physicochemical environment drives phytoplankton metabolic
dynamics in a changing ecosystem. This postdoctoral fellowship aims to address
this gap by developing high quality factor (high-Q) nanophotonics for sensitive,
quantitative, amplification-free, and label-free detection of aquatic
phycotoxins in near real-time and in situ. Rather than amplifying a biomolecule
to successfully detect it, high-Q metasurfaces use nanostructured silicon to
strongly amplify laser light at molecular binding sites to enable sensitive
detection of target molecules in a scalable, highly multiplexed, all-optical
platform with a compact footprint. This postdoctoral fellowship will focus on
two phycotoxins: domoic acid, a neurotoxin produced by the marine diatoms,
Pseudo-nitzschia spp., that is responsible for human and wildlife mortalities,
and microcystin, a liver toxin produced by cyanobacteria and that poses a major
threat to drinking, recreational, and agricultural water supplies. While domoic
acid is a low molecular weight L- proline derivative, microcystin is a
relatively large cyclic peptide; together these two prevalent phycotoxins will
demonstrate the broad applicability of this technique across marine metabolites
and diverse environments. Together, this research will enable real-time
quantitative detection of phycotoxins over a large range of concentrations and
environmental conditions. The outputs of this work will be an avenue for real-
time measurements of phycotoxins, which can be combined with and interpreted in
the context of correlative measurements of temperature, pH, and chlorophyll
fluorescence, deepening our fundamental understanding of how changing climate
conditions drive phytoplankton productivity and toxin
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.