* 2205996
* OCE-PRF: Windows into Cretaceous diatom paleobiology: Seasonal responses in laminated sediments and survivability and response to the Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Jason Coenen, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 07/31/2024
* USD 329,660.00

Diatoms are photosynthetic algae that are an essential part of the biosphere and
Earth’s climate system. While Cenozoic records indicate their impact on primary
biological and chemical cycles, there is a lack of descriptive and applied
research on Cretaceous diatoms. This lack of descriptive work limits their
application for understanding ancient global ecosystems such as the Cretaceous
greenhouse climates. Therefore, developing a better understanding of how diatoms
responded to significant environmental perturbations during the end-Cretaceous
mass extinction event and their response to seasonal changes in the early
Cretaceous; is critical for understanding how Earth’s climate system has evolved
through geologic time and helps constrain future climate variability. The
unifying research theme is to better understand the controls on diatom responses
to paleoenvironmental changes and improve their utility as tools for Cretaceous
geological studies. PI Coenen will study modern and ancient laminated sediments
to better understand Ocean Drilling Project Site 693 paleoenvironments and
diatom taxonomy. This work will provide a critical understanding of early
Cretaceous climate variability on a seasonal timescale, which will aid in the
understanding of Earth’s climate system in a greenhouse world. Additionally, PI
Coenen will study diatoms and silicoflagellates both before and after the
Cretaceous-Paleogene (K/Pg) mass extinction to see how siliceous microfossils
respond to environmental perturbations and understand what factors led to
survivability in diatoms through this mass extinction event. As an NSF
Postdoctoral Researcher, PI Coenen will mentor undergraduate student projects
and learn how to mentor graduate level projects and run a research lab with Dr.
Harwood. Additionally, PI Coenen will develop modules for an online Antarctic
Geosciences course and a Paleogene and Cretaceous siliceous microfossil
biostratigraphy workshop. PI Coenen will also host outreach activities at local
libraries and k-12 schools and work closely with UNL to foster efforts to
broaden participation in the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research seeks to develop new information on diatom paleobiology and
paleoecology from two locations in the Southern Hemisphere, ranging in time from
the early Cretaceous through the K/Pg mass extinction event. PI Coenen will
evaluate whether modern ecological approaches can be applied to ancient
paleontological records. The central hypothesis is that Cretaceous diatoms
shared many life strategies with modern diatoms, allowing for the application of
‘biological uniformitarianism’ to interpret fossil diatom records. This research
will be conducted at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, where Dr. Harwood will
mentor PI Coenen on Cretaceous diatom systematics, biostratigraphy, and
paleoecology. Drs. Harwood and Coenen will collaborate with Dr. Leventer to
provide Coenen training on modern diatom-bearing laminated sediments from the
East Antarctic margin to build his skill set to interpret early Cretaceous
diatom seasonal changes from ODP Site 693 laminations. This work will provide a
rare opportunity to study high-resolution ocean-atmospheric forcing during early
Cretaceous greenhouse climates. Additionally, siliceous microfossils from
Seymour and Vega islands, Antarctic Peninsula, will be documented across a
precursor extinction recognized in the macrofauna ~150 kyr prior to the K/Pg
mass extinction event, as well as document the post-event recovery. The response
of both silicoflagellates and diatoms to extreme environmental perturbations
will be studied in detail to document silicoflagellate retrograde evolution and
better understand how diatoms survived the K/Pg extinction that decimated other
fossil phytoplankton. Study of diatom assemblages, with a focus on abundance and
volume changes of diatom resting spores across a potential precursor extinction
related to the Deccan Traps will provide data to resolve these questions.
Additionally, this research on the newly forming Southern Ocean has important
implications for understanding late Cretaceous paleoclimate and
paleoceanography. Both proposed studies have the potential to constrain modeling
efforts and provide a better sense of paleoenvironments in these respective
intervals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.