* 2205974
* Binary Compact Objects and their Progenitors
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* James Fuller, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2025
* USD 369,564.00

Heat from nuclear reactions inside stars creates pressure that prevents the star
from collapsing under its own gravity. However, all stars will ultimately run
out of nuclear fuel. When this happens, the star collapses under its own weight
and the core will form a very dense, compact remnant. Depending on the mass of
the star, the remnant will either be a black hole, neutron star or white dwarf.
Many stars are formed in binary systems – two stars that are gravitationally
bound to each other. If both stars in a binary evolve to form compact objects,
the resulting system is known as a “compact object binary”. Compact object
binaries that in-spiral and merge have been observed in recent sky surveys as
bright transients and detected as sources of gravitational waves. A team from
the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) will study the formation
pathways of these compact binary systems. Their results will constrain the
physical processes affecting the evolution of these systems, which determine
their gravitational wave and electromagnetic signatures. The team will work on a
variety of projects designed to retain under-represented minority (URM)
undergraduates in STEM fields. In particular, the Principal Investigator (PI)
will mentor URM undergraduate and graduate students from Caltech and neighboring
institutions. The PI will also participate in Caltech's new FUTURE Ignited
program designed to help students of color to prepare for graduate school,
including help with the application process and research opportunities at
Caltech. Finally, the PI will participate in several public outreach events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will use advanced computational techniques to
model the formation pathways of binary compact objects. They will focus on
understanding how orbital angular momentum (AM) is lost to enable the two
remnants to in-spiral and merge. In particular, they will: (1) Perform
evolutionary calculations for binary White Dwarf (WD) models with a range of WD
masses, initial orbital periods, and hydrogen shell masses to determine the post
common envelope conditions of observed WD binaries. (2) Implement extra AM loss
via the Lagrangian-2 (L2) point into binary stellar evolution models for a range
of progenitor mass, companion mass, and initial orbital period to account for
the fact that material can escape through the higher Lagrangian points if the
mass transfer rate is high enough. (3) Run binary models that include helium
(Case BB) transfer, including extra AM loss due to L2 mass loss. (4) Model the
light curves of heavily stripped type Ib/c supernovae produced by stars
undergoing Case BB helium mass transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.