* 2205692
* Graduate Student Participation and CCD Procurement for the Original PolyOculus Array
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Stephen Eikenberry, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 173,438.00

This project continues development of a new telescope configuration that is
referred to as PolyOculus, which enables large telescope arrays at significantly
lower cost. This allows smaller universities and colleges with limited budgets
to engage in forefront research. The system uses small amateur telescopes to
create robotic light collectors. These units are pointed at the same target and
the light is fed into custom fiber optic cables. A photonic lantern is used to
combine the light from the parallel fibers. Light can be further combined again
with other similar units to make even bigger telescopes. The PolyOculus system
would serve as a pathfinder for studies of targets identified by the Vera Rubin
Observatory, to study the nature of Dark Energy and search for Earth-like
planets. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Follow-up spectroscopy is scientifically
important for identifying the basic nature of new sources that are being
discovered by time series observation of the night sky (e.g. supernovae, flare
stars, tidal disruption events, or new classes of objects), for determining the
key physical properties of these events(temperature, composition, radial
velocity, outflows, etc.) and to follow the evolution of those properties with
time. Traditional large spectroscopic facilities are expensive to construct.
This project will develop a method for producing large-area-equivalent
telescopes by using photonic technology to link multiple semi-autonomous, small,
inexpensive, commercial-off-the-shelf telescopes. Crucially, this scalable
design has construction costs which are substantially lower than equivalent
traditional large-area telescopes. This projectâ€™s innovative array approach
represents a new approach to obtaining spectroscopic follow-up for time-domain
astronomy. Two graduate students will be engaged in the deployment and
commissioning of the instrument at the Mount Laguna
Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.