* 2205095
* Measurement, Simulation, and Mitigation of the Impact of Low-Earth Orbit (LEO) Satellite Constellations on Wide-Field Optical Surveys
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* J. Anthony Tyson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2025
* USD 564,958.00

Ground based optical observatories require a dark night sky to answer questions
about the nature of our universe. However, companies and governments are
launching many bright satellites into Low-Earth Orbit (LEO). These “mega
constellations” will fundamentally change astronomical observing. Night-time
images will have streaks caused by the passage of sun-illuminated satellites.
With the planned launch of 100,000 or more of these satellites to orbit the
earth, there will be negative impacts on astronomy. Without mitigation in the
next decade this will transform ground based optical astronomy. Wide field sky
surveys such as Rubin Observatory’s Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) are
most impacted. The glare from satellite constellations impacts professional and
amateur astronomers as well as the general public. To address these issues, the
PI proposes to pursue multiple mitigations that includes working with the team
at SpaceX.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of companies and governments are in
various stages of planning or deploying bright satellites in Low-Earth Orbit
(LEOsats) in greater numbers than ever before. Given that several companies are
going ahead with their constellations, an assessment of the science impact and
exploration of the effectiveness of several mitigation strategies will be made.
Wide-field sky surveys like the Rubin Observatory are most impacted. The PI will
develop novel algorithms for CCD image processing, an advanced strategy for
avoiding the brightest LEOsats, a new method of masking LEOsat streaks, on-sky
exploration of the effects of LEOsat streaks using Rubin Observatory’s
commissioning camera, validation of these mitigation strategies, and full
simulations of LSST observing and resulting impact on key science of the
residual systematic errors from the millions of LEOsat trails in the data.
Outreach efforts to the wider community will involve attendance at SATCON-1,
SATCON-2, and Dark &amp; Quiet Skies workshops, as well as presentations at the
annual Rubin Observatory Project and Community
Workshop&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.