* 2205572
* SHF: Small: Learning Circuit Networks from Measurements
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Zhuo Feng, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2025
* USD 550,000.00

Recent graph-learning techniques exploit both graph topological properties and
node-feature (attribute) information to achieve promising results for various
important applications such as vertex (data) classification, link prediction
(recommendation systems), community detection, drug discovery, partial
differential equation (PDE) solvers, and electronic design automation (EDA). On
the other hand, graph learning can still be extremely challenging when there
exists only partial or no knowledge about the underlying graph topologies.
Fortunately, recent research shows that it is possible to learn graph topologies
from node-feature (attribute) data so that existing graph-learning algorithms
can be applied subsequently. However, even the state-of-the-art graph-topology-
learning algorithms do not scale to large data sets due to their high
computational complexity, which may prohibit their applications in real-world
large-scale graph-learning tasks, such as those adopted for integrated-circuit
networks involving billions of components. This project is also likely to spark
new research in many other related fields, such as complex system/network
modeling, model order reduction, computational biology, precision medicine, and
transportation networks. The source code of the developed algorithms will be
released on a public website managed by the PI to facilitate technology
transfers to the industry, especially to the leading EDA companies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will investigate highly scalable yet
sample-efficient spectral methods for learning graph topologies from potentially
high-dimensional data samples, such as voltage and current measurements in
circuit networks. The proposed approach is based on a novel spectral-graph
densification framework to allow for more efficient estimations of attractive
Gaussian Markov Random Fields (GMRFs). A unique property of the learned graphs
is that the effective-resistance distances on the learned graph will encode the
similarities between the original data samples. The success of this research
plan will immediately lead to the development of more scalable data-driven,
physics-informed EDA algorithms for modeling, simulation, optimization, and
verification of integrated circuits (ICs). The accomplished theoretical results
will likely advance state of the art in spectral graph theory, dimensionality
reduction, scientific computation, data visualization, and machine learning
(ML).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.