* 2205635
* Are Hubble Residuals a Product of Poor Mass Estimates? Improving Supernova Ia Host Galaxy Characterizations
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Louis-Gregory Strolger, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2024
* USD 355,665.00

Type Ia supernovae (SNIa) are extraordinary cosmological distance indicators
that were used in the discovery of the accelerated expansion of the universe and
are now being used for precision measurements of the equation of state of dark
energy. SNIa properties now curiously show trends with host galaxy properties,
which complicates their use as clean predictors of distance. At present, it is
not clear if these trends are indicating something physical, or if they are
simply a manifestation of insufficient data and the methods that are used to
measure galaxy properties. This project will revisit these trends, making use of
the more extensive multi-wavelength datasets that are now available, and
improved methods for characterizing galaxy masses and other properties. The team
at Johns Hopkins University will enlist undergraduate interns from Baltimore-
area schools, with a focus on students from underrepresented and underserved
backgrounds, to participate in the archival data recovery, galaxy
characterization, and publication of the final
catalogs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this program is to test the
much-debated existence and magnitude of Hubble residuals, excesses in corrected
SNIa peak luminosities that appear to correlate with host galaxy masses. The
team will compile an extensive multi-wavelength dataset from available and soon
to be available infrared archives, leveraging existing optical data to recover
the best available star-formation histories from non-parametric fitting, and
more accurately determine stellar masses and star-formation rates for SNIa host
galaxies from the Pantheon+ sample, which is a large compilation of several past
SNIa surveys. Using this complete and robust catalog of host characteristics,
the team will revisit Hubble residuals and their implications for cosmological
analyses. In addition, this project will allow the first estimation of SNIa
delay-time distributions as a function of host mass, and over a wide redshift
range, and thus test the hypothesis, implied by the Hubble residuals, that SNIa
are the products of more than one dominant progenitor
mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.