* 2206471
* Collaborative Research: Tidal Disruption of Stars by Massive Black Holes
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Alexander Chekhovskoy, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2025
* USD 314,904.00

The disruption and subsequent accretion of stars by super-massive black holes
(SMBHs) has been linked to many luminous flares observed in the nuclei of nearby
galaxies. Our theoretical understanding of these tidal disruption events (TDEs),
however, remains incomplete. A research collaboration between the University of
California Santa Cruz, the University of California Berkeley, and Northwestern
University will bring together experts in different fields of physics:
hydrodynamics, general relatively and radiative transfer to address important
gaps in our understanding of TDEs. This understanding requires a multi-pronged
approach that attempts to resolve the underlying physics at a wide range of
physical and temporal scales. The phenomena of TDEs provide an exciting
opportunity to study the size of SMBHs in quiescent galaxies, the stellar
populations and dynamics in galactic nuclei, and the physics of black hole
accretion under well-defined conditions. Whereas active galactic nuclei may be
supplied by a steady stream of fuel for thousands of years, TDEs offer a unique
opportunity to study a single SMBH when the mass accretion rates and feeding
timescales change over days or months. The project will also include an
education and public outreach program which aims to cross-fertilize the training
of computational scientists and students in the visual arts and digital media
using state-of-art simulations as common ground in a group environment that
significantly increases the number of under-represented students trained in
computational astrophysics. To do this, the astronomers will partner with
university arts and education programs and with local schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wide-field transient surveys are currently delivering more
and better data on TDEs. Fully three-dimensional simulations of accretion disks
are computationally expensive, and as a result there is trade-off between
running a simulation with significant resolution that only resolves a fraction
of the disk and global simulations at moderate resolution that resolve the full
structure. For TDEs the trade-offs are even more pronounced and require a large
range of scales to be resolved simultaneously. As a consequence, running a
single simulation of the full problem incorporating all of the aforementioned
effects would not only be prohibitive, but also difficult to interpret because
of the complexity of the interplay between the various physical mechanisms at
different scales. As an alternative, the investigators will aim to answer these
questions via a series of numerical experiments that isolate the key processes
that regulate the disruption itself, the formation of the debris disk, the
production of jets and the generation of the emanating radiation. In addition to
being computationally feasible, this approach will enable a thorough
understanding of each of the processes, which are likely highly reminiscent of
the well-studied phenomenology of steadily-accreting
AGN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.