* 2206493
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical Analysis of the Effects of Rotation, Stratification, and Dissipation in Incompressible Fluid Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Aseel Farhat, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2025
* USD 213,000.00

The rotation of the planet, the stratification of density, and the generation of
friction all play important roles in the motion of geophysical fluids. These
mechanisms are always present in our ocean and atmosphere, as well as that of
other planets. They are collectively responsible for many well-known phenomena
that we observe in nature, e.g., jet streams, zonal jets, the El Ni√±o cycle, and
Jupiter's Great Red Spot, to name only a few. These mechanisms typically serve
to constrain the motion of the fluid in a very particular way. For instance, it
is observed that in a rapidly rotating fluid in three-dimensions, particles that
are aligned along a common vertical parallel to the axis of rotation move nearly
in unison, thus rendering the overall motion of the flow to be essentially two-
dimensional. Despite many experimental and computational efforts to understand
the precise development of such phenomena, the mathematical justification for
them, that is, from directly studying the equations of motion themselves,
remains largely open. This project will systematically address such concerns in
various geophysical settings. This project will also provide research and
mentorship opportunities for students at the undergraduate and graduate levels,
as well as postdoctoral scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An overarching goal of
this project is to understand various manifestations of finite-dimensionality
and its interconnections with the mechanisms of dissipation, rotation, and
stratification. The main approach will be through the study of the regularity
and long-time behavior of solutions to the associated equations of motion that
allow one to obtain precise quantitative relations between the parameters
representing the strength of these various mechanisms with the smallest relevant
length scales of the fluid flow. The main models of interest will be those that
arise naturally in geophysics such as the rotating Navier-Stokes equations and
the stably stratified Boussinesq equations. In order to properly quantify the
effects carried by rotation and stratification, anisotropic dispersive
estimates, and careful analyses of resonance structures inherent in such systems
will be carried out. A novelty of this project is the interplay between physical
space- and frequency space-based approaches. Although both approaches have seen
success in studying the regularity of solutions, the frequency space-based
approach is well-suited for quantifying the number of degrees of freedom, while
the physical space-based approach is well-suited for exploiting information
about the spatial analyticity radius. This project attempts to merge these two
approaches in ways that allow one to jointly exploit the reductions in
dimensionality in both physical-space and frequency-space that is observed in
rotating or stratified fluid flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.