* 2206099
* Collaborative Research: RUI:  Integral Field Unit Speckle Imager
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Christine Broadbridge, Southern Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2025
* USD 542,317.00

This project will build a new kind of imaging system for astronomical
observations. The innovative new imager will be capable of removing the effect
of turbulence in the Earth’s atmosphere, leading to images with extremely fine
detail, while simultaneously collecting all wavelengths of visible light at
every point in the image. The instrument will separate the light from each point
into its constituent colors for further, comprehensive analysis. These design
features will lead to extremely precise measurements of the properties of stars
in close binary systems, including being able to identify whether a planet in a
binary star system is orbiting the brighter or the fainter star of the
gravitationally-bound pair. The Kepler and TESS satellite missions have led to
the discovery of a growing number of cases where planets exist in binary star
systems, and this instrument will be uniquely capable of characterizing these
systems. The statistics of such planet-hosting binary stars will help provide an
understanding of star and planet formation processes, potentially including the
formation of Earthlike planets. An education and public outreach portion of the
project will create and disseminate three teaching modules for teachers suitable
for science classes in Connecticut public schools and beyond. These modules will
highlight the technology aspects of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators seek to build the first hyperspectral speckle imaging instrument
by using a custom-made integral field unit and taking advantage of the speed at
which large-format EMCCDs can read out to capture spectra of resolved speckles
on the image plane. The instrument will collect all visible light between
approximately 450 and 770 nm and allow for complete flexibility in reassembling
and analyzing speckle images from the raw data at all desired wavelengths. This
innovation obviates the need for dispersion correction and removes the main
systematic errors that limit speckle photometry. The instrument will have no
moving parts and be flexible enough to use at telescopes from the 1-m class up
to 4-m class. The creation of this instrument will enable two main areas in
stellar and exoplanetary astronomy. First, it will resolve visible spectra of
components of binary stars down to the diffraction limit. This means it will be
possible to measure effective temperatures and luminosities of close binary
stars in a much more robust way than with current speckle imagers or space-based
surveys such as Gaia. Second, there are now many exoplanets known that are found
in binary star systems. This instrument will be uniquely capable of determining
which star in a binary system the planet orbits for transiting exoplanets by
measuring the magnitude difference of the binary while the planet is in transit
and comparing the result to when it is not. The derived statistics will lead to
a better understanding of star and planet formation mechanisms as well as more
accurate characterization of planetary radii and densities. An education and
public outreach portion of the project will create and disseminate curriculum
modules for high school science classes consistent with the Next Generation
Science Standards for K-12 education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.