* 2206450
* Collaborative Research: Peering to the Heart of Massive Star Birth
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jonathan Tan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chris J. Davis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 449,485.00

Massive stars much larger than the sun affect the evolution of galaxies through
their powerful winds and the intense radiation they produce. When they explode
as supernovae, massive stars throw heavy elements into the surrounding
interstellar medium. Yet despite their importance, little is known about how
they are formed. In this project, over 100 very young, massive stars will be
observed with radio telescopes in New Mexico and Chile. Computer models will be
used to interpret the observational data and to develop a better understanding
of massive star formation as a whole. Graduate and undergraduate students will
be involved in this project. The proposers also plan on developing an existing
outreach program, Star Hunt, that involves middle school children and their
teachers in an astronomy research exercise. Star Hunt Plus will be deployed to
schools in New Mexico, Virginia and eventually
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project, between teams in
Virginia and New Mexico, will investigate the nature and origin of massive young
stars. A combined theoretical and observational approach is proposed: a grid of
model Spectral Energy Distributions and synthetic images will be produced. Over
100 massive protostars will then be observed in cm continuum emission with the
Very Large Array and in mm/sub-mm emission with the Atacama Large Millimeter
Array. The observational data will be used to test the models, illustrate the
presence of lower-mass companions and radio jets, and characterize inflow and
outflow properties. Infall velocities and mass flow rates will be compared to
the values expected from the SED-fitted core accretion models. Similarly, the
molecular outflow properties will be compared to those of the radio jets and
predictions of the models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.