* 2206259
* Collaborative Research: A Tunable Astrophotonic Spectrometer with Adaptive Faint-Source Extraction
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kevin Bundy, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2025
* USD 672,384.00

Future telescope instruments capable of collecting and processing light from
thousands of faint galaxies simultaneously are planned. Such instruments would
enable transformative insights, including on the nature of dark energy and dark
matter. The investigators represent a collaboration between astronomical
instrument builders and engineering groups specializing in new lightwave
circuits that manipulate light on a chip. This technology is exciting because
such “photonic” chips are small and light-weight and can be mass-produced to
provide more powerful astronomical instruments at a fraction of their current
cost. The investigators propose to build and test a novel chip whose performance
can be tuned. This makes it ideally suited to studying thousands of small
galaxies, with the eventual aim of revealing their dark matter content for the
first time using an array of such chips mounted on a telescope. The
investigators will weave the themes of this work into several STEM engagement
efforts targeting underserved communities and age levels from elementary school
to undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next-generation of spectroscopic
facilities will need to be capable of observing 1 billion spectra efficiently.
This is many factors greater than what is possible today. The only viable path
is an order-of-magnitude reduction in the cost-per-spectrum afforded by
utilizing integrated photonic technologies. This project makes important strides
towards high-multiplex, on-chip spectrometers by focusing on the wide-field
regime where low-order adaptive optics corrections are possible. The
investigators will develop a new spectrally-tunable chip-based spectrometer that
is easily mass-produced and delivers 2D spectral images well suited to scalable
packaging. Taking advantage of advanced astronomical testing facilities at
UCSC’s Lab for Adaptive Optics, this proposal will inform the conceptual design
of a near-term photonic instrument with modest cost capable of conducting a
powerful dwarf galaxy dark matter survey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.