* 2206573
* Shape dynamics of melting ice: Experiments, simulations, modeling and analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Leif Ristroph, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2025
* USD 631,765.00

The Earth's ice reserves are melting with increasing rate. Interpreting what
these changes mean for the health of our planet requires models that account for
complex processes that act interdependently over immense ranges of length and
time scales. The accuracy of global-scale climate models depends on the physics
at the most fundamental scales, such as how the melting of ice depends on the
shape of its interface with liquid water and the local temperature, salinity,
and flow conditions. Applied and computational mathematics and mathematical
modeling provide many methods that are well suited to addressing these problems.
Applying such techniques and developing new ones specifically for ice melting
can provide critical information needed to improve climate models. Better
understanding the underlying physics and mathematics can also help to explain
the diverse shapes and patterning of natural ice, which could allow local
environmental conditions to be inferred from observations of ice. Investigating
these important issues also provides opportunities to educate students and train
researchers, thereby contributing to a workforce that is well prepared to tackle
these and related problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These projects investigate the
melting dynamics of ice through laboratory experiments, numerical simulations,
mathematical modeling, and analysis. The general progression of the research
program is from idealized settings such as melting of fixed bodies with simple
initial forms in fresh water at fixed far-field temperature to increasingly
elaborate situations involving changes in geometry, temperature, and salinity.
Further extensions address additional couplings such as melting-induced motions
of free ice. Experiments will focus on accurate measurement of ice-water
interface forms and motions in laboratory settings where the initial geometry,
far-field temperature, and salinity profiles can be controlled and
systematically varied. Direct numerical computations will employ phase-field
methods to simulate the evolution of the temperature, flow, and salt
concentration fields that give rise to the interfacial dynamics. Modeling will
invoke idealizations based, for example, on boundary layer theory to derive
moving-boundary descriptions and stability analyses that relate to pattern
formation. All methods will be combined interactively towards targeting
significant gaps in the current understanding of how the evolving shape of ice
feeds back on the melting process and how the morphology of ice can be used to
infer ambient conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.