* 2206218
* Regularity and Stability for Solutions of Quasilinear Wave Equations with Singularities
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Yannan Shen, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 06/30/2025
* USD 162,383.00

The formation of cusp and shock waves in optical systems, liquid crystals, and
water waves are examples of nonlinear phenomena arising in nature and
engineering that can be described by nonlinear partial differential equations.
This project considers nonlinear partial differential equations for wave models
whose solutions might form different types of singularities in finite time, such
as cusp singularities in the shallow water wave equation or shock waves in
models of nonlinear optics, with the overall aim of understanding under which
condition the solutions are valid for all times. The research will give guidance
in engineering, for example for designing and controlling devices in optical
systems. The project will also provide opportunities for research training of
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A main goal of the project is to
describe how the power of nonlinear wave speed impacts the regularity of
solutions. The investigator will study a class of equations, which include the
short pulse equation from nonlinear optics and Camassa-Holm type equations from
water waves, whose solutions might form finite-time singularities. They will
also establish an optimal transport metric when studying the stability of a
system of wave equations modelling nematic liquid crystals. Finally, they will
explore a higher dimensional quasilinear model with radial symmetry, the so-
called O(3) sigma-model, with background in general relativity, Yang-Mills field
and nematic liquid crystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
by the DMS Applied Mathematics Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.