* 2206653
* Magneto-optical quantum excitations and spintronics effects in chiral (CH)x
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Zeev Valy Vardeny, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2025
* USD 825,000.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Next generation electronic applications and
devices will be faster with greater fidelity and require smaller device features
with less heat dissipation. The tiny electron magnetic moment, called spin of
which direction can represent information, has not been used in devices as much
as its charge. These days, spin-based quantum information devices are being
developed to achieve these objectives. New forms of the well-known conducting
polymer, namely (CH)n (where n is a numerical index larger than ~20) that come
in the form of microscopic bundled chains into fibers and rings, offers
opportunities to provide long spin coherence that is required in such devices.
In this project, the effect of light on (CH)n will be characterized using
advanced optical and magneto-optical spectroscopies. This project will
contribute to the development of new, enhanced components for electronics, i.e.
integrated circuits, for numerous applications. In addition this project will
also train undergraduate and graduate students and, thus, contribute to the
future workforce of the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;The understanding of paramagnetic, i.e. spin-carrying,
electronic excitations in the novel chiral and cyclic forms of polyacetylene,
(CH)n films could lead to new quantum sensing, spintronics and optoelectronic
device concepts. In this project we will investigate the neutral
photoexcitations in (CH)n which are composed of four entangled neutral spin 1/2
solitons having very long spin-coherence times and strong chiral effects. For
this research we will use a large arsenal of synthesis, electrical, magnetic,
spintronics as well as transient and steady state optical and magneto-optical
techniques to study spin lifetimes, spin diffusion phenomena, and optical
properties of injected and photogenerated electronic excitations in chiral and
cyclic (CH)x films and spintronic devices. In particular these investigations
will be carried out using circularly polarized steady state and transient
spectroscopies in a broad spectral range of 0.4-15 microns and time ranging from
100 fs to seconds. We will also use magneto-optics and various steady state and
transient optically detected magnetic resonance techniques, as well as
theoretical models to deepen our understanding of the novel neutral excitations
in (CH)n.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.