* 2206096
* Improving modeling of the LIGO AGN channel
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kathleen Saavik Ford, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2025
* USD 446,421.00

The LIGO, Virgo and Kagra (LVK) gravitational wave (GW) detectors are detecting
large numbers of merging compact astrophysical objects (neutron stars and black
holes) in our Universe via gravitational wave observations. An important area of
investigation is how these pairs of compact objects form, come together and
merge within the age of the Universe. Several clues are emerging from LIGO-Virgo
GW observations that suggest that active galactic nuclei, where supermassive
black holes are fed by disks of hot, bright gas, may be a significant
contributor to observed compact object mergers. A research group at the CUNY
Borough of Manhattan Community College and American Museum of Natural History
will rewrite, improve and publicly release to the astronomy community a software
package they have developed to study this AGN formation channel. As part of this
project, the lead investigators will work with a program called AstroCom NYC,
designed to increase diversity in astrophysics research, by involving under-
represented minority undergraduate students directly in research as well as
encouraging research at minority-serving institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some
of the clues linking AGN to compact object mergers include the broken power-law
mass distribution of black holes, intermediate mass black hole formation, and
asymmetric mass merger events (particularly between black holes and neutron
stars). The Monte Carlo code the investigators have developed has made several
original predictions about the AGN channel and by publicly releasing it, they
will help population modelers in the broader community to test AGN channel
priors compared with other channels and move the field towards an understanding
of AGN and the embedded objects within them. This will also accelerate model
development and LVK populations modelling across the community as LVK O4
(observing run 4) begins. This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on
the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.