* 2206358
* DISES: Integrating environmental justice into urban forest assessment and valuation tools: blueprint for the future
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2023,04/30/2023
* Matthew Fry, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 04/30/2023
* USD 1,549,219.00

Urban forests provide communities with diverse benefits––including reduced
exposure to poor air quality, stormwater runoff, excessive heat, and other
health hazards. These benefits, or ecosystem services, are estimated to save
urban residents billions of dollars annually. Increasingly, cities rely on
digital technologies to monitor, plan, and manage urban forests and their
ecosystem services. In theory, digital technologies aid in urban forest
management decisions that improve environmental and human well-being. In
practice, it remains unclear by whom, how, and in what context these
technologies are implemented and the resultant outcomes. This award aims to
understand to what extent digital technologies: (1) facilitate equitable access
to tree-based ecosystem services; (2) involve urban residents in decision-making
processes surrounding urban forests; and (3) represent peoples’ values and
preferences for urban trees. The overarching goal of the project is to improve
urban forest sustainability and equity at the human-technology
frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the significant role of technology in urban
green infrastructure planning and development, urban forests have become a locus
of interactions and feedbacks between social, ecological, and technological
systems. In cities worldwide, decision makers rely heavily on urban forest
assessment and valuation tools to quantify the ecological structure (e.g., tree
canopy), function (e.g., air pollution removal), and economic value (i.e.,
dollars saved) of urban forests. Recent advances allow users to prioritize areas
within cities for tree planting, further guiding decision-making processes.
Thus, digital forest technologies have the potential to influence access to
urban trees and their benefits (distributional justice), participation in
decisions surrounding urban forests (procedural and recognition justice), and
equity through prioritization of certain values over others (recognition
justice). This award asks: How can urban forest assessment and valuation tools
integrate equity concerns and participatory processes to support procedural,
recognition, and distributional justice in urban forestry? Using i-Tree as a
model system, this award will investigate the mechanisms by which digital tools
influence forest governance and equity (i.e., through participation and
recognition) and potential canopy pollution removal (i.e., through benefits
estimates and area prioritizations). Research will be conducted in multiple
cities using a multi-scalar, mixed methods approach, including institutional
analysis, survey and interview questions designed to facilitate participatory
processes, leaf particulate matter sampling, and geospatial analysis using
Geographic Information Systems (GIS), remote sensing, and land use regression
modeling. The project draws on frameworks, approaches, and technologies from
social science, ecology, geospatial science, and visual design to better
understand the development and implications of human-technology partnerships in
urban forest planning and management. Further, by creatively integrating
environmental justice into a major model system for urban forest assessment and
valuation, results could provide an example roadmap for other cities to follow,
potentially transforming urban forest planning and management into a more just
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.