* 2206888
* GOALI: Experimental Tests of Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics Beyond the Onsager Relation: Nonlinear and Far-From-Equilibrium Thermoelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Mark Lee, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2025
* USD 426,013.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Management of heat flow to control
temperature plays a critical role in the proper operation of a wide variety of
modern processes, ranging from running computer chips to heating/cooling a house
to cryptocurrency mining. Interestingly, the physics of heat flow is well
understood only for what is known as “near-equilibrium” situations, where
temperature differences and heat transfers between hot and cold regions are
small. However, many large-scale processes, such as generating electrical power
or running a modern data center, involve sizeable heat flows between objects at
very different temperatures. It is unclear whether existing understanding of
near-equilibrium processes can be used to model accurately such “far-from-
equilibrium” conditions. The main goal of this project is to conduct experiments
on heat flow that violate the main assumptions of the near-equilibrium theory
and test whether its conclusions continue to hold or need to be amended in far-
from-equilibrium situations. The results will provide a foundation on which to
build advanced models to manage far-from-equilibrium heat flows produced in the
industrial production of almost all goods and services. Being an NSF GOALI
partnership between industry and academia, this project will expose students to
an industrial perspective and approach to research, which will be particularly
valuable training to both students and society when they enter the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonequilibrium thermodynamics is concerned with
evolution of heat and entropy when energy, mass, and charge flows result from
various driving forces. A central question is how macroscopic energy dissipation
and entropy production develop when the microscopic particle dynamics are time
reversible and dissipationless. The principle known as the Onsager reciprocal
relation (ORR) is considered a cornerstone of current understanding in
nonequilibrium thermodynamics but was derived assuming the simplest of
conditions: microscopic time-reversal symmetry, linear force-flow dynamics, and
a macroscopic system in near-equilibrium. More complicated cases have been
examined theoretically but with no agreement on whether the ORR can be applied.
No reliable empirical guidance exists to steer the direction of theoretical
work. This project aims to fill in this gap by experimentally exploring to what
extent the ORR, as applied to thermoelectric (TE) physics, continues to remain
valid. In TE systems the ORR predicts the ratio of Peltier coefficient to
thermopower equals the absolute temperature. This project will test the ORR by
measuring this ratio under conditions that violate the ORR’s basic assumptions.
These conditions include going to large enough temperature differences to
qualify as far-from-equilibrium and testing the ORR prediction on semiconductor
diodes that have an intrinsic nonlinear force-flow relation. The main questions
to be answered are whether the ORR continues to be valid even outside its
foundational assumptions and, if not, whether the ORR can be revised to
generalize it to a wider range of conditions. Results of this research will
establish quantitative guidance on any such revisions and thus broaden the
understanding of nonequilibrium thermodynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.