* 2206952
* RET Site: Mission Rebuild Workforce through Advanced Manufacturing Training Of K-14 Educators
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* MD Sarder, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2025
* USD 620,000.00

The Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site at Bowling Green State
University (BGSU) will engage high school (HS) and community college (CC)
educators in cutting edge hands-on research experiences in Advanced
Manufacturing/Robotics. This training program will enhance educators’ knowledge
and skills in the stated domain. The educators will return to their
institutions, develop advanced manufacturing curriculum modules, and enhance the
interest of their students. The U.S. Midwest is known as the heartland of U.S.
manufacturing. Today’s manufacturing is quite different from traditional
manufacturing and it relies heavily on automated and integrated systems.
Traditional manufacturing skills are no match to those advanced
manufacturing/robotics skills. This RET project provides a platform for
researchers and educators to investigate new research opportunities to fill the
existing skills gap in advanced manufacturing. The participating educators will
translate their research experiences and knowledge into classroom practice. This
comprehensive and unique experience will play a transformational role in
preparing future leaders in the emerging areas of advanced
manufacturing/robotics within the U.S. Midwest region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary objective of the Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site at Bowling
Green State University (BGSU) is to play a transformational role in preparing
future leaders in advanced manufacturing by instilling advanced
manufacturing/robotics research experience within STEM educators through six-
week summer workshops dedicated to hands-on research experiences. The summer
workshops will focus on research activities in emerging areas of advanced
manufacturing including modern sensors and actuators, advanced robot
programming, CNC programming, CAD/CAM, 3D printing, and e-factory. This RET
project will strategically engage 18 HS and 18 CC educators from regional HSs
and CCs in research experiences. Through targeted recruitment, the project plans
to engage 18 female and minority STEM educators representing minority and
economically disadvantaged school districts, impacting more than 6,400 STEM
students at local high schools and community colleges. This project cements the
partnership among BGSU, local high schools, and community colleges to address
the common need of producing STEM graduates in advanced manufacturing area. This
project will (a) explore a sustainable educational model that connects high
schools, community colleges, university, and industry; (b) improve the existing
pathways and implement new pathways, expanding opportunities for STEM students,
focusing on women and minorities; and c) play a transformational role in
preparing future leaders in advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.