* 2206328
* Collaborative Research: The Virgo Cluster as a Testbed for the Study of Galaxy Formation and Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Puragra Guha Thakurta, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2025
* USD 279,069.00

Galaxies and clusters of galaxies are visible because of the light emitted by
stars and hot gas. However, the mass of stars and gas in these structures is
greatly exceeded by the mass of dark matter. Dark matter cannot be observed
directly, but the gravitational effects of dark matter can be observed in the
distribution and motion of stars, gas, and stellar clusters such as globular
clusters (GCs). A team from the University of the Pacific and the University of
California Santa Cruz will use spectroscopic observations of GCs to probe the
dark matter content of the nearby Virgo cluster of galaxies with the goal of
understanding the assembly history of massive galaxy clusters. The team will
continue working with high school students through the Science Internship
Program (SIP) at UC Santa Cruz. In addition, they will involve undergraduates
from both the University of the Pacific and the University of California Santa
Cruz in research relating to this project. Finally, they will participate in
traditional outreach events such as public talks and workshops, with special
emphasis on reaching Hispanic and Latino communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will use GCs to study the assembly of structures in the Virgo cluster.
This takes advantage of the large numbers of GCs, their relatively high surface
brightness, and their extended radial distribution. The main scientific goals
include: (i) determining the dark matter content of dwarf early-type and ultra-
diffuse galaxies; (ii) testing the dynamical friction scenario for the formation
of galaxy nuclei from mergers of GCs; and (iii) understanding the effects of the
cluster environment through analysis of clustering, substructures, and
asymmetries found in the GC population, and the study of cluster-centric radial
trends of the stellar populations of Virgo dwarf
ellipticals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.