* 2206677
* Collisions in Plasma: The Landau Equation and Related Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Maria Pia Gualdani, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 08/31/2025
* USD 154,726.00

Phenomena in gas dynamics and plasma physics are driven by collisions and
diffusion of particles. The mathematical modeling of these effects lies at the
intersection of applied mathematics and statistical physics, and it involves the
study of kinetic equations, a class of nonlinear partial differential equations
that captures the behavior of large number of particles in terms of the particle
density. This project concentrates on two specific kinetic equations: the first
describes the time evolution of the particle distribution when particles
interact through binary collisions that can occur at very large microscopical
distances, the second arises in the statistical description of charged quantum
particles. The intent is to validate the fidelity of these models to the
physical systems by studying the qualitative properties of their solutions, to
ensure that a temporary breakdown of the models does not occur. The project will
provide training opportunities for graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project aims at expanding the
mathematical understanding of the dynamics of collisions in dilute gases and
plasma by analyzing two kinetic partial differential equations. The first is the
Landau equation, which describes the time evolution of the particle distribution
when particles interact through binary collisions of grazing type. The second is
the Landau-Fermi-Dirac equation, which arises in the statistical description of
charged quantum particles. Both equations present challenges due to nonlinear
terms, nonlocal features, and degenerate coefficients. The first part of the
project deals with the qualitative properties of solutions, such as global well-
posedness and finite time blow-up, characterization of the long-time behavior,
and connection with macroscopic fluid equations. The second part concerns the
validity of the Landau-Fermi-Dirac approximation as a correction to the
Boltzmann equation in the grazing regime. The techniques employed include a
novel combination of classical kinetic theory and recent theories developed for
nonlinear nonlocal integro-differential equations and degenerate nonlocal
differential operators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.