* 2206953
* RET Site: Machine Learning and Smart System Design
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Sheng-Jen Hsieh, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 10/31/2025
* USD 599,978.00

Due to increased automation of manufacturing processes, industry demand for
workers with knowledge and skills related to industrial automation is high. In
addition, increasingly widespread deployment of high-speed sensors in the field
allows vast amounts of data to be collected. Machine learning techniques can be
applied to these data to enable automated systems to adapt to changing
conditions—that is, to become smart systems. This RET site will provide
opportunities for high school faculty to learn about machine learning and smart
systems with emphasis on applications and careers related to industrial
automation; to work on related research projects; and to develop and share new
instructional resources. The program will strengthen education in machine
learning and smart system design and ultimately strengthen the U.S. workforce
and U.S. economic competitiveness. Students who choose careers in automation
will also benefit; entry-level jobs related to automation pay well and often do
not require a four-year degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RET site will provide
opportunities for high school teachers to collaborate with faculty and student
researchers in the College of Engineering at Texas A&amp;M University. Program
goals include: 1) provide teachers opportunities for professional development in
machine learning and smart system design; 2) enrich their teaching of
engineering concepts; 3) provide opportunities for them to network with industry
mentors, and university faculty and student researchers; 4) equip them to
encourage, guide and stimulate their students’ interest in careers in the
program’s theme area, especially students historically underrepresented in these
areas; 5) encourage them to disseminate what they learn to other teachers in the
field; and 6) develop long-term collaborative relationships between the project
team, participating instructors and their institutions, and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.