* 2206945
* Sentinel: RNA phage Qbeta displayed SARS-CoV-2 epitopes fused with Nanotag as a biosensor toolkit
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Alain Bopda Waffo, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is associated with
significant morbidity and mortality, and its societal impact is very high due to
its high rate of transmission. While effective vaccines exist for the current
strains of SARS-CoV-2, preventative approaches remain limited, and novel
variants may limit the efficacy of current vaccines. The spike protein (S), the
major biomarker of COVID-19, projects from the surface of the virus, facilitates
the virus’s entry into host cells (e.g. cells that line the lungs), and induces
the production of neutralizing antibodies. Unfortunately, data on the level and
longevity of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies produced in vaccinated and infected people
are still limited. Current technologies are expensive, require the use of live
viruses, and are not designed to quantitively monitor the level of antibodies in
individuals. The goal of this project is to explore the feasibility of a new
approach that focuses on the regions on S (called epitopes) that are capable of
eliciting an immune response and of combining with the antibody produced to
counter that response. The relationship between these epitopes and antibodies
resulting from COVID-19 exposure will then be monitored in real-time using a
novel display technology that has been developed by the investigators. Results
from this project will create a foundation for peptides representing live SARS-
CoV-2 and binding for clinical quantification of its specific antibodies. The
project has the potential to improve biosensor tools with synthetic biology and
to expand to other viral antibodies, new infection outbreaks in other hosts, or
biothreats. The project will provide training opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students, be used to highlight the importance of
STEM/interdisciplinary research, with an emphasis on reaching out to
underrepresented individuals, and will maintain a pedagogical web-based learning
module about the newly adopted research strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
long-term goal of this project is to improve the rapid detection and monitoring
of COVID-19 antibodies and vaccine efficacy. Nearly three years into the
pandemic, very little is known about the level and longevity of protective
COVID-19-related antibodies in previously infected or vaccinated populations.
The structural spike (S) glycoprotein, common to both SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2,
plays a pivotal role by mediating the host cell entry and inducing the
production of neutralizing antibodies, and was used to develop the vaccines. A
quantitative monitoring of host S-related antibodies in SARS-CoVs infections
could provide key information, but this method requires lateral flow assay (LFA)
testing, which is expensive and not always sensitive enough. Thus, alternative
affordable and accurate COVID-19 antibodies (Abs) monitoring methods are
required. To address this urgent need, the project will explore the feasibility,
using a combination of S epitope peptides fused with the minor coat protein A1
of the evolutionary RNA phage Qβ displayed as reagents for biosensors
development. Phage Qβ is easily scaled and is a member of the family Leviviridae
that infects bacteria with the F+ pilus and is resistant to extreme conditions
with an icosahedral shell. Phage Qβ is a small positive strand RNA virus 25 nm
in diameter and a 4.2 kb genome encoding 4 proteins. These are coat protein
(Cp), maturation (or A2) protein, read-through (A1), and the RNA replicase
(RdRp). Recently, the A1 protein was successfully used for fusion and exposition
of peptides in the investigator’s laboratory, which is important due to its
number and positions on the icosahedral structure of the Qβ platform. Protein S
epitope(s) of SARS-CoVs separately exposed on the phage platform will mimic
their natural position, recognize, and bind to an antibody proportional to the
reduction of the transducer’s (Strep II tag) intensity. The following three
objectives will be used to determine the position and role of the S epitope
probes and the transducer peptide in an interaction that leads to a detectable
and measurable signal in a bioassay: (1)To construct and express S epitopes
fused with transducer peptide at the end of A1 protein; (2) To optimize and
stabilize the S epitopes and transducer fusion peptides against anti-S
antibodies; and (3) To initiate the assemblage and characterize the biosensor.
In a competitive ELISA, the recombinant phages obtained will be analyzed and
standardized against commercially available antibodies and will be used to
detect and monitor COVID-19-related antibodies in real
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.