* 2206428
* NSF-BSF: Gravitational Waves From Compact Objects at Galactic Nuclei
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Smadar Naoz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2025
* USD 437,486.00

Recent direct detections of gravitational waves (GW) from merging binary black
holes by the LIGO and Virgo GW detectors have transformed the way astronomers
observe and understand the Universe. However, it is still an open question how
these pairs of compact objects like black holes come together and get close
enough to merge. One important channel is dynamical formation in dense star
clusters. A research collaboration between the University of California-Los
Angeles and the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in Israel will examine the
formation, evolution, and gravitational wave emission of systems composed of
compact object binaries in galactic nuclei , or the central regions of galaxies,
which host some of the densest known stellar clusters in the universe. The
project will include graduate and undergraduate students in the research.
Additionally, the UCLA lead investigator will implement an original educational
workshop, entitled ``Californiaâ€™s fUtuRe scIence lEaders (CURIE), PHysics &amp;
AStronomy for EveRyone (PHASOR)." This educational workshop is aimed at under-
represented minority high schoolers in Los Angeles and will directly impact
young students, showing them that STEM career paths are open to them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expanding on a proof-of-concept study that outlined the
possible GW sources in dense galactic cores, the researchers will analyze the
physical processes that can either lead to or suppress the merger of compact
objects. The work will include gravitational interactions between stars and the
supermassive black hole (SMBH) at the galaxy center, general relativity,
gravitational wave emission, and post-main sequence stellar evolution. The
methodology will utilize a combined approach of secular (i.e., long-term, orbit
averaged) and statistical approaches of the many-body interaction, as well as
direct integration (i.e., N-body) effects. In particular, the SMBH can induce
collisions and mergers between stars and compact objects, such as black holes
and neutron stars. The study will predict the outcome of the dynamical formation
of GW sources at galactic nuclei in the context of LIGO-Virgo and LISA
observations and use the results to attempt to explain some of the exotic GW
signals, such as the puzzling massive compact objects (e.g., GW190814 and
GW190521). This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe
Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.