* 2206302
* Hamiltonian and Dissipative Structures for Reduced Plasma Kinetic Models
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Alain Brizard, Saint Michael's College
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 04/30/2025
* USD 134,481.00

This award supports theoretical development of reduced plasma models that allow
for accurate and simultaneous treatment of charged particles and electromagnetic
fields. The description of plasma physics phenomena, whether observed in a
laboratory or in space, must consider the complex interactions between the
orbits of charged plasma particles and the electromagnetic fields that control
their dynamics. In realistic plasma conditions, however, the underlying plasma
equations are often too complex to be solved, even with the help of the most
powerful computers available. The complexity of the plasma physics description
can be simplified by the adoption of reduced plasma models, which are faithful
to the exact plasma dynamics only if their exact conservation properties are
preserved from the original plasma equations. A major outcome of this project is
the derivation of new theoretical structures for a variety of reduced plasma
models with exact conservation properties that allow for the simultaneous
treatment of particles and fields under general plasma conditions. The
simultaneous treatment of particles and fields within a reduced plasma model can
yield significant increases in the power and speed of new numerical algorithms
developed for these reduced plasma models. These new numerical algorithms, in
turn, will enable the study of the complex dynamics of laboratory and space
magnetized plasmas over longer time scales and under more realistic conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existence of Hamiltonian and dissipative bracket
structures for plasma kinetic models have led to the emergence of novel
structure-preserving computational algorithms in the past ten years. An
important new application of these structure-preserving algorithms carried out
in this project is concerned with the development of Hamiltonian and dissipative
bracket structures for reduced plasma gyrokinetic models. The derivation of a
Hamiltonian bracket structure for a given set of gyrokinetic plasma equations,
which presents unique challenges in theoretical physics, is a major outcome of
this project. The formulation of gyrokinetic plasma models in terms of fields,
instead of potentials, will open new frontiers of research in space and
astrophysical plasma physics. The gyrokinetic Hamiltonian bracket structure will
also allow for the derivation of the dissipative bracket structure of the
gyrokinetic Landau collision operator under general magnetic geometries. By
construction, the dissipative gyrokinetic bracket structure will have exact
conservation properties, which is a crucial requirement to investigate the
synergy between collisionless (Hamiltonian) and collisional (dissipative) plasma
evolutions over long time scales. The development of advanced Hamiltonian and
dissipative structure-preserving algorithms associated with reduced plasma
gyrokinetic models will thus provide a set of powerful theoretical and
computational tools for investigations of a wider range of research problems
associated with the nonlinear turbulent evolution of laboratory, space, and
astrophysical magnetized plasmas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.