* 2206904
* ECLIPSE: Multiscale Modeling of Crossed-Field Discharges with Speed-Limited Particle-in-Cell Simulation
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* John Cary, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,093,132.00

This project aims to develop and demonstrate computer simulation techniques for
optimizing plasma-based magnetron sputtering. Magnetron sputtering is used to
produce thin coatings essential to many important products, including integrated
circuits and solar cells. Magnetron sputtering devices coat a substrate material
by using energetic ions to knock/sputter atoms off the cathode material and onto
the substrate. Improving these devices will lead to more reliable, higher
quality coatings, lower production costs, and increased performance - cheaper,
faster electronics and more efficient solar panels. The key to improvement is
controlling the sputtered atoms, which requires controlling the density, energy,
and distribution of ions. Computer simulations enabled by this project will
allow investigation of system details that are all but inaccessible via
experiment, as well as faster exploration of design changes for clean energy
technologies. As such, this project is being supported under the ECosystem for
Leading Innovation in Plasma Science and Engineering (ECLIPSE)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cathode-bombarding ions are accelerated within
a plasma produced by an electric discharge; a magnetic field reduces electron
loss to maintain the plasma. The plasma is difficult to model: it is non-
equilibrium, partially ionized, moderately collisional, with multiple ion
species and plasma-surface interactions in a chamber with complicated geometry.
Particle-in-cell (PIC) computer simulation has the power to simulate all these
effects. However, the large computational cost poses severe challenges for
design optimization, which requires many simulations to explore a wide range of
conditions. In this project multiple plasma modeling techniques will be
developed and tested to speed-up PIC simulation of magnetron sputtering,
including non-uniform grid spacing, energy-conserving PIC algorithms that allow
grid cells larger than the plasma Debye length, and the speed-limited PIC
algorithm, which reduces the number of time steps needed to complete a
simulation. These techniques are expected to be especially effective when used
together, and they will be applicable to a wide range of low-temperature plasma
simulations beyond magnetron sputtering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.