* 2206576
* Graphical Optimal Transport: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Yongxin Chen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2025
* USD 239,999.00

This project aims to develop mathematical theories and efficient algorithms to
study a class of multi-marginal optimal transport (OT) methods. OT is a popular
mathematical framework that has found many applications in several areas such as
economics, operations research, biology, signal processing, systems and control,
and data science. Still, the computational complexity of using multiple
marginals hinders its use in practice, and most applications of OT are limited
to two marginals. The resulting framework will greatly expand the applications
of OT methods with multiple marginals. The project will also include an
important application, estimating the group behavior of a large population with
aggregate measurements. The measurements are aggregated in the sense that the
individuals in the population/group are indistinguishable from each other. Such
measurement may occur due to privacy issues where the identities of the
individuals are unrevealed. This study will be potentially applicable to
studying the disease spreading in a large population. Finally, the
interdisciplinary nature of the research bridging multiple subjects will impact
and cross-fertilize science and education in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to establish a unified framework for multi-
marginal OT problems with graphical costs. Unlike bi-marginal OT, which has been
widely used in applications, the use of multi-marginal OT has been hindered by
its notorious computational complexity that typically grows exponentially as the
number of marginals increases. Still, the complexity of multi-marginal OT can be
alleviated by exploiting the structures of its cost function. The project will
focus on an important type of cost structure that encodes the marginals as nodes
in a graph. Many multi-marginal OT problems such as the Wasserstein barycenter
and the incompressible Euler flow problems are associated with such graphical
structures. This project will build on two seemly irrelevant subjects: optimal
transport and probabilistic graphical models. The investigator will establish
the overall framework of graphical OT by merging the two subjects, and
systematically investigate the theoretical properties of graphical OT,
particularly in the setting with continuous state variables. Another important
task is to develop efficient algorithms by leveraging available algorithms in
both OT and probabilistic graphical models. Finally, the investigator will apply
the framework to a representative application known as inference with aggregate
measurements. In this type of inference problem involving a large population of
individuals, the observations are aggregated in the form of distributions, and
the problem can be formulated as an entropy regularized multi-marginal OT
problem whose cost tensor is associated with a hidden Markov model. The project
will provide theoretical and algorithmic tools for addressing OT problems with
structured costs, and greatly expand the application domains of multi-marginal
OT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.