* 2206741
* Collaborative Research: Data Assimilation for Turbulent Flows: Dynamic Model Learning and Solution Capturing
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Adam Larios, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2025
* USD 167,505.00

The world is full of complex, multi-scale phenomena that can be challenging to
predict due to their underlying chaotic nature. For example, fast and accurate
predictions of weather phenomena (both terrestrial and solar), ocean dynamics,
and groundwater flow are vital to economic growth and stability. These
predictions typically incorporate computer simulations of mathematical models;
however, to make accurate predictions, these models need to be properly
"initialized"; that is, they need to know the current state of the system very
precisely and the models need to be adjusted based on actual observations of the
system in question. For example, in order to accurately predict the weather,
models often require the current state of the weather to be known on the scale
of a few inches, but weather observation stations are often spaced several miles
apart. Since weather is a highly chaotic phenomenon, small errors in the
observations and/or sparsity in the actual observations can lead to significant
errors in the predictions. To address this issue in the past several decades a
collection of techniques known as "data assimilation" have been developed. Data
assimilation incorporates observational data into the mathematical model of the
system of interest in order to drive the prediction to the correct state.
However, the standard data assimilation techniques, known as the Kalman filter
and four-dimensional variational (4D-VAR) approaches, are very computationally
costly, and major challenges still exist when adapting them to complex systems.
Recently, a new algorithm for data assimilation, known as the Azouani-Olson-Titi
(AOT) algorithm has emerged as a fast, robust, highly accurate technique which
is easy to adapt to a wide variety of models, and which is computationally
inexpensive to add to an already existing computational model. This project will
not only extend and improve the AOT algorithm, but it will also use new ideas
and technologies invented by the PIs and coauthors to adapt the AOT framework to
learn more about the underlying mathematical model itself, further improving
predictive capabilities. This project fosters mentoring undergraduate and
graduate students, interdisciplinary research, and interaction with national
labs. The impacts of this project will be far-reaching and will pave the way for
new techniques which will greatly speed up data assimilation in simulations of
highly complicated fluid flows, introduce novel techniques for parameter
learning and model reconstruction, and provide a computational approach to
investigating fundamental mathematical problems. The computational technologies
and mathematical tools developed will be useful to scientists and engineers in
other fields as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on previous work
of the PIs on the AOT algorithm, which showed that this algorithm can be adapted
to learn the (unknown) parameters of the system, and even the form of the model
itself, while simultaneously recovering the "true" state of the system.
Extensions of the preliminary work will be carried out, and rigorous
justification for convergence of the algorithm will be completed for physically
interesting systems, including noisy data and sparse-in-time observations. In
addition, several extensions of AOT itself will be numerically tested and
rigorously investigated: nudging for intermittent observations, as well as
nudging based on moving observers. AOT will also be implemented and tested for a
multi-physics large-scale model of the Earth's oceans, for the Richards equation
for soil moisture, and for a simplified fluids experiment using real-time
collected data. This project will optimize observer requirements for better
accuracy, significantly lowering costs. The methods described here have the
potential to reduce production and computational cost for experiments, making
them more useful to researchers working on real world problems. Moreover, novel
proof methods will be developed to prove convergence in the cases of nonlinear
AOT algorithms, AOT-based on moving observers, AOT-based model recovery,
temperature-based AOT, and extensions of AOT to geophysical
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.