* 2206739
* DISES: Understanding dynamic social-environmental feedbacks in temporary fisheries closures
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Steven Gaines, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,600,000.00

Small-scale fisheries are the ocean’s biggest employers and provide nutrition to
billions, but they are threatened by mounting overfishing. The most well-known
strategy to manage near-shore fisheries is to implement permanent bans on
fishing in marine protected areas. Those closures often fail due to lack of
fisher compliance. Temporary closures are often preferred by fishers around the
world to rebuild their fisheries. Unfortunately, they are relatively
understudied and there is little understanding of the way that ecological and
social components of these systems interact. This research studies the
interactions between social and ecological dynamics resulting from temporary
fisheries closures. This study will explore the interacting social and
environmental dynamics in dozens of sites in Mexico and French Polynesia where
temporary closures have been implemented. It contributes to sustainable
management of small-scale fisheries by building knowledge, capacity, and
networks of relevant expertise. The results will directly inform publicly
available decision tools. The tools will be broadcast to non-governmental
organizations, government agencies, and other relevant conservation practitioner
groups. The models can serve as the basis for a web and smartphone application
that fishers can use to explore alternative designs for temporary closures. This
research also directly informs policy through partnerships with local fisheries
and management organizations. This will lead to closures that are more effective
and equitable. This project finally provides an integrative training environment
for students and a post-doctoral researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
disturbance induced by a temporary ban on fishing has significant consequences
on fish species and other components of the ecosystem. This is a result of
potential trophic cascades that play out over different temporal scales. The
dynamics of these ecological relationships are poorly understood. The number of
species targeted, their growth rates, and their mobility, as well as changes to
the benthos, have complex relationships that will respond to the varying length
of closures, creating potential trade-offs between different portfolios of
species. In terms of social dynamics, temporary areas have the potential to
serve as learning and trust-building tools aligned with theories of adaptive co-
management of marine resources, but their temporality also opens them to
corruption, uncertainties, and instability in the wake of large disruptions like
the COVID-19 pandemic. This project brings together cutting-edge techniques in
an integrated social, ecological, and modeling research program centered on two
countries where temporary closures have been implemented. Fisher creel surveys,
underwater fish censuses and water-based drone surveys will be employed to
provide comprehensive data on the state of the benthos and the fish populations.
This will be combined with social science fieldwork focusing on the histories of
the reserves, the heterogeneity of stakeholders, local knowledge, and the
configurations of property rights that shape stakeholders’ interpretations of a
reserve’s socio-ecological outcomes. Drawing from these social and ecological
data, dynamic agent-based and bioeconomic models will be adapted from other
contexts to generate testable predictions of how temporary closure design
affects fish biomass and fisher incomes in the short- and long-term. The
outcomes of this research will be used to adapt a decision-tool model to help
fishers design temporary closures and it will be tested in several pilot
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.