* 2206865
* Collaborative Proposal: SaTC: Frontiers: Enabling a Secure and Trustworthy Software Supply Chain
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Adam Aviv, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2027
* USD 231,661.00

The modern world relies on software in almost every human endeavor, and a
typical software product includes 80% open source components. Attackers find and
exploit accidentally-injected security vulnerabilities and, increasingly,
aggressively implant vulnerabilities or malicious code directly into the
software supply chain -- the open source software and its build and deployment
pipelines. This Frontiers project establishes the Secure Software Supply Chain
Center (S3C2), a large-scale, multi-institution effort designed to aid the
software industry re-establish trust in the software supply chain through the
development of scientific principles, synergistic tools, metrics, and models in
the context of human behavior among software supply chain stakeholders. The
project’s novelties include the contributions to a diverse workforce that is
trained in secure software supply chain methods through research and outreach
initiatives, including summer research experiences for undergraduates (REU),
summer camps, and the development of course modules for undergraduates, graduate
students, and practitioners. The project’s broader significance and importance
are the ways in which S3C2 will facilitate rapid innovation with increased
confidence in software supply chain security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;S3C2 focuses
on interconnected research thrusts for two supply chain attack vectors: (1)
upstream dependencies and (2) the build process in the context of a continuous
integration/continuous deployment (CI/CD) pipeline. Thrust One focuses on
developing tools and techniques to aid practitioners with the risk of upstream
dependencies. It enhances the utility of the Software Bill of Materials (SBoM)
by identifying exploitability of vulnerabilities and changes to attack surfaces
and isolates risky code as a stop-gap before patching is possible. Thrust Two
focuses on developing tools and techniques to aid practitioners with the risk of
build processes. It enables strong guarantees for build integrity through
analysis of CI/CD configuration and techniques that help developers achieve
reproducible builds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.