* 2206286
* Interactions in Queues: A Stochastic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jamol Pender, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2025
* USD 317,000.00

It has never been more important to understand how we share space with others.
Ever since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic, the general public is more aware
of their surroundings and try to social distance when possible. This award
supports fundamental research intended to understand how customers interact with
one another in service systems. This research will enable businesses and
individuals to understand how the time that customers interact with each other
in spaces will influence the spread of infectious diseases such as Covid-19.
This project will influence the operational decision making of service system
managers so they can understand how limiting the time that customers spend in
systems will contribute to the health and safety of those customers and the
general public. In particular, this project can impact the understanding of how
infectious diseases spread in settings where people are not able to social
distance such as public transportation systems. It also includes targeted
outreach efforts to broaden participation of Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) students in research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
will study new stochastic models for representing interactions and overlap times
of customers in service system settings. The research objective is to aid
service system managers and the public understand the risk profile of joining
various service systems where social distancing is not possible. The analysis
will uniquely use tools from queueing theory and stochastic processes to develop
new insights for describing the probability of interacting with other customers
for a specified time duration. Stochastic queueing models will be used to
describe the interactions between customers and develop rigorous descriptions of
the time of interaction between consecutive customers. The rigorous analysis of
the interactions will be compared with stochastic simulation as well as
observational data from real-world transportation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.