* 2206057
* DISES: Using continent-wide participatory science to model the dynamic outcomes for humans and birds in a socio-environmental system
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Richard Hall, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,599,997.00

Bird feeding is the most common way that people intentionally attract wildlife
near their homes, with over 57 million Americans involved in bird feeding. Bird
feeders can impact the number and diversity of birds, increase the number of
predators in an area, and increase disease transmission among birds. People can
also be impacted through psychological responses to what they see at their
feeders, which can influence their mental well-being. This project addresses the
question of how we can maximize the positive benefits of bird feeding for both
birds and people. To do so, Project FeederWatch, a participatory science project
with more than 10,000 volunteers across the United States who study birds at
feeders, is being transformed, allowing participants to be involved in passive
experiments and also to input information on their own psychological responses
from their observations. This research analyses how people’s responses are
impacted by their beliefs about wildlife, motivations for feeding wildlife, and
demographic characteristics such as gender, age, race, as well as physical or
mental disabilities. The continent-wide scale of the collected data also allows
for study of how these links between people and birds operate over seasons and
from urban to rural areas. The project also aims to understand and implement how
to diversify bird feeding and participatory science projects, better engaging
Black and Indigenous people, other people of color, and people with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Worldwide, people intentionally modify
landscapes and food sources to affect wildlife behavior and improve outcomes for
themselves. These human-modified habitats constitute a growing portion of
wildlife habitat in the Anthropocene; yet, these integrated socio-environmental
systems have rarely been studied as such. The proposed work focuses on bird
feeding and associated habitat management, arguably the most common form of
intentional wildlife attraction, to understand socio-environmental links and
emergent outcomes for bird populations and human mental well-being. This project
brings together social-ecological data collected weekly by participatory
scientists across the continental U.S., feeder management experiments by
participatory scientists, social science surveys, and laboratory experiments to
test five hypotheses about the integrated links between human components and
natural components of the socio-environmental system of bird feeding. The
diverse ways in which humans impact birds and their natural enemies and the ways
in which birds and their natural enemies influence humans, who then alter their
behavior, are explored in this research. These responses are integrated to
understand overall effects of the human emotional and behavioral responses on
mental well-being, effects of spatial and temporal variation in the abiotic
environment, and emergent outcomes for bird populations and human mental well-
being over time and space. This proposed transdisciplinary approach investigates
the crucial contribution that participatory science can make to socio-
environmental systems research, and brings together a team of scientists trained
in social and ecological theories and experienced in convergent social-
ecological science. The work also engages more than 10,000 volunteers from
across the U.S, including a disproportionately high number of women and strong
participation of those with physical and mental disabilities, and focuses on
improving inclusivity for ethno-racial groups that are currently
underrepresented in birdwatching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.