* 2206986
* RET Site: Interdisciplinary Additive Manufacturing Research Experience for Teachers (IAM-RET)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Zhenzhen Yu, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 07/31/2025
* USD 599,930.00

The Interdisciplinary Additive Manufacturing Research Experience for Teachers
(IAM-RET) Site at Colorado School of Mines (Mines) will prepare high school
teachers to integrate additive manufacturing into science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) curriculum. This 3-year project will work with 30
teachers, providing mentorship by Mines faculty and graduate student researchers
and professional development opportunities. The experiences will provide
teachers the knowledge and experience to educate high school students about the
different career pathways and opportunities in industrial additive
manufacturing. High school teachers will experience hands-on use of the
industrial additive manufacturing equipment in the Mines laboratories that can
fabricate many different types of materials such as plastics, ceramics, and
metals for applications in many fields including medical, automotive, and
aerospace. A pipeline of students highly qualified with industrial additive
manufacturing knowledge will help strengthen American-based supply chain
resilience and further advance American manufacturing global
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Interdisciplinary Additive
Manufacturing Research Experience for Teachers (IAM-RET) Site at Colorado School
of Mines (Mines) will prepare high school teachers to integrate additive
manufacturing into science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) curriculum.
A major barrier towards implementation of additive manufacturing is a lack of
qualified workforce with knowledge about the different industrial additive
manufacturing processes. This knowledge requires working at the interface of
many different interdisciplinary fields including manufacturing, mechanical
engineering, and material science to perform accurate process and material
selection for additive manufacturing applications. The IAM-RET site will
introduce industrial metal, ceramic, and polymer additive manufacturing
processes to high school teachers, who will develop curriculum educating their
students on the same concepts, creating a significant impact on the integration
of additive manufacturing into the 9-12 curriculum. The program will also
include group professional development and curriculum development opportunities.
Follow-up academic year engagement between the teachers, their students and
Mines will include a design competition among participating high schools. Broad
dissemination of the IAM-RET curriculum and results will enhance workforce
development efforts and impact the additive manufacturing community nationwide.
The experience will produce a lasting partnership among collaborating high
schools, universities, and the local AM industry to produce a highly skilled
workforce, poised to strengthen the Colorado additive manufacturing
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.