* 2206851
* Slender body theory and finite difference computations to characterize particle-fluid interactions at moderate Reynolds numbers
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Donald Koch, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2025
* USD 371,000.00

The rotational and translational motions of slender needle-like particles
interacting with fluid flows influences the fate of plastic pollutants (such as
fishing line fragments), the scattering of solar radiation by ice crystals in
clouds, and the recycling of fiber composite materials. Most previous theories
for the motion of such particles have emphasized the role of the frictional or
viscous forces in the fluid. To predict the motion of needle-like particles
larger than about one tenth of a millimeter in water or air, this award will
develop a theory that accounts for fluid inertia (the tendency of a fluid in
motion to remain in motion) as well as viscosity. Computer simulations of the
exact fluid motion around a freely translating and rotating particle will
validate and complement the theory. Research projects and outreach for
undergraduate and high school students will build intuition for the way one non-
spherical particle falls and tumbles when it drafts in the wake of another
particle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A slender-body theory will be derived by matching
two-dimensional solutions to the full Navier-Stokes equations in the inner
region to solutions of the linearized Navier-Stokes equation in the outer region
for particles translating and rotating in linear flow fields. A theory valid for
asymptotically large Reynolds number based on the fiber length will be obtained
by allowing inertia to influence the particle-fluid force per unit length at
leading order. An in-house finite difference simulation will validate the
slender-body theory and extend the understanding of particle-fluid interactions
to prolate spheroidal particles with moderate aspect ratios. Adoption of a body-
fitted spheroidal coordinate system that rotates with the particle will resolve
the flow near the particle surface accurately. These methods will be used to
explore: (1) The orientation-dependent drag, lift and torque induced by relative
translation of the fluid with a fixed particle; (2) The translational and
orientational dynamics of a freely settling particle in a quiescent fluid and in
horizontal and vertical simple shear flows; (3) The orientation of sub-
Kolmogorov scale particles settling in a homogeneous, isotropic turbulent flow;
and (4) The marginal stability limits for the homogeneous state of a dilute
sedimenting suspension of spheroidal particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.