* 2206777
* NSF-GACR: Study of Gamma-Ray Generation in High-Intensity Laser-Plasma Interactions at ELI Beamlines
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Alexey Arefiev, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 648,444.00

This project will explore efficient gamma-ray generation using ultra-high-
intensity lasers. The development of advanced light sources has contributed to
significant progress in science and technology across many disciplines. The next
frontier are sources of efficient gamma-rays – whose energies are thousands of
times higher than those of typical x-rays. Light at these extreme energies can
be used in fundamental studies, such as matter-antimatter production and
understanding of astrophysical multi-messenger sources, and in applications to
nuclear material detection, nuclear waste analysis, and medical isotope
production. The aim of this project is to demonstrate efficient gamma-ray
generation using ultra-high-intensity lasers at the Extreme Light Infrastructure
Beamlines (ELI-Beamlines) facility in the Czech Republic. This collaboration,
enabled by the partnership between NSF and the Czech Science Foundation (GACR),
combines the required theoretical expertise from UCSD, experimental expertise
from ELI-Beamlines, and target fabrication expertise from General Atomics. In
addition to graduate student training, the project will also provide dedicated
summer internships to undergraduate students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The emission of high-energy photons, a million
times higher than visible-light, will be achieved by driving a multi-GigaGauss
quasi-static azimuthal magnetic field inside a dense plasma that is rendered
transparent by an ultra-high-intensity laser pulse. Plasma electrons serve as a
mediator in the conversion of laser energy into a dense beam of energetic gamma-
rays. The confining azimuthal magnetic field facilitates electron energy gain
from the laser, while the electron deflections within the magnetic field cause
the electrons to emit MeV gamma-rays in the direction of laser propagation. The
extreme magnetic field strength and high electron energy ensure high efficiency
of gamma-ray emission. The experiments will be performed at the ELI-Beamlines
laser facility in the Czech Republic. The ability of these lasers to reach
ultra-high on-target intensity is the key to accessing the desired regime. The
experiments will utilize low-mass foam targets to produce a dense plasma whose
electron density is well above the classical cutoff density, but below the
relativistically adjusted cutoff density for the laser intensities used in the
experiments. This choice of target density enables laser propagation through the
plasma while also providing efficient generation of MeV
photons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.