* 2206018
* CPS Medium: Autonomous Control of Self-Powered Critical Infrastructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Heath Hofmann, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2025
* USD 650,084.00

This Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) project will develop novel sensing, actuation,
and embedded computing technologies that allow civil infrastructures to be
responsive, resilient and adaptive in the face of dynamic loads. Such
technologies require delivery of electrical power, typically either via an
external power grid, or through the use of battery storage. However, grid power
may be unreliable during extreme loading events, and batteries must be
periodically recharged or replaced. The novelty of the technologies developed in
this project is that they power themselves, by storing and reusing energy
injected into the infrastructure by external loads. The project focuses on three
applications: (1) urban stormwater networks that actively control water levels
to prevent flooding, using power generated from the hydrologic flows, (2)
buildings that actively control their deformations during earthquakes and high
winds, using power generated from vibrations, and (3) ocean desalination systems
that actively control pumping rates, using power generated from waves. The
project contains an experimental campaign for each application. It also contains
an analytical component, focused on the development of control algorithms to
maximize the performance of the technologies. Educational outreach activities
include class modules and research experiences for undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as a workshop for high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Control algorithms for self-powered infrastructures must
explicitly optimize the balance between power generation and performance
objectives. This project will innovate new Model Predictive Control algorithms
for self-powered infrastructure technologies, such that they achieve the best
performance possible while not running out of energy. These algorithms will be
validated experimentally, for all three applications. There is presently no
existing theory for optimal control of self-powered systems that is scalable to
large and complex systems such as the ones under consideration. The research to
be conducted here will augment recent advances in Model Predictive Control
theory, to result in a new body of knowledge in this area. Challenges include:
(1) innovation of optimization algorithms that can contend with the inherent
nonconvexity of optimal self-powered control problems; (2) development of
effective techniques for handling the stochastic nature of the dynamics for the
target applications; (3) synthesis of controllers that are computationally
tractable, but which also optimally compensate for the complex transmission
losses and constraints in the power trains; (4) the derivation of systematic
techniques for ensuring the robustness of the controllers, to uncertainties in
the system model and disturbances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.