* 2206884
* RET Site: Research Experience for Teachers in Interdisciplinary AI
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Amy Eguchi, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 01/31/2026
* USD 517,554.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is having an increasing impact on everyday life,
from smart speakers and digital assistants to medical discoveries and judicial
sentencing. Therefore, the ethical and social implications of AI technologies
make it imperative that all citizens understand both the positive and negative
impacts on the future of society. This new RET site at the University of
California San Diego (UCSD) will provide research opportunities for high school
teachers to deepen their understanding of the field of AI while developing
materials to use in their classrooms. Teachers will be primarily recruited from
high schools in districts serving students who are underrepresented in STEM and
from low socio-economic backgrounds. The six-week summer program will include a
two-week boot camp to prepare teachers to participate in an intensive AI
research project across a range of applications. During the academic year,
teachers will continue to engage with research faculty through monthly dinner
seminars where they will exchange ideas and discuss the latest updates in AI
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual focus of this RET Site from
UCSD is Interdisciplinary Artificial Intelligence, with a focus on the
applications of Deep Learning. The high school computer science and math
teachers, mostly from the Computer Science Teachers Association San Diego
Chapter (CSTA SD), which is headquartered at UCSD, will participate in a two-
week summer “boot camp”, followed by four weeks of intensive research with AI
faculty and graduate students from Computer Science and Engineering, Cognitive
Science, and Psychology. Additional objectives are to improve the ability of
UCSD faculty to communicate ideas to the public through collaborating with and
learning from teacher participants. The team also strives to use ideas from
participants that can be incorporated into teaching UCSD AI systems. Finally,
the main goal of the site is that teachers understand the ethical implications
and current challenges of AI to promote awareness, discussion, and excitement
among their students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.