* 2206086
* DISES: Socio-environmental dynamics determining the climate mitigation and adaptation potential of midwestern US agroecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Jennifer Tank, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,598,634.00

Natural climate solutions are managed alterations to ecosystems designed to
enhance their ability to store carbon dioxide or to reduce emissions of
greenhouse gases. In the intensely managed agricultural lands of the Midwestern
United States, cover crops, which are non-harvestable crops that grow when
conventionally managed fields are fallow, have substantial public and private-
sector support as a natural climate solution. However, estimates of the climate
benefits achievable with cover crops are uncertain, and it is not known how
social and economic factors interact with environmental feedbacks to determine
whether individual producers will adopt cover crops at the necessary scales.
This project will examine the social and environmental factors that govern the
climate mitigation and adaptation potential of cover crops in Midwestern U.S.
croplands in order to determine when and where cover crops are most likely to
succeed as a natural climate solution. This research will provide actionable
policy and management guidance through committed partnership with a broad
community of public and private stakeholders, ranging from individual farmers to
state and national-level officials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
organized around four research questions, aimed at determining 1) field-scale
biophysical mechanisms by which cover crops affect carbon, nutrient, water and
energy cycles, 2) how these biophysical mechanisms interact with management
decisions to govern mitigation and adaptation potential across the Midwest, 3)
how landowners' perceptions of cover crop effectiveness and profitability
determine current and future rates of implementation, and 4) how all of these
factors interact to determine where the opportunity for climate mitigation with
cover cropping is greatest. Methods include intensive field campaigns, state-of-
the-art remote sensing methods, producer interviews and surveys, and economic
modeling. Through these integrated activities, the goals are to: 1) fully close
the field-scale carbon, water, and energy budgets to elucidate the mechanisms by
which cover crops confer climate benefits, 2) map cover crop climate mitigation
and adaptation potential across the Midwest, and document how it is shaped by
regional-scale factors, 3) investigate how producersâ€™ experience with cover
crops is shaped by environmental factors, macro-scale economic feedbacks, and
social norms, and 4) develop new approaches for identifying where natural
climate solutions are most likely to succeed and most
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.