* 2206584
* The CODEX of the Milky Way
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Peter Barnes, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2025
* USD 304,966.00

Stars are the basic building blocks of galaxies like our own Milky Way.
Understanding galaxy evolution, and indeed the history of the universe, requires
a thorough understanding of how different types of stars change with time. Stars
have their own life cycle, from stellar birth in cold clouds, through their
maturity as the stars we see at night, to their ends as red giants or sometimes
spectacular supernovae. The process of forming stars, however, is still poorly
understood, mainly due to the difficulty in observing the processes that take
place inside cold, dark molecular clouds which visible light cannot penetrate.
Instead, astronomers use longer-wavelength radiation, like infrared light or
radio waves, to discover important details of star formation, including the
temperature, density and abundances of elements that are needed to form
molecules. The investigator will share their research with the public in a
striking way, by launching a “science+art” outreach effort to schoolchildren,
emphasizing the important connections between science and art for the general
public's appreciation, and increasing the impact of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary goal of the investigator’s research is
testing models for molecular emission in the galaxy, based on maps of mm-wave
emission from carbon monoxide (CO) molecules in clouds. Astronomers make CO
observations of the Milky Way because the molecule is widespread and relatively
easy to observe. The investigator has recently published research suggesting
simple interpretations of CO mapping may be subtly misleading our understanding
of the physical conditions in clouds, which are mostly made up of molecular
hydrogen (H2) that is very difficult to detect directly. In short, the CO maps
can be biased in tracing H2. The investigator will complete and release to the
community their molecular line survey of the Milky Way as the Combined Dense Gas
and Excitation Atlas of the Milky Way (the CODEX). In addition, they will
provide a more sophisticated calculation of the physical conditions in molecular
clouds, something which has not been attempted before excepting on much smaller
scales. This will allow astronomers to better understand how the H2 molecules
assemble under the influence of gravity to make stars throughout the Milky Way,
and by extension, in other spiral galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.