* 2206996
* Collaborative Research: Atmospheric Ridging over Western North America in Current and Future Climates
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Deepti Singh, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 06/30/2025
* USD 633,673.00

Atmospheric ridges are elongated regions of high pressure relative to their
surroundings that are typically associated with warm and dry conditions at the
surface. Such atmospheric features have contributed to notable extreme events in
the region, including the 2021 Northwest Heatwave, droughts, and the 2020 Labor
Day Fires that burned across Oregon and Washington. While ridges are a normal
part of the mid-latitude atmospheric circulation, their occurrence over western
North America is influenced by multiple unique factors including proximity to
the Pacific Ocean, interactions between the Pacific Ocean and the atmosphere and
the complex topography of western North America. The overarching goal of this
project is to advance our basic understanding of the components of the Earth
system that influence atmospheric ridges over western North America, which could
help identify sources for their seasonal to sub-seasonal predictions and
investigate how and why ridges will respond to continued global warming. The
project will target three key questions using a combination of observations and
the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP6) climate model simulations: (1)
How do various atmosphere, ocean and land-surface conditions influence
characteristics of atmospheric ridges such as their extent, frequency,
persistence and amplitude? (2) How are simulated changes in ridge
characteristics influenced by changes in these physical drivers? and (3) How do
potential changes in ridge characteristics interact with warming to influence
surface climate and extremes in the region? In addition, detailed analyses of
the physical mechanisms associated with extreme ridges (very large, very
amplified, and/or very persistent ridges) will be conducted, as they are likely
associated with the most significant climate impacts. Together, the proposed
work will provide an understanding of the physical mechanisms associated with
weather and climate extremes that are associated with major societal impacts, in
current and future warmer climates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will
advance the understanding of how and why natural climate variability and
anthropogenic climate change influences this important atmospheric feature.
Findings will facilitate the evaluation of implications of current and future
weather and climate extremes that affect various sectors including human health,
water resources, infrastructure, the regional economy, and emergency management
resources. The outcomes of this work are directly translatable to impacts on
society and the environment, thus aiding planning and adaptation measures. The
proposed work will address gaps in scientific literature about how factors such
as natural climate variability modes such as El Niño Southern Oscillation and
anomalous soil-moisture conditions influence ridging in this region. The
methods, framework, and insights developed from this work will be extensible to
other mid-latitude regions. The project will involve training a postdoctoral
researcher and a graduate student, who will be directly supported by the
project, as well as undergraduate students from underrepresented backgrounds at
Washington State University Vancouver (WSUV) and Portland State University
(PSU). It will directly contribute to building STEM research infrastructure at
WSUV, which is a primarily undergraduate institution with ~44% first-generation
students, ~55% women and ~33% students of color. The investigators, postdoc, and
graduate student will participate in the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry
(OMSI) Science Communication Fellowship program that involves creating hands-on
activities to demonstrate our research to the museum visitors and for the team's
outreach efforts with local educators, schools, community groups and
stakeholders. Finally, this project will provide a basic science underpinning
for recent applied climate research by the PSU Climate Science Lab in
partnership local water utilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.