* 2206083
* Collaborative Research: Constraining galaxy cluster merger dynamics with hydrodynamical simulations and novel multi-probe observations of 10 objects
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* John ZuHone, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Edward Ajhar
* 08/31/2025
* USD 130,077.00

Clusters of galaxies are key players in unraveling the mysteries behind galaxy
formation and evolution, and understanding such mysteries is necessary to
uncover how our Universe evolved and to learn how our own Milky Way Galaxy
began. The goal of this project is to better understand the primary growth
mechanism of the largest bound objects in our Universe: major mergers between
galaxy clusters of similar masses. Deep, multi-probe observational data and
advanced hydrodynamical computer simulations are required. This project aims to
significantly advance our knowledge through the study of ten galaxy clusters.
This project will also strengthen the US science workforce by directly training
a graduate student and postdoctoral researcher in general and computational
astrophysics. Project plans also include a vigorous education and public
outreach program. Specifically, the investigators will advance discovery and
understanding via regular visits to Gabrielino High School (San Gabriel, CA);
broaden participation of underrepresented groups by hosting students from
Gabrielino High School via the Summer Research Connection at Caltech, as well as
undergraduates from colleges around Eastern Massashuetts via the Latino
Initiative Program at the Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory; and
enhance infrastructure for research and education by accessing the demonstration
resources available from Caltech for visits to Gabrielino High School.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis will focus on ten objects that have
gravitational lensing models from Hubble Space Telescope to map the plane-of-sky
(POS) projected total mass density; X-ray spectroscopic imaging to map the POS
ICM emissivity and temperature; cluster-member spectroscopy to map the line of
sight (LOS) velocity of the dark matter; and Sunyaev-Zelâ€™dovich effect data to
map the LOS velocity and projected density of the ICM. The investigators will
have complete information about the POS morphology and LOS velocity of both the
dark matter and the ICM gas. They will compare with mock observations of custom
hydrodynamical merger simulations produced specifically for this project. The
end result will be a robust constraint on the merger geometry of each galaxy
cluster in their sample that will enable a search for new dynamical processes
and an assessment of population statistics for the
sample.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.