* 2206050
* Accurate Atomic Transition Probabilities in Aid of APOGEE and the Study of Galactic Chemical Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* James Lawler, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2025
* USD 369,415.00

Spectroscopy of metal-poor stars – very old stars deficient in elements heavier
than helium – is one of the most important means to study the origin of chemical
elements in the Milky Way. This research project will primarily generate high
quality laboratory measurements of infrared (IR) atomic spectra and transition
probabilities that will enable the Apache Point Observatory Galactic Evolution
Experiment (APOGEE) spectroscopic survey to accurately determine elemental
abundances in metal-poor stars residing in the dusty bulge of the Milky Way.
This will allow astronomers to better understand the sites and processes of
nucleosynthesis and the chemical enrichment history of the Galaxy. Data
generated in this project will also be useful for observations undertaken with
the next generation of large IR telescopes. This project will provide
opportunities for undergraduate students to be involved in advanced
spectroscopic research, as well as opportunities for community engagement with
local elementary school teachers and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using advanced experimental techniques, the
research team of the Wisconsin Atomic Transition Probability program (WATP) will
measure high resolution near IR spectra of lanthanide and Fe-group elements, and
optical and ultraviolet (UV) spectra of key lanthanide elements. This will
permit determination of accurate, absolute atomic transition probabilities. WATP
personnel are collaborating with some of the leading experts in the study of
metal-poor stars, and this project represents the beginning of a focused effort
to measure transition data in the near IR wavelength range, specifically
targeting several measurements in the H-band, in aid of the large APOGEE survey.
The data generated by this project will improve the ability of APOGEE to a)
determine the important parameter log(g), or stellar surface gravity, b)
discriminate between predominantly r(apid)-process and predominantly
s(low)-process n(eutron)-capture nucleosynthesis sites, and c) determine more
reliable abundances of several Fe-group species. In addition to these near IR
studies, this project will generate optical and UV measurements of important
n-capture lanthanide elements. The methods of quantitative atomic spectroscopy
developed and applied in this project are also expected to benefit other fields
such as analytical chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.