* 2206784
* Collaborative Research: Integrated distribution models for North American mammals as tests of niche conservatism.
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jamian Pacifici, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 07/31/2025
* USD 374,312.00

Mapping animal populations is a powerful approach for learning what factors are
important to&lt;br/&gt;the species. By comparing records of where animals are
common, rare, or absent with local&lt;br/&gt;environmental conditions
researchers can quantify the relative effects of habitat, climate,
and&lt;br/&gt;human disturbances. The proliferation of new animal data from
camera traps and citizen&lt;br/&gt;scientists allows these questions to be asked
at larger scales, but this also introduces a new&lt;br/&gt;problem of local
specialization - do bears in Florida respond to the environment in the
same&lt;br/&gt;ways as bears in Maine? Can we have one model that predicts a
species abundance across its&lt;br/&gt;range? This project will address this
question by evaluating to what extent different populations&lt;br/&gt;are
consistent in their response to environmental factors across the country. The
resulting maps&lt;br/&gt;will show where mammal species are more or less common,
which will be useful for&lt;br/&gt;conservation and wildlife management.
Furthermore, the results will also highlight which local&lt;br/&gt;or national
environmental factors are driving these patterns, which could be useful
when&lt;br/&gt;mitigating climate change, designating habitat corridors, or
planning other active population&lt;br/&gt;management techniques. Comparing
these results across 100 North American species will&lt;br/&gt;show the broader
importance of local ecological specialization in mammal evolution. In
addition&lt;br/&gt;to publications, the results will be shared through the Wild
Animals podcast and YouTube&lt;br/&gt;channel, including the best camera trap
footage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project asks to what extent the ecological
niche reflects range-wide tendencies of a species&lt;br/&gt;(i.e. phylogenetic
conservatism) vs. local adaptation by a population. This is a critical
question&lt;br/&gt;not only for understanding evolution, but also when
considering how to manage populations&lt;br/&gt;facing climate change and
anthropogenic disturbances. The project will test the hypothesis
that&lt;br/&gt;ecological similarity should parallel phylogenetic similarity and
also compare the degree of local&lt;br/&gt;adaptation to natural (climate and
vegetation) vs. anthropogenic factors. To meet these&lt;br/&gt;objectives,
researchers will create continental scale species distribution models
for&lt;br/&gt;approximately 100 North American mammal species using data
integration techniques that&lt;br/&gt;combine traditional museum data with ‘born
digital’ data from camera traps and citizen science.&lt;br/&gt;These new data
include camera trap surveys at NEON sites and from the Snapshot
USA&lt;br/&gt;program which runs annually in all 50 states. The Snapshot program
surveys 1500 sites/yr&lt;br/&gt;through a massive collaboration between 150+
scientists, including many undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;classes (&gt;800 students
from 40 institutions) and underserved communities. The project
will&lt;br/&gt;grow this network by recruiting more participants, providing
timely results that they can use with&lt;br/&gt;their students with prepared
classroom modules, offering online data analysis workshops
for&lt;br/&gt;participants, and making the data publicly available each year.
This hierarchical, integrated,&lt;br/&gt;spatially-varying model approach will
allow researchers to address new questions about the&lt;br/&gt;scale of
ecological adaptation and whether natural factors still regulate most species or
if&lt;br/&gt;evolutionary responses to anthropogenic changes are outpacing these
natural processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.