* 2206039
* ECLIPSE: CAS-Climate: Understanding the Role of Thermally-Driven Processes in Pattern Formation and Droplet Emission in DC Glows with Applications to Water Treatment
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* John Foster, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2025
* USD 511,185.00

This award enables study of plasma-liquid interactions which could be exploited
for plasma treatment of water at atmospheric pressure. Applications of
atmospheric pressure plasmas, which are plasmas produced in regular air, range
from water treatment to CO2 abatement to medicine. For water treatment and
medical applications, it is important to understand how these plasmas interact
with water. Such interactions create highly reactive species that can transform
electrical energy into chemical energy to drive the decomposition of toxic
chemicals in drinking water or the disinfection of bacteria and viral particles
on contaminated surfaces. This research activity aims to understand the plasma-
liquid interaction and investigate the physics of the plasma contact area
associated with processes such as self-organization. This research is expected
to provide insight for scale-up for applications such as water treatment through
the control of the plasma liquid contact area and reactive species delivery
through self-organization. As such, this project is being supported under the
ECosystem for Leading Innovation in Plasma Science and Engineering (ECLIPSE)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the one atmosphere DC
glow with liquid anode as a test bed to understand the complex plasma-liquid
interface and demonstrate understanding and control over the contact area. This
discharge is of interest because the anode attachment can self-organize, thereby
changing the spatial distribution and size of the contact area - a key energy
and mass transfer channel between plasma and liquid. The role of thermal
processes such as evaporation that appear to play a key role in discharge
operation will be explored. This discharge is also a source of solvated
electrons and liquid derived high-speed droplets, some of which contain
nanoparticles. Using advanced optical diagnostics, the goal is to understand the
constrained dynamical variables associated with self-organization and the
importance of thermal transport in discharge maintenance. This, in turn, will
lead to improved understanding of the physics and chemistry of the plasma-liquid
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.