* 2206264
* Collaborative Research: Galactic Archaeology from Careful Modeling of Old Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Alexander Ji, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2025
* USD 424,475.00

The history of star formation of the entire universe is hidden in the elements
making up the oldest stars in our Milky Way Galaxy. Astronomers start to unravel
that history by careful observations of metal-poor (old) red giant stars. Making
further progress requires numerically modeling the observations. These
investigators will enhance our understanding by creating more exact models.
Their work is important because in the coming years, large observational
spectroscopic surveys of our Milky Way Galaxy will push the distance and age
frontiers of our knowledge. The investigators plan to help analyze enormous
datasets using fast, physically motivated analysis tools. They will derive the
starsâ€™ current physical parameters and chemical compositions. Currently, most
models use an approximation in stellar spectral analysis, called Local
Thermodynamic Equilibrium (LTE). The investigators will use more realistic, but
computationally expensive, non-LTE models. The investigators will significantly
improve the accuracy of derived elemental abundances found in the metal-poor red
giant stars, giving us a better understanding of the history of star formation.
Additionally, the project will develop opportunities for under-represented and
minority K-12 students from Florida schools to undertake research using the
local teaching observatory and telescopes. It will also improve diversity in
astronomy through equitable and inclusive mentoring of under-represented
minority undergraduate students in summer research projects at the University of
Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project between the University
of Florida and the University of Chicago will enable fast, homogeneous
derivation of non-LTE stellar parameters and chemical abundances by implementing
non-LTE in full spectrum synthesis and using machine learning techniques to
efficiently emulate the non-LTE grids. The results will be applied on industrial
scales to large surveys of red giant stars covering both optical and infrared
wavelengths. The project will produce user-friendly, publicly available codes
that allow other astronomers to apply non-LTE analyses to their
spectra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.