* 2206534
* CAS:  Hard Permanent Magnets Through Molecular Design
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jeffrey Long, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 385,074.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetism is a scientific
concept that penetrates society in myriad aspects of daily life, from the
magnets in electric motors, to portable electronics, to scanners for diagnostic
medical imaging. With this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research, researchers at the
University of California (UC) Berkeley create new magnetic materials whose
design is tailored at the atomic level. The research significantly advances our
knowledge and understanding of permanent magnet materials, in particular how to
synthesize them through molecular design principles. The research could be
transformative in that it offers the potential to inform the design and
manufacture of new magnets with superior properties relative to the current
state-of-the-art. At a more fundamental level, the research has significant
impact in the areas of magnetic materials, materials chemistry, and
metal–organic frameworks. In addition, many researchers engaged in the
disciplines of condensed matter physics, conductive materials, and quantum
information science can also benefit from the new insights gained by the
research. Beyond these scientific benefits, this project broadly expand its
impact by creating educational opportunities for the general public,
specifically through the production of educational outreach program branching
off an existing collaboration, where graduate students from UC Berkeley produce
lessons on magnetic materials for Bay Area elementary school students. This
outreach program is intended to reach large numbers of K-12 students that
constitute diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of this project, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in NSF’s Division of Materials
Research, researchers at UC Berkeley test the hypothesis that the design
principles governing magnetic anisotropy in molecules can inform the design of
ultrahard permanent magnet materials. Specifically, work from many research
groups over the past two decades has uncovered how coordination chemistry can be
applied to tailor geometric and electronic structures of molecules with atomic
precision, to maximize the single-ion magnetic anisotropy—the fundamental source
of the strength, or “hardness”, of a permanent magnet. This project employs
these design principles to incorporate selected classes of high-anisotropy
molecules—in particular high-performance single-molecule magnets—into
metal–organic framework materials. Both transition metal- and lanthanide
(Ln)-based molecular building units are pursued, falling into four main classes:
(i) mixed-valence Ln2X3 cores with immense coercivity, (ii) low-valent
lanthanide complexes with populated 5d orbitals, (iii) two- and three-coordinate
transition metal complexes, and (iv) trigonal paddlewheel complexes. To install
strong coupling interactions between these high-anisotropy nodes, two synthetic
strategies are utilized: (i) high-energy organic linker-based spins and (ii)
electron delocalization in mixed-valence materials. The students and
postdoctoral researchers who carry out this research receive training in the
synthesis of and characterization of framework materials, including
sophisticated physical methods such as magnetometry, x-ray diffraction, and
Mössbauer spectroscopy. Moreover, these researchers regularly interact with
collaborators in other research groups, both at Berkeley and other institutions.
This collaborative culture fosters an open and inclusive forum for scientific
advancement, and aids in the professional development and teamwork skills of the
involved researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.