* 2206330
* Opinion Formation and Graph Dynamics: From Modeling to Empirical Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Dylan Weber, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2025
* USD 416,853.00

The rise of social media has drastically changed our conception of opinion
formation. Rather than a few central outlets (TV channels, newspapers) acting as
a common and external frame of reference, many now derive their information
through interaction on social platforms. Therefore, the dynamics of opinion
formation have become more self-organized where large scale behaviors emerge as
a result of local interactions without a central authority, similar to a flock
of birds or a shoal of fish. But how are opinions formed in social networks? Is
the structure of social networks a reaction of the users' opinions or does the
network shape the users' opinions? One of the key motivations for this project
is the following paradox: while the use of social media has supposedly increased
the connectivity among individuals, opinions have become more polarized;
homophilic "echo chambers" appear to be a ubiquitous feature of the structure of
social media. These observed behaviors call for a close examination of the
interplay between social media interaction and the dynamics of opinion formation
at scale in order to better understand the rise of polarization and echo
chambers. This project will also provide research and mentorship opportunities
for graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an emergent behavior, the
underlying dynamics of opinion formation is unknown and cannot be derived from
physical principles. Thus, the framework developed in this project is
interdisciplinary at its core and combines both mathematical modeling (dynamical
systems, graph theory) and data acquisition and analysis (natural language
processing, sentiment analysis, clustering algorithms). This project will
investigate novel dynamical systems modeling the interplay between a graph and a
system of opinions. The aim is to characterize conditions resulting in
polarization, consensus, or a transition between these two states. Then,
experimental data will be extracted from the major social media platforms using
a variety of data capture techniques. The resulting measurements will allow for
an investigation of how the network structure of social media and the
distribution of its user's opinions change overtime, providing insight into the
interplay between these two dynamics. The ultimate goal is to refine the
modeling pursuit with experimental data in order to investigate what is driving
the observed trend towards polarization. Finally, using models validated with
empirical data, the project will investigate various strategies aimed at
reducing polarization and enhancing the natural flow of various opinions within
a large audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.