* 2206139
* 2022 Salt and Water Stress in Plants GRC and GRS
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Jose Dinneny, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 05/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

The greatest challenge to human society in the next 50 years will be to develop
a fully sustainable society. Above and beyond urban or industrial use,
agriculture is the largest consumer of land and water. How can plant biology
address these existential problems? One has only to look back, a little over 50
years, to see that the coincidence of changes in farm management practices and
plant breeding led to the Green Revolution. Through simple changes in plant
architecture, farmers were better able to take advantage of past innovations in
the production of synthetic fertilizers. These changes are thought to have saved
over a billion lives and reduced the rate of deforestation. The next Green
Revolution will require innovations that go beyond these simple solutions.
Increasing yields in an ecologically conscientious manner will involve
interdisciplinary teams including basic scientists, breeders, synthetic
biologists, and agronomists. The goal of the Gordon Research Conference on Salt
and Water Stress in Plants is to foster sharing of the latest research in these
areas and provide fertile grounds to spawn the next game-changing innovations in
plant science that will make a “green”-Green Revolution
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2022 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Salt
and Water Stress in Plants will bring together researchers endeavoring to
discover the mechanistic basis of stress tolerance in plants at different scales
of organization. The program represents an acknowledgement of the holistic
nature of plant-environmental interactions and the need to integrate research
topics that span molecular, cellular, developmental, ecological and global
scales. The program will focus on salinity and other water-associated stresses,
and will now also include pioneering work that examines the interface between
these stresses and the biotic realm. Presentations will highlight the power of
model systems, tackle evolutionary questions spanning species boundaries, and
examine the nexus between basic and applied research using globally relevant
crops. Through this interdisciplinary forum, we hope to pool together
researchers that are answering the most compelling scientific questions with the
broadest impact. The bulk of the GRC will comprise 20-minute presentations of
unpublished research and 10-minute discussion periods. Although the core of the
program is established, nearly half of the talks will be selected from submitted
abstracts to air the most recent discoveries and provide opportunities for
younger and rising trainees. The program includes poster sessions and free time
to enhance idea exchange and networking. The GRS pre-meeting is organized by
trainees and focused on multi-disciplinary research topics that explore plant
diversity, genomics, integrative physiology and field-relevant research. The
conference will support broader participation through targeted travel awards to
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows interested in pursuing plant
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.