* 2206972
* Collaborative Research: Inference on Expensive, Grey-Box Simulation Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* David Eckman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 07/31/2025
* USD 283,099.00

This grant will advance the national prosperity and welfare by allowing
organizations to use stochastic computer simulation models to make critical
strategic, tactical and operational decisions in the face of uncertainty. Such
decisions in supply chain logistics, transportation, healthcare, defense
planning and finance entail choosing from among millions of scenarios based on
estimates of key performance indicators. The award supports fundamental research
on a flexible framework for exploiting information about simulated system
performance to obtain stronger inference and better decisions for hitherto
unsolvable large-scale problems. Close collaboration between academic
researchers and industrial practitioners at leading U.S. companies will yield
rapid, reliable algorithms that can be tailored to a diverse array of simulation
problems across many industries and government agencies. All results will be
made available as open-source software and the methods communicated in the form
of tutorials and instructional materials for graduate engineering, data science
and business classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is motivated by modern
large-scale simulation problems and the shortcomings of state-of-the-art
general-purpose methods that treat a simulation model as a “black box.” The work
will create methods that efficiently carry out statistical inference by
extracting and exploiting additional structural information available from the
“grey-box” nature of modern simulations. Specifically, it will leverage this
information to strengthen the delivered inferences and offer certifiable
guarantees for expensive stochastic simulation models. The methods will account
for multiple, conflicting performance measures and exploit structural
information to drive the sequential experiment design of simulation runs, as
well as verify and extract the needed structural information from a simulation
model to obtain scalable computational methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.