* 2206102
* Collaborative Research: A Data-Driven Approach to the Multi-Wavelength Circumgalactic Revolution
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Benjamin Oppenheimer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 07/31/2025
* USD 206,240.00

In the current paradigm of galaxy formation vast streams of cool, primordial gas
fall into the centers of dark matter halos. As the flows continue and density
increases, the first generation of stars form in what will eventually become a
young galaxy. The subsequent interaction between the cool inflowing gas and the
hot ejected gas gives rise to an extensive and dynamic gaseous "atmosphere"
surrounding it, called the circumgalactic medium (CGM). The CGM is important for
what it can tell us about both the formation and continuing evolution of
galaxies. The researchers will lead a coordinated program combining state-of-
the-art hydrodynamical galaxy simulations with data from new multi-wavelength
surveys capable of probing the CGM to advance our understanding of the physical
processes that have shaped it over cosmic time. The award will also support a
graduate student as well as a program designed to recruit, train, mentor, and
support undergraduate STEM students in CGM research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will advance the understanding of the physics of gaseous halos as we enter
the era of multi- wavelength astronomical surveys. Specifically, the researchers
will (1) place novel, deep-learning constraints on CGM physics by interpreting
deep eROSITA x-ray data in light of the state-of-the-art Cosmology and
Astrophysics with MachinE Learning Simulations (CAMELS) results, (2) explore the
use of radio 21 cm mapping and fast radio bursts (FRBs) as probes of CGM over
cosmic time, and (3) develop a machine learning technique to estimate the mass
of galaxy groups by combining Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) and eROSITA
images. As the CGM becomes increasingly mapped both panchromatically and
tomographically, statistical forecasts from ongoing, state-of-the-art
cosmological simulation projects are necessary to place rigorous constraints on
CGM processes that drive galaxy evolution. The researchers will also develop
useful community tools that can be used to maximize the scientific returns of
upcoming multi-wavelength astronomical surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.