* 2206424
* Using Scaling Laws to Constrain Magneto-Thermal Coupling in Active Regions of the Sun with Multi-wavelength Microwave Imaging
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Dale Gary, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 08/31/2025
* USD 620,374.00

A research team from the New Jersey Institute of Technology advance our
understanding of how the solar corona is heated. Many mechanisms for energy
release in the solar corona have been proposed. This project would examine both
thermal and magnetic properties of solar active regions and their connection to
the solar corona. The project will be carried out using observations from the
Extended Owens Valley Solar Array (EOVSA) combined with 3D numerical
simulations. This project meets NSFâ€™s mission to advance science by tackling a
fundamental problem in solar physics. It also contributes to understanding of
the solar environment, which contributes to the national priority to better
understand space weather. The project includes participation by high school and
graduate students and makes use of the GX Simulator, which has already proved
successful in engaging students in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
this project will address the coupling of thermal and magnetic structures from
active regions (ARs) to the corona. This will be achieved by modeling coronal
magnetic fields and plasma properties, which will then be compared with
observations. The 3D structure of the coronal magnetic field will be quantified.
AR evolution will be examined by combining maps of the coronal magnetic field
with thermal plasma and validating these maps with data from EOVSA and space-
based sources. These 3D maps will then be used to constrain scaling laws, which
will be investigated for constraints on the coronal heating mechanisms. Finally,
this will be used to examine how magnetic field energy accumulated and evolves.
The codes employed include the Automated Model Production Pipeline (AMPP) for
generating 3D models of ARs, a stand-alone Non-Linear Force Free Field (NLFFF)
code, and the above mentioned GX Simulator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.