* 2206734
* Collaborative Research: Adaptation or opportunity? Using mammal sucking lice to determine drivers of host-parasite associations
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Edward Stanley, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 133,767.00

Parasitism is one of the most common forms of life on the planet. However, it is
largely unknown why organisms parasitize some species but not others. Sucking
lice parasitize one or a few mammal host species, but it is unclear if this
limited number of hosts is due to the inability of a louse to parasitize other
species or simply lack of opportunity to encounter additional hosts. This
research project will investigate how the evolutionary history, genes, and
physical traits of sucking lice, including human lice, determine what host
species they can parasitize. These findings will also identify potential genetic
and physical traits important in parasitism to investigate in other parasites.
More broadly, this research can be used to help understand the likelihood of a
parasite moving to a new host and help to reduce or mitigate the consequences of
new parasites. This project will train students and researchers in cutting-edge
research methods, generate college-level curricula, and use virtual reality
experiences to educate the public about the diversity of lice and their traits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate selection and adaptations in sucking lice,
this project will use high-throughput sequencing to build the first phylogenomic
tree for mammalian sucking lice (Anoplura). Next, the project will generate a
database of louse morphological characters and spatial distributions through
novel machine learning algorithms to mine species descriptions. Third, this
investigation will assemble louse coding genes and genomes and use nanoCT
scanning and geometric morphometrics to characterize phenotypic traits of
distantly related louse taxa parasitizing the same host species. These datasets
will be integrated to: 1) date louse diversification events and test for host-
parasite codiversification, 2) examine the evolution of louse morphological
characters and association of louse traits with host characters, 3) assess louse
biogeographic histories and distributions relative to hosts, and 4) determine
which genomic and morphological traits are under selection to facilitate
parasitism. This project will determine if louse diversification and host
associations are primarily driven by history and host adaptations, or if louse
adaptations could permit parasitism of a diversity of hosts but are restricted
to one or a few host species due to limited dispersal and ultimately address the
question, “Why and how to be a parasite?”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.