* 2206341
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Optimizing discovery with multi-epoch photometric survey data
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Tamas Budavari, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2025
* USD 134,673.00

Current and forthcoming multi-epoch digital sky surveys are revolutionizing
astronomy by probing the time domain with unprecedented breadth and sensitivity,
producing vast amounts of information on variable and transient objects. This
project will develop new statistical and machine learning methods and software
to improve the detection, characterization, and classification of astrophysical
objects using multi-epoch imaging survey data. This science-enabling technology
will be useful in diverse ground- and space-based survey settings. New
classifiers will also help to optimize the allocation of limited follow-up
resources. All algorithms will be implemented in public, open-source software.
The team includes astronomers, applied mathematicians, and statisticians, and
this project requires innovation across disciplines and will enhance their
partnership. The work will train a graduate student in applied math to work on
data science problems in astronomy, and includes support to train a diverse
population of young astronomers in advanced statistics and machine learning
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Object detection, characterization, and
classification are fundamental to extracting science from survey data. The main
work of this project is to develop new algorithms for classifying variable and
transient objects based on the shapes of their multiband light curves. A second
approach will use Bayesian neural networks, using improved priors and improved
solution space exploration. Companion components address optimal specification
and use of source likelihood functions, developing more accurate representations
of source uncertainty, working towards the optimal detection of dim, variable
objects, and doing demographic modeling of cosmic
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.