* 2206219
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Measurements of Supermassive Black Holes with Triaxial Stellar-Dynamical Models
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jonelle Walsh, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2025
* USD 377,602.00

Supermassive black holes (SMBHs) are fundamental components of galaxies.
Discovering a SMBH requires both exquisite observational datasets and extensive
numerical modeling. Over 30 years of research effort have produced about 100
SMBH masses in nearby galaxies. The local SMBH census, however, is still highly
incomplete above a few billion solar masses. Moreover, only a handful of studies
have made direct comparisons of SMBH masses obtained using the motions of stars
and using the motion of gas or under different modeling assumptions. When this
important check was performed, it was common to find disagreements of a factor
of two or more. The research team will make major advances modeling stellar
motions. They will apply this tool to uncover a new population of massive SMBHs
in the Universe and to make direct comparisons of SMBH mass measurements
determined using stars and gas. The program will improve the census of local
SMBHs and our understanding of how SMBHs and galaxies grow over time. The
project further benefits society by giving research opportunities and career
mentoring to high school and college students from diverse backgrounds. The
students will be immersed in research during the summer. They will work closely
with the principal investigators and their teams on projects involving the
detailed study of SMBHs and nearby galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
team will populate and expand the sparse upper-end of the correlations between
SMBH and host galaxies, as well as identify and investigate possible
discrepancies in SMBH masses resulting from stellar-dynamical modeling
assumptions (axisymmetric and triaxial shapes) and from different dynamical
tracers (stars and molecular gas). They will exploit the exciting recent
opportunities afforded by our newly revised triaxial orbit modeling code, highly
sensitive integral-field spectrographs on large telescopes, and ALMA-based gas-
dynamical SMBH mass measurements. They will apply our triaxial code and develop
a modern parameter search strategy to enable efficient grid-free sampling of
high-dimensional parameter space and rapid convergence to best-fit models. They
will then apply this technique to two galaxy samples observed with integral
field spectrographs on the Keck and Gemini telescopes: giant elliptical galaxies
with large, diffuse stellar cores and early-type galaxies with existing
molecular gas-dynamical SMBH masses. The program will advance triaxial orbit
modeling from a rarity to a standard technique, double the number of known
ultra-massive SMBHs in the mass range of ten billion suns, provide critical
assessment of the two main dynamical SMBH mass measurement methods, and enable
the study of galaxy intrinsic shapes and stellar orbital
distributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.