* 2206609
* Collaborative Research: WoU-MMA: Multimessenger Plasma Physics Center (MPPC)
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Andrei Beloborodov, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2027
* USD 300,321.00

This award establishes a multi-institutional and international collaborative
Multi-messenger Plasma Physics Center (MPPC) focused on studying fundamental
plasma processes with the goal of modeling sources of astrophysical signals.
Recent discoveries of gravitational waves from merging black holes and neutron
stars and the detections of energetic neutrinos and ultra-high energy cosmic
rays herald the rise of multi-messenger astronomy (MMA) aiming to observe the
sky not only through light, but also through gravitational waves and energetic
particles. Interpretation of MMA signals, however, crucially depends on our
ability to understand, predict, and model the electromagnetic counterparts of
multi-messenger sources. In most theories of these sources, the light is coming
from a relativistic plasma that experiences very strong gravitational, magnetic
and radiation fields. How plasmas produce the observable radiation under these
conditions challenges our understanding of plasma physics. MPPC will study the
fundamental processes in relativistic plasmas that lead to the observable
emission from multimessenger sources, and thus addresses goals of NSF's "Windows
on the Universe: The Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics". The investigators
will mentor summer research for undergraduate and high school students and will
increase awareness of plasma astrophysics through introductory lectures at
minority-serving undergraduate institutions and through public outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MPPC research will be concentrated in three areas: 1)
basic physics of relativistic pair plasmas near compact objects, including
radiative relativistic reconnection, pair creation, and interaction of strong
waves with plasmas; 2) multi-scale modeling of compact objects, including the
development of global models of merging neutron star magnetospheres, magnetar
outbursts, black hole accretion disk flares, and particle acceleration in jets;
3) the physics of transport of cosmic rays in our galaxy, including streaming
instabilities and interactions of cosmic rays with turbulence. The collaboration
will develop models that will be used to predict electromagnetic precursors of
neutron star mergers, constrain the sites of acceleration of ultra-high energy
cosmic rays, and improve cosmic ray transport models for galactic wind driving.
The Center will also provide scientific leadership in designing laboratory
experiments for studying relativistic astrophysical plasmas with ultra-intense
lasers. The Center includes four US nodes - Princeton University, Columbia
University, University of Maryland, and Washington University in St. Louis, -
and will have an international collaborative component with the participation of
Max Planck Society institutes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.