* 2206885
* Collaborative Research: RET Site: Data Sciences and Data Fluency in Scientific Data Sets (DATA3)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Stefan Robila, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 05/31/2025
* USD 560,110.00

The DATA3 experience, a partnership between Montclair State University (MSU) and
New Jersey Institute of Technology, is a new RET site focused on topics of
applied data science, artificial intelligence, and software engineering
research. The site will support middle school, high school, and community
college educators from the Orange School District and Passaic County Community
College in research experiences to explore these topics through access to the
EarthCube Data Capabilities Group resources. The site will also support a
pedagogical experience at MSU’s Red Hawk CS Lab, a summer camp experience in
computational thinking for English learners (students who may not have English
as their first language). In addition, the site will expand these professional
education experiences to the larger MSU Network for Education Renewal, an
already established education network at MSU servicing over 3000 teachers in
northern New Jersey that reaches 260,000 students. The site will conclude with a
conference to discuss Computer Science Education in Northern New Jersey, where
K-12, Community Colleges and University Faculty can meet and discuss the
pressing issues facing CS Education in New Jersey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
collaboration between MSU and NJIT through the EarthCube Data Capabilities Group
will create resources for teachers in computer science education to help them
explore exciting topics in the field. This program will help teachers explore
the concepts of “Deep Learning”, an artificial intelligence technique used to
try to mimic human learning. The site aims to further establish communication
and collaboration between the K-14 computer science academic community and the
MSU/NJIT computer science academic community. The site will engage in-service
computer science teachers at the middle school, high school and community
college level, with committed partners Orange School District and Passaic County
Community College, in research in machine learning in scientific data sets,
specifically solar weather data sets from the EarthCube research project. The
experience will also guide them in distilling this experience into learning
units for their classes through working with the Red Hawk Lab – a computational
thinking camp for English learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.