* 2206194
* Collaborative Research:  A gravitational inventory of the solar system using high precision minor planet astrometry
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Matthew Holman, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 08/31/2025
* USD 293,281.00

The NSF's Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST) will use the Vera C. Rubin
Observatory to image over half the sky during 2023-2033. The investigators will
improve the accuracy of sky position measurements for minor planets, allowing
them to be used as "test particles" for exploring the gravitational forces in
the solar system. The highly precise positions of these bodies will be used to
study the potential gravitational effects of “planet X,” which might exist in
the outer solar system. This work will indirectly benefit other astronomers by
substantially improving the accuracy of LSST measurements of the motions of
stars and planets. The program will involve young scientists from under-
represented groups in astrophysical research at both the University of
Pennsylvania and the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics and will
support one graduate student at each institution. It will expand participation
in summer research for undergraduates at Penn through a program directed at
bringing first-generation / low-income undergraduates into research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining millions of LSST observations of thousands of
Trojans, the effective motion of these objects over 10 years can be measured to
10-meter accuracy. Combined with ranging data from spacecraft at Jupiter and
Saturn, a more accurate and specific understanding of gravity in the outer solar
system will be possible by watching the Trojans complete an orbit around the Sun
over LSST's lifetime. Accuracy below 1 meter will be obtained from the 200,000
brightest main belt asteroids (MBAs). This collective measurement accuracy
allows detection of the gravity of a "Planet X" lurking undiscovered in the
outer solar system. Close passages between the test particles will allow
determination of the masses of perhaps 10 Trojans and 150-250 MBAs. By combining
the signals all the mutual encounters, it should be possible to measure the mean
relation between mass and brightness for MBAs down to about 15 km diameter and
Trojans down to about 50 km diameter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.