* 2206252
* Analytical Aspects of Nonlocal Models in Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Tadele Mengesha, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 07/31/2025
* USD 276,770.00

Nonlocal models in mechanics and other application areas are of relatively
recent vintage but have proved to be very effective for modeling certain
challenging phenomena, such as fracture in solid mechanics. Understanding how
materials behave, their failure as well as their strength when deformed, is
crucial for their proper usage and for the design of new materials, with
potential impact in manufacturing, materials engineering, and related
technologies. This project aims to develop fundamental mathematical techniques
that will deliver a sound analytical footing for the so-called peridynamic
model, as well as other nonlocal models of continuum mechanics. The findings are
expected to be applicable to other models having similar structure, with
applications in engineering sciences. The activities will contribute to improved
effectiveness of these models and ensure that future modeling and simulation
efforts based on these nonlocal theories will be more quantitative and reliable.
The project will provide research training opportunities for doctoral students.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project centers on a rigorous study of nonlocal
models in applications, primarily in mechanics. The models under consideration
are characterized by their effective description of continuous as well as
discontinuous fields within a single mathematical framework by using integral
equations instead of differential equations. These models have been successfully
applied to better describe jump stochastic processes, super- and sub- diffusion,
and spontaneous formation and propagation of cracks in solids, to name a few
applications. However, they have also presented the scientific community with
new mathematical challenges. This project is devoted to exploring some
analytical issues while at the same time laying the necessary mathematical
foundation for future studies of nonlocal models. Issues to be addressed include
well-posedness of linearized nonlocal models that involve anisotropy and
heterogeneity, asymptotic analysis of linear and nonlinear nonlocal models with
oscillatory coefficients, development of a regularity theory of solutions as a
function of applied force and material coefficients, and optimal design and
optimal control problems in systems governed by nonlocal models. The
mathematical approaches considered include perturbation methods, calculus of
variations, and nonlinear functional analysis. The research aims to make
nonlocal and peridynamics-based modeling and simulation more mathematically
consistent, quantitative, and predictive in practical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.