* 2206774
* Practice-Driven Professional Development for Algebra Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Zandra de Araujo, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,870,854.00

Professional development (PD) is a direct attempt to improve the quality of
instruction for teachers already in the classroom. Traditional PD is typically
costly in terms of time and money, and efforts tend to be delivered as a one-
size-fits-all approach. Furthermore, for teachers who adopt novel techniques
such as flipped instruction, there may be few resources to support their
efforts. This project seeks to develop a personalized, scalable PD approach that
centers on and builds from algebra teachers’ practices and individual strengths.
The project will focus its PD efforts on instructional actions that are tailored
to teachers' existing practice, can be readily adopted, and are easily
accessible. The project team have termed such instructional actions high-uptake
practices. The project will develop and field test PD materials to support
algebra teachers at scale via these high-uptake
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to developing the PD materials, the
project team will research the efficacy of this PD model in terms of student
learning outcomes and teacher instructional practices in approximately 60
algebra classrooms. The main data sources will include teacher observation data,
teacher interviews and surveys, student pre/posttests, student surveys, and PD
analytics. The research will characterize the immediate and longer term impacts
of the PD on teachers’ instructional practices; and characterize the impact of
teachers’ participation in the PD on students’ learning outcomes and engagement.
The research questions include: 1) In what ways does teachers’ participation in
the PD impact their instructional practices? 2) Do students of teachers who
participate in the PD demonstrate differential growth in learning outcomes? 3)
Do students of teachers who participate in the PD have increased rates of
homework completion?; and 4) Do students of teachers who participate in the PD
have increased engagement during individual work time? In meeting both our PD
development and research aims, this project will contribute knowledge about the
effectiveness of an incremental, practice-driven approach to PD and
instructional change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12
program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of innovative resources, models and
tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM
education and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical
and empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.