* 2206512
* Collaborative Research: ACES Galactic Center Mass Flow
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Qizhou Zhang, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2025
* USD 190,606.00

The center of our Milky Way Galaxy is dynamic, with stars forming in clouds of
molecular gas. The pressure on the flow of gas regulates the star formation
process. As gas moves in and out of galaxy centers, the galaxies grow and
change. Gas flows form new stars, feed the central supermassive black hole, and
eject mass in energetic outflows. The Milky Way center is the nearest and best
laboratory for studying the life cycle of gas flows. The team of investigators
will make the first high resolution maps of gas across the entire Milky Way
center. By simultaneously mapping the gas motions and the distribution of star
formation, the team will reveal how these processes are connected. This will be
a significant advance in our understanding of the physics that drive the
activity cycle in all galaxy centers. In addition, this work will support the
creation of a program to support underrepresented students in the transition
year between undergraduate and graduate school. Students will be integrated into
this research collaboration and will receive data analysis training and targeted
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key research area in the National Academy’s
“Pathways to Discovery in Astronomy and Astrophysics for the 2020s” report is
the study of cosmic mass flows on large and small scales. The center region of
the Milky Way, called the Central Molecular Zone (CMZ) is a unique ecosystem for
these studies. The CMZ is the only location where gas flows from kilo-parsec
scales down to proto-stellar disks can be explored simultaneously. The team will
lead critical parts of the ALMA CMZ Exploration Survey (ACES), an ALMA large
program to survey the entire Milky Way center and will make the first
comprehensive measurement of mass flows in a galaxy nucleus. This program
represents an unprecedented combination of a large observing area with high-
resolution imaging. The investigators will conduct a complete census of the mass
in molecular gas and protostars spanning four orders of magnitude in size scale
and characterize the associated gas kinematics with more than a dozen molecular
tracers. Products of this work will include a catalog of extended (diffuse) and
compact (dense) mass components in the CMZ, as well as a complete kinematic
model of gas motions through the CMZ. Ultimately, this project will make the
definitive measurements of the rates of inflow, outflow, star formation, and
accretion toward the central supermassive black hole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.