* 2206730
* Collaborative Research: WoU-MMA: Opening the Infrared Window into Multi-Messenger Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Mansi Kasliwal, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 09/30/2024
* USD 350,381.00

For most of human history, light has been the only tool available for
astronomers to study&lt;br/&gt;the nature of objects in the distant universe.
Recently, gravitational wave interferometers and high energy neutrino
experiments have achieved the first direct detection of spacetime perturbations
and particles from distant cosmic explosions, coincident with conventional
observation of transients using visible light. The emerging discipline of multi-
messenger astrophysics combines information from gravitational waves, neutrinos
and light each probing a different physical scale and process to unravel the
physics of extreme cosmic events that test our understanding of strong gravity
and the end stages of stars. This project will open the relatively unexplored
infrared sky to time-domain surveys. A sensitive wide-field infrared telescope,
the Wide-Field InfraRed Transient Explorer, WINTER, at Palomar Observatory will
be dedicated to multi-messenger astrophysics. The program will include graduate
students, postdoctoral scholars, undergraduate students for summer projects and
senior theses, and high school students and high school teachers for summer
projects. The project plans to work with multiple diversity initiatives reaching
out to women and underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three
scientific goals will be pursued by this project. Firstly, a search will be
conducted for infrared counterparts to binary neutron star mergers and neutron
star black hole mergers during the LIGO/Virgo fourth gravitational wave
observing run. The advantage of WINTER's infrared search is that the emission is
predicted to be ubiquitous and much less affected by viewing angle, mass ratio,
remnant lifetime and opacity distribution. Characterizing the counterpart will
reveal information regarding the heavy elements that were synthesized. Secondly,
a search for infrared counterparts to high energy neutrino triggers from ICECUBE
will be undertaken. Thirdly, a search for stellar mergers of the most massive
stars will be made to derive a complete luminosity function and rate estimate.
Insights during this common envelope phase will have implications on many
branches of stellar evolution, including multi-messenger progenitor systems. The
project will participate in existing diversity initiatives for undergraduate and
high school students at Caltech, California State University, California
Community Colleges, MIT and the Pasadena Unified School
District.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the goals of the Windows on
the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.