* 2206033
* Radio Studies of Planetary Nebulae: Probing Radiation-driven Molecular Chemistry
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Joel Kastner, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2025
* USD 339,362.00

Stars generate their energy through fusion of hydrogen to helium in their cores.
When a star's hydrogen supply runs out, the star expands dramatically to become
a "red giant". Red giants generate elements (like carbon and oxygen) that are
essential for life as we know it. The outer layers of a red giant, which are
only weakly bound to the star's core by gravity, are easily driven away from the
star by its intense radiation. Intense ultraviolet radiation from the star's hot
core then can turn the ejected red giant gas into a giant, glowing plasma cloud
that astronomers call a "planetary nebula". Some planetary nebulae also contain
a rich mixture of chemicals, in molecular form, that may resemble the atmosphere
of the young Earth. Each planetary nebula thereby gives us a snapshot of the
process by which stars enrich the Universe in the building blocks of life. The
investigator will use radio telescope observations of planetary nebulae to
determine the mixture of molecular gases that are released into interstellar
space. The results will advance the field of astronomy by deepening human
understanding of how the essential elements of life arrived on Earth and might
arrive on planets orbiting other stars. To support education and diversity in
the sciences, the investigator will also develop a summer short course for
middle and high school students to explain, among other things, how astronomers
determine the compositions of interstellar gases, and will generate exhibits
about planetary nebulae for use in planetariums around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extremes of physical conditions within molecule-
rich planetary nebulae make these geometrically simple objects particularly
fertile ground for research. Images of these regions aid in improving
astronomers' understanding of radiation-driven chemistry in (UV) photon-
dominated regions (PDRs) and X-ray-dominated regions (XDRs). The investigator
plans a comprehensive campaign of observations and modeling of key tracers of
irradiated molecular gas for a sample comprising the nearest and best-studied
molecule-rich planetary nebulae (PNe). The investigator will fully exploit the
broad frequency coverage and wide-field mapping capabilities of single-dish and
interferometric (sub)mm-wave radio astronomy facilities, including the Atacama
Large Millimeter Array (ALMA). The investigator will make use of "off-the-shelf"
modeling codes to interpret the observational results in terms of molecular gas
distributions, temperatures, densities, and compositions within the target PNe.
The results will have broad applicability, given that the PDRs and XDRs in the
PNe, that are the focus of this study, are representative of a diverse array of
astrophysical environments, from star-forming cores within molecular clouds to
molecular tori surrounding active galactic nuclei.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.