* 2206087
* Enabling Novel Anti-Reflection Coatings for Millimeter and Submillimeter-Wave Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Shaul Hanany, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 07/31/2025
* USD 859,626.00

The investigators will improve the performance of telescopes that study the
large scale properties of the early Universe. For best performance such
telescopes utilize optics made from alumina, sapphire, and silicon. The
investigators seek to develop a new technique to modify the surfaces of such
optics to increase the amount of light that can be utilized. The techniques
developed will also allow the optics to operate over a larger range of
temperatures. Such improvements will enable astronomers to collect light more
efficiently and collect better scientific observations. . Successful development
will lead to a technique that can then be industrialized on large
scales.&lt;br/&gt;This work will involve the efforts of graduate student. An
expansion of an outreach program that reaches tens of thousands of school-age
kids and families annually is also planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The search by
cosmic microwave background (CMB) instruments to find the signatures of
inflation, constrain the sum of neutrino masses, and trace the formation of
cosmic structures requires ever larger throughput from the optical systems
utilized. In response, optical designers are increasingly using optical elements
made of alumina, silicon, and sapphire for higher throughput. This project aims
to develop broad-band, cryogenically-robust, anti-reflection coating (ARC) for
optical elements made of alumina, sapphire, and silicon using laser ablation of
sub-wavelength structures (SWS). Maturing this technology will solve a
technology bottleneck in millimeter and sub-millimeter astrophysics for CMB
instruments. This resulting scalable and reproducible ARC fabrication approach,
will be transferred to industrial partners. This will permit researchers to have
purchasable, turn-key solutions for their ARC needs instead of solving the
challenge anew with every project. The project looks to develop a prescription
for the processing steps need to manufacture such ARCs that can be transferred
to corporate entities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.