* 2206380
* Self-Generated Coronal Magnetic Fields in High Energy Density Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Riccardo Betti, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 390,000.00

This award supports a computational study of how magnetic fields can be
generated in astrophysical and laboratory plasmas, which are collections of many
electrically charged particles interacting with each other. It is well known
that magnetic fields can strongly impact how plasmas behave, but the mechanisms
for self-generation of magnetic field in different types of plasma continue to
be a mystery. Self-generated magnetic fields are ubiquitous in many
astrophysical environments and determine the evolution of such systems, with the
22-year solar cycle of magnetic activity being one of many examples. Self-
generated magnetic fields in laser-driven plasmas can also be strong enough to
significantly modify the plasma behavior. This project will help explain the
processes giving rise to magnetic fields in plasmas irradiated by stars in gas
nebulae or by lasers in the laboratory. It will also aid in better understanding
thermodynamic transport properties in laboratory and astrophysical plasma
systems. For example, observations of gas nebulae morphologies from current and
future astronomical observatories, such as ALMA and JWST, stand to benefit from
the development and testing of the theory developed in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to identify the main
mechanisms by which magnetic fields are self-generated in irradiated plasmas
subject to instabilities. Self-generated magnetic fields in irradiated plasmas
are often produced by the Biermann battery effect. Magnetic fields can also be
driven by the Rayleigh-Taylor (RT) instability in radiation-driven plasmas. RT
induced fields are confined near the ablation front by the Nernst flow and do
not affect the coronal plasma properties. However, in laboratory plasmas
irradiated by a laser, strong B-fields have been observed in the coronal plasma
using proton radiography, in addition to the standard Biermann battery fields
surrounding the laser spot. It has been speculated that the magneto-thermal
instability (MTI) is the main source of mega-gauss magnetic fields in the corona
of laser-driven plasmas; yet, recent work has shown that the traditional form of
MTI is suppressed by supersonic plasma flows. This leaves an important open
question on what is responsible for the coronal magnetic fields observed in
laboratory settings. This project will investigate new instability mechanisms
which can generate magnetic fields that are sufficiently strong to explain
observations, including the electro-thermal instability and new forms of the
magneto thermal instability localized where the flow velocity equals the Nernst
velocity. The work will involve theoretical analysis and numerical
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.