* 2206494
* Collaborative Research: The Definitive Follow-up Campaign for Fast Radio Bursts
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Wen-fai Fong, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2025
* USD 39,746.00

Fast radio bursts (FRBs) are transient pulses of radio emission lasting only
milliseconds. They are known to be coming from galaxies outside our own and are
now a highly intense area of astrophysical pursuit, with over a thousand FRBs
detected to date. A research team between the University of California Santa
Cruz, Northwestern University and the Maria Mitchell Observatory (MMO) forms the
core of the Fast and Fortunate for FRB Follow-up (F4) team, which has been
funded by the NSF since 2019 to observe FRBs and associate them with their host
galaxies. This has enabled the team to start to use FRB signals to probe the
universe and to make a new census of the baryons (subatomic particles, mostly
protons and neutrons) in a highly diffuse state outside of galaxies throughout
the universe. This current NSF award extends this work to allow F4 to increase
its observational impact by an order of magnitude through follow-up observations
of two new surveys of precisely localized FRBs, allowing them to study
cosmology, baryon distribution and identify FRB progenitors. This award will
also support students in a postbaccalaureate 'Bridge' program hosted at the MMO
for attracting and retaining talented and traditionally underrepresented
students, with a long-term goal of increasing their participation and leadership
in STEM fields. All of the investigators will engage in the many outreach
activities of the MMO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the period of this grant, the
F4 team will acquire, analyze, and disseminate deep, multi-band imaging and
spectroscopy on the host galaxies of hundreds of FRBs across the sky. For many
tens of FRB fields, they will obtain imaging and multi-object spectroscopy to
identify intervening galactic halos and map the foreground large-scale
structure. These data and derived quantities (e.g. redshifts (z) and stellar
masses), together with measurements of the FRBs (e.g. dispersion measure (DM)
and rotation measure (RM)) will enable three major scientific thrusts: (1)
cosmology: the first statistically robust determination of the Macquart relation
(DM vs. z), leading to a new and complementary estimate of the Hubble parameter;
(2) galaxy formation: inferring the radial distribution of baryons in galactic
halos and constraining the magnetic fields and gas density of the circumgalactic
medium; and (3) FRB progenitors: testing the many models invoked to produce FRBs
and using rapid follow-up imaging at radio, optical and X-ray wavelengths to
resolve FRB emission mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.