* 2206090
* Integral Field Spectroscopy and the Hubble Constant
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Robin Ciardullo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2025
* USD 295,591.00

Arguably, the most important question in cosmology today is that of the Hubble
tension, i.e., the small discrepancy between the expansion rate of the universe
measured locally, and that inferred from the basic physics of the early universe
and the application of Einsteinâ€™s equations. If this tension is confirmed, then
the mysterious Dark Energy that dominates the universe is more complex than even
Einstein imagined, and new physics is needed to explain the expansion history of
the universe. To address this problem, we need to measure precise distances to
galaxies using as many independent methods as possible. Scientists at the
Pennsylvania State University propose to develop and test two such methods based
on special types of stars that are near the end of their lifetimes: post-
asymptotic giant branch stars, and planetary nebulae. Both objects have shown
tremendous promise as tools for measuring precise distances, but their use has
been limited by technology. The availability of new, large-scale instruments
combined with 8-meter class telescopes has changed this. The team will analyze
both existing and new data from such instruments to determine whether either or
both methods can address the current tension in cosmology. Questions of the
origin and evolution of the universe are of great interest to people outside the
world of astrophysics and are an excellent way to engage students at all levels
of education. This project includes a significant program of public outreach
targeted at both the K-12 level and the general public through a series of local
outreach events. In addition, the project will help train the generation of
scientists now in college by involving them directly in this research
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on current measurements, the Hubble Constant
determined from the Cepheid calibration of SNIa does not quite match that
derived from the combination of the power spectrum of the cosmic microwave
background and the assumption of a Cosmological Constant. To test whether this
Hubble tension is real or just an artifact driven by systematic errors, there is
a need for additional high-precision extragalactic distance indicators. The goal
of this proposal is to develop and test two such standard candles: post-
asymptotic giant branch stars and the planetary nebula luminosity function. The
former has the potential to produce ~2% distance errors to quiescent galaxies
within ~10 Mpc and is tied directly to Gaia measurements; the technique must be
calibrated outside the Galaxy, but can be applied to all galaxies with absolute
V-band magnitudes brighter than -20 within ~40 Mpc, and can increase the number
of SNIa with sub-8% distances by an order of magnitude. The development of both
methods is made possible by the availability of two large-scale integral-field
unit spectrographs: VIRUS on the Hobby-Eberly Telescope and MUSE on the European
Very Large Telescope. The data from these instruments will allow the team to
determine whether either or both methods can reach the precision needed to test
whether the Hubble tension is real and thus requires new physics to explain
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.