* 2206522
* Efficient Astronomical Data Processing Among Distributed Astronomical Radio Observatories
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Haiying (Helen) Shen, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2025
* USD 586,924.00

Astronomy has become a data rich science and one of the biggest consumers of
computing resources. NSF’s National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO) collects
and processes radio telescope data from a broad selection of facilities, but
this centralized approach cannot provide timely analysis, driving an increasing
need for an efficient astronomical data processing system among distributed
observatories. As future telescope projects come online, the data size will grow
dramatically and astronomical experiments will require more accurate data
analysis and processing, and more detailed results. A critical challenge is job
scheduling to maximize application performance and minimize system cost. This
project will design and develop system software for geo-distributed
observatories, focusing on astronomical data processing performance measurement
and performance analysis, and efficient processing system design. Research
results will be disseminated through open-source software releases. The project
will be showcased in relevant courses and will provide thorough training and
collaborative research opportunities to participating undergraduate, graduate,
and K-12 students and faculty, and under-represented and female
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This software for scalable and efficient
astronomical (SEA) data processing includes novel coordination between job
scheduling, job directed acyclic graph (DAG) configuration, and the distribution
of data around the globe. The team will analyze the performance of NRAO’s Common
Astronomy Software Applications (CASA), and of machine learning (ML) and deep
learning (DL) algorithms for astronomical research, on realistic datasets. Using
those results, they will design ML/DL-assisted heuristic methods that adaptively
determine the job DAG configuration and schedule, allowing an application to
process geo-distributed datasets with maximum performance and minimum system
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.