* 2206453
* Partial Differential Equations for Incompressible Fluids and Elastic Solids
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Anna Mazzucato, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2025
* USD 374,420.00

The focus of this project is to study the behavior of fluids and elastic
materials that are modeled mathematically by so-called partial differential
equations. The aim is to further our understanding of certain phenomena by
utilizing rigorous and quantitative mathematical results. Numerical simulations
will also be used in parts of the project. The phenomena that will be studied
are motivated by applications to real-life problems with potential societal
impacts and are characterized by the presence of singularities and the coupling
between different length and time scales. In the first part of the project, the
exchange between walls and incompressible fluids will be considered by studying
the effect of injection and suction on fluid flow and the effect of the motion
of multiple bodies immersed in the fluid and their possible collisions, as in
debris flow and sedimentation. In the second part of the project, the object of
investigation will be how an incompressible flow transports and deforms
directional objects, as in magnetic and conducting fluids, and the interplay
between mixing and diffusion, as in biological processes. The last part of the
project concerns modeling of faults buried deep in the Earth's crust and their
monitoring using data from Global Positioning Systems (GPS) and satellites, with
the ultimate goal of predicting the onset of seismic events. The project
provides also training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students,
particularly members of under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus
of this project is the study of various problems modeled by partial differential
equations concerning the behavior of incompressible fluids and elastic solids,
using analytic and geometric techniques. The problems under investigation are
motivated by fundamental physical phenomena and bring about challenging
mathematical questions, such as fluid-structure interaction problems in the
presence of collisions, and non-local and non-linear interface conditions for
elastic dislocations. The project is divided into three main parts. The first
part concerns the behavior of inviscid and slightly viscous fluids with boundary
injection and suction, which can be used to control turbulent flows in pipes and
channels and stabilize the viscous boundary layer. The motion of rigid bodies in
a viscous fluid when slippage is allowed will also be studied, with applications
to debris flow and sedimentation. The second part concerns measures of mixing
and stretching for transport of vectors by a flow, such as in magneto-
hydrodynamics, and enhanced dissipation for degenerate operators, with
applications in electro- and thermo-rheological fluids and mathematical biology.
The third part concerns seismic faults and fault monitoring using GPS and
satellite data. Progress on these problems is likely to have impact in other
fields, such as geophysics and engineering. The presence of multi-scale effects
and singularities gives cohesiveness to the project. While its focus lies on
analytic results and techniques, several of the proposed problems, such as
optimal mixing and modeling of faults, have a natural computational counterpart
that will be addressed together with collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.