* 2206500
* Nonlinear Dynamics with Applications to Physical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Mark Levi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

The proposed research aims at discovering new phenomena of fundamental
mathematical interest as well as physical relevance, and at explaining them in
the simplest possible way. The three main proposed projects are (i) study of the
robustness or fragility of resonances arising in many physical applications,
e.g. in solid state physics, (ii) explaining the geometrical mechanism of the
recently discovered ponderomotive magnetism (observed in many physical
experiments) and developing a connection between averaging theory and
differential geometry – two seemingly unrelated fields, and (iii) exploiting the
recently discovered connection between Hill's equation on the one hand and the
tire track problem on the other, thus unifying two seemingly unrelated areas.
Some results of this project are likely to give a new and simpler understanding
of some phenomena of fundamental interest, and may make their way into
textbooks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of three parts, unified by
the desire to discover and understand new phenomena in dynamics. Some years ago
J. B. Keller and V. Arnold discovered and analyzed a fundamental feature of
resonances in two different classes of problems: circle maps and Mathieu-type
equations. The goal of the first part of the project is to add a yet one more
class to the two studied by Arnold and Keller, namely the area-preserving
cylinder maps. Besides of its basic interest, the latter example comes up in
solid-state physics among many other settings. The second part of the project
aims at understanding the somewhat mysterious mechanism of ponderomotive
magnetism, and also aims to explore a connection between two fundamental
objects, one from mechanics (the gyroscopic effect) and the other from
differential geometry (Jacobi fields). The third project proposes to exploit the
recently found connection between two seemingly unrelated objects: (i) Hill's
equation, studied extensively over a couple of centuries, and (ii) tire tracks,
a more recently studied object. It is hoped that the results from one area will
give new insights into the other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.