* 2206499
* WoU-MMA: Frequency and Abundance of Binary sUpermassive bLack holes from Optical Variability Surveys (FABULOVS)
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Xin Liu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2025
* USD 367,174.00

Supermassive black holes (SMBHs) are millions to billions of times more massive
than the Sun. They are commonly found at the centers of massive galaxies. When
galaxies merge, their central black holes should also combine. Binary SMBHs are
ideal targets for multi-messenger astronomy, but no robust detection of binary
SMBH has been made, due to observational limitations. This program will
systematically identify and characterize binary SMBHs. It will deliver a
database of robust binary SMBH candidates and provide constraints on their
abundance and evolution. It will enable reliable forecasts for gravitational
wave detection. The research team will also develop dedicated outreach programs
that promote diversity in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will
combine high-quality long-term photometric and spectroscopic synoptic surveys to
systematically identify and characterize sub-pc binary SMBHs. First, it aims to
identify sub-pc binary SMBHs using long-term radial velocity shifts of active
galactic nucleus (AGN) broad emission lines. It will test the hypothesis that
the temporal drifts represent Doppler shifts from binary orbital motion. Second,
it will identify milli-pc binary SMBHs from periodically variable AGNs. It will
critically distinguish periodicity from stochastic variability. Combined with
follow-up observations, it will provide a database of robust sub-pc binary SMBH
candidates to inform their abundance, enabling reliable forecast for
gravitational wave and multi-messenger detections. The program will also be
valuable for characterizing long-term AGN photometric and spectroscopic
variability, advancing the general understanding of accretion disk physics,
effects of accretion disk winds, and SMBH feeding and feedback. This award
addresses and advances the goals of the Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.