* 2206165
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Formation and Growth of Supermassive Black Holes through Variability and Transients
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Vivienne Baldassare, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2025
* USD 491,956.00

Supermassive black holes can be millions to billions of times the mass of our
Sun and are found in the centers of most large galaxies. However, the formation
of these supermassive black holes and the methods by which they grow remain
uncertain. While astronomers cannot observe the black holes directly, light from
gas or stars falling onto the black holes will produce bright disks of accretion
that can be. In this program, the PIs will study time-variable signatures from
these systems to provide unique constraints on the properties and environments
of black holes in the centers of galaxies. This work will address fundamental
questions about formation and evolution of supermassive black holes. The
investigators will also develop a set of inquiry-based educational materials for
high school students. These materials will convey excitement about supermassive
black holes while addressing common misconceptions about extreme gravity. The
activities will map to the key scientific practices identified by the Next-
generation State Standards used by both Illinois and Washington and provide
students an opportunity to engage in exploration and discussion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supermassive black holes (SMBHs) are ubiquitous in the
centers of massive galaxies, yet the formation of SMBH progenitors and their
routes of growth remain unclear. The properties of SMBHs can be revealed by the
accretion of gas or tidally-disrupted stars. Variable or transient emission from
these phenomena provide constraints on the masses, accretion disk properties,
and small-scale environments of these SMBHs. The study will (1) identify
intermediate mass black holes in order to understand possible routes for SMBH
formation, and (2) constrain the environments of active and quiescent SMBHs to
understand how SMBHs grow and how they co-evolve with their host galaxies. This
work will use observations from the Young Supernova Experiment -- a repeat
imaging survey using the Pan-STARRS telescopes to image 1500 square degrees of
sky in four bands with a three day cadence. They will search for active and
quiescent SMBHs in low-mass galaxies through variability and tidal disruption
events, respectively. They will identify and characterize changing-state AGN,
use continuum reverberation mapping to study accretion disk properties, and
study the broader population of tidal disruption events observed by the Young
Supernova Experiment. This project will also study the environments and host
galaxy properties of active and quiescent SMBHs as they grow and evolve, which
will inform studies of galaxy--SMBH co-evolution and provide predictions for
future work with the Vera C. Rubin Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.