* 2206834
* The CO-Mapping Array Pathfinder Survey - A New Window on Cosmic Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kieran Cleary, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,151,085.00

Principal Investigator Cleary and his team are studying galaxies during the
epoch of galaxy assembly, which reached its peak when the Universe was a few
billion years old. Because most galaxies are faint and difficult to observe,
astronomers often look at individual bright galaxies, that are not
representative of the whole. Instead, the team are using a new technique where
they take a series of low resolution “blurry” images of the sky using telescopes
that are designed to detect radio emission from carbon monoxide molecules. These
blurry images are the sum of the radio emission from the gas in many galaxies,
faint and bright. Careful analysis of the data will help us understand how these
early galaxies grew through the conversion of gas into stars, paving the way for
future studies looking even further back in time. To broaden participation the
team are collaborating with the Goldstone Apple Valley Radio Telescope and the
Lewis Center for Educational Research to train teachers in the use of a 34 m
radio telescope. The teachers and their students will observe the radio sky in
real-time from their classroom. In addition, the team will develop classroom
activities specific to their research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CO Mapping Array
Project (COMAP) uses line intensity mapping (LIM) of carbon monoxide (CO) to
trace the distribution and global properties of galaxies over cosmic time, back
to the Epoch of Reionization. This project will complete the on-going 5-year
survey of 12 sq. deg. to detect the CO signal from z~3. Analysis should lead to
a detection of the CO(1-0) power spectrum and the CO-galaxy cross spectrum,
leading to detections of the clustering amplitude and constraints on the cosmic
molecular gas abundance and star formation history at
z=2.4-3.4.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.