* 2206306
* Unraveling the mysteries of small-body ring systems through numerical modeling
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Amanda Sickafoose, Planetary Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 08/31/2025
* USD 465,178.00

Researchers from the Planetary Science Institute seek to characterize the ring
systems around small solar system bodies, such as Centaurs and Kuiper Belt
Objects. The objective is to understand how they are maintained, given that ring
material tends to spread over time. The results of this study could be used to
improve understanding of other, larger ring systems. The research team will also
develop pedagogical modules for grade 7-9 teachers on rings of the solar system,
and they will participate in Girls Camp in South Africa promoting STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to understand and identify the
fundamental physics at play in the maintenance of these ring systems.
Specifically, the goals are to (1) confirm whether a shepherd moon can confine
material as observed at Chariklo and Chiron, including constraining the moonâ€™s
size and location; (2) discover the mechanisms and underlying causes of unusual
structures or features observed in rings around Chariklo; and (3) parameterize
the required conditions (including nucleus size, shape, and spin rate) for rings
to be stable around small, axisymmetric bodies. The project team plans to carry
out N-body simulations of ring particles moving past a satellite using a model
previously developed for the study of Saturn and modified for small bodies.
Model results will be verified with existing data from stellar occultations and
other observations of Chariklo and Chiron.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.