* 2206846
* RAPID: Retrieving the Late Pleistocene/Holocene Archaeology Record at the Carpenter Mining Quarry, Interior Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2022,09/30/2024
* Charles Holmes, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 09/30/2024
* USD 238,520.00

Stratified archaeological sites in interior Alaska are critical to understanding
the peopling of Beringia and the Americas. This rapid-response research involves
the excavation and recovery of archaeological, geological, and paleoecological
data from a multicomponent site in interior Alaska that is in imminent danger of
destruction. Dating to the Late Pleistocene and early Holocene and located on a
prominent landform, the site contains lithics and well-preserved organic
materials from several time periods. The siteâ€™s location, stratification, and
degree of preservation offer scientists unparalleled insights on ancient human
adaptations to an ecosystem shifting from tundra to boreal
forest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Site XBD-00456 will be systematically excavated by
arbitrary levels to document the cultural, environmental, and depositional
history of the site. Lithic and bone artifacts, carbon and soil samples will be
collected and analyzed according to professional archaeological standards.
Geoarchaeological data will inform paleoecological reconstruction, while lithic
artifacts will undergo XRF analysis to characterize their chemical composition.
Recovered materials will be curated in Alaska and accessible for future study by
researchers and descendant community members. Results will be disseminated via
conference presentations, journal articles, and to descendant
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.