* 2206670
* DISES: Indigenous forest management in a non-stationary climate
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,02/28/2023
* Kevin Anchukaitis, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,599,397.00

Forests have provided shelter, sustain, and provide ecosystem goods and
services, including carbon sequestration, nourishment, and water resources for
human societies for millennia. Forests reflect a complex mix of human
management, extraction, and conservation interactions, and they face a myriad of
threats from both economic forces and global environmental change. This award
will explore how forests have been managed and sustained over millennia through
exploring the human knowledge of these interactions. This award will explore the
forest’s dynamics using: formal technical or ‘Western’ scientific and Indigenous
Knowledge (defined here by local ancestral knowledge held by Indigenous
communities) approaches and understanding. This study will rigorously assess
forest disturbance history and model forest climate sensitivity in neotropical
conifer forests using western methods from tree-ring studies and understanding
how climatic risks are perceived by indigenous forest managers, the forest
management systems in place led by indigenous communities, to understand how
Indigenous Knowledge is applied to forest management in these communities and
how this knowledge acquisition and transmission could be modified by social
changes including migration, and how this relates to the existing body of
Indigenous Knowledge. The project includes a range of broader impacts related to
education, training, and co-production of knowledge focused on building local
capacity and generating information that can be applied to study the range of
variability in the coupled socio-environmental system of forests conserved by
Indigenous communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forest ecosystems are a critical
component of the biosphere and play an important role in coupling the atmosphere
to the land surface and carbon cycle. These environments also shelter, sustain,
and provide ecosystem goods and services, including carbon sequestration and
water resources, for human societies at scales from local to global. Forests are
fully integrated socio-environmental systems that reflect reciprocal
interactions, exchanges, and feedbacks between biosphere, atmosphere, and human
society. Terrestrial protected areas and ecologically intact landscapes are
conserved and managed by indigenous peoples, but imminent climate disruption and
changes in forest disturbance regimes threaten the state of ecosystems and the
human livelihoods that both depend on and affect them. Indigenous Knowledge
reflects holistic accumulated understanding of the system by indigenous
communities; however, migration and other social and cultural changes have
altered the modes of transmission of environmental knowledge in these
communities. How does modern Indigenous Knowledge integrate centuries of socio-
environmental interactions and experiences and how will that knowledge system
change in the face of social and environmental systems that will imminently
shift beyond the variability of the last several centuries? This research
approach combines a long-term understanding of past, present, and future forest
history and disturbance from dendrochronology, novel insights into indigenous
management and conservation practices through time, an understanding of
traditional environmental knowledge dynamics, scale, and change, and forecasts
of future socio-ecological change. This project seeks to understand how
indigenous knowledge of forest dynamics reflect centuries of ecosystem
variability and how non-stationarity in both the human and ecological components
of this coupled system will affect management, conservation, and preservation of
this socio-ecological system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.