* 2206766
* Probing Cosmic Dawn with End-to-End Forward Models
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Judd Bowman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alison Peck
* 08/31/2025
* USD 445,607.00

Direct observations of neutral hydrogen remain the most promising probes of
"Cosmic Dawn". This project will combine state-of-the-art observations from two
US-led experiments: the global Experiment to Detect the Global Epoch of
Reionization (EoR) Signal (EDGES), and the interferometric Hydrogen Epoch of
Reionization Array (HERA). The analysis of HERA data will discriminate between
exotic explanations of EDGES’ results, including early radio-loud black holes
and novel dark matter candidates beyond the standard model. On a broader level,
the proposed project will deliver a common framework for combining different
datasets focusing on Cosmic Dawn, increasing both the reliability and power of
physical interpretations. This project will take place at a university that has
a strong commitment to serving students from non-traditional backgrounds such as
returning, first generation, and veteran students and will involve students in
the successful Research Experiences for Non-Traditional Undergraduates
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The epoch of Cosmic Dawn, spanning a redshift of
12 to 30, encompasses the gravitational collapse of dark matter halos and the
birth of the first stars and galaxies, and has far-reaching implications for
both galaxy evolution and cosmology. Focusing on frequencies of 50-100 MHz –
within which the first evidence for the first stars has been reported by EDGES,
this program will implement a fundamentally new paradigm to account for
systematics by defining modular end-to-end statistical forward models. Such
forward models are the only rigorous way to account for systematic residuals and
their effect on posterior constraints of astrophysics and cosmology. These
forward models will be applied – both in isolation, and jointly – to forthcoming
data from the third-generation EDGES experiment and the first data from the
completed HERA Phase II array, yielding the most stringent physical inference to
date during this epoch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.