* 2206125
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Using allies to expand your network: Implementing a psychological methodology to attract and retain underrepresented (UR) students in geoscience
* GEO,RISE
* 12/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Jeffrey Nittrouer, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 273,404.00

Geoscience maintains a base-rate problem with respect to diversity: ethnic
minorities and people with disabilities are highly underrepresented. This has
been traced to a variety of barriers for underrepresented (UR) ethnic scholars
including: a lack of geoscience majors at HBCUs and primarily Hispanic-serving
institutions, a lack of experience with, and time spent in, nature (e.g., &lt;
3% of visitors to U.S. national parks are Black and Hispanic), and negative
attitudes about career prospects. For people with disabilities, the main
challenge is accessibility and the provision of appropriate accommodations. UR
individuals may self-select out of geoscience programs due to these perceptions
and barriers. This project will test the idea that allies, or members of
dominant social identities, are best situated to positively influence these
statistics. Academic allies, whether faculty or graduate student teaching
assistants, have tremendous impact on their students’ academic engagement and
can serve as linchpins for improving the future trajectories of UR students. PIs
will train individuals in effective allyship behaviors, and incentivize them to
recruit UR students into their academic field trips. The PIs plan to target
allies who engage in field research and education, as geoscience is a unique
STEM field insofar as much of the data collection and skill development are
practiced out in nature at locations around the world. The PIs propose testing a
strategy to overcome barriers in this context for UR students, as positive (or
negative) experiences in field settings have profound impacts on recruitment and
retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will facilitate training and
assessment of approximately 80 academic allies and measure the effect of that
training on allies as well as hundreds of majority and UR students. The
expectation is that the training will produce a secondary effect: academic
allies role model effective behaviors to all of their students and faculty
networks, creating a “train-the-trainer” ripple effect. The PIs will use
academic field trips as a vehicle for measurement, including multisource
ratings, applying 360-degree-type ratings typically collected in performance
appraisals to this setting. Deliverables include an experimental, longitudinal
(over time), and multisource analysis of the allyship program and its
improvement of allyship-related attitudes and behaviors, as well as its impact
on the performance of UR students. These results will inform research efforts
regarding the effectiveness of implemented strategies, and the materials and
procedure will be made open-source for maximum replicability. A capstone
conference will be used to disseminate findings to all participating allies and
UR students, inform about methodologies that improve attraction and retention of
UR groups in the geosciences, and expand UR networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.