* 2206962
* RET Site: Engaging and Enabling Teachers through Advanced Manufacturing Research
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Mark Johnson, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2025
* USD 599,947.00

The RET Site ‘Engaging and Enabling Teachers through Advance Manufacturing
Research’ at Clemson University will host 10 high school teachers and community
college instructors from South Carolina each year for the 3-year project.
Manufacturing is a foundation of economic growth and job creation across the
U.S. and is constantly changing with improvements in technology, materials, and
design. While this field is a pillar for economic growth within the U.S.,
manufacturing companies struggle to recruit a technically prepared workforce.
When teachers have an opportunity to engage in research, seeing for themselves
how knowledge is constructed for a field and understand how the work can
influence the larger engineering or scientific community through the stages of
research (identification of research questions through to the dissemination of
the findings), their impact in the classroom will be increased as they
incorporate these experiences into their classroom activities. This research
experience for teachers (RET) program is focused on providing experiences for
high school teachers and community college instructors to improve their
understanding of how research progresses (scientific inquiry) and the field of
advanced manufacturing. All teachers will be asked to design and develop
classroom activities related to their research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RET Site ‘Engaging and Enabling Teachers through
Advanced Manufacturing Research’ at Clemson University seeks to provide
transformative manufacturing research experiences for 30 high school teachers
and community college instructors from South Carolina. Each teacher will have
agency over their own research project related to the development of advanced
manufacturing materials or manufacturing techniques. By participating, the
teacher’s confidence about manufacturing, knowledge of new manufacturing
opportunities, and the research process is anticipated to increase. At the close
of the program, each teacher will be able to convey the research process, the
manufacturing landscape within the U.S., manufacturing career opportunities and
different educational pathways into manufacturing to their students. The goals
include: (1) expanding content knowledge of advanced and traditional materials
manufacturing for teachers to support integration into new STEM and workforce
development teaching and learning materials; (2) engaging teachers in advanced
manufacturing research where they take on the role as the lead researcher and
increase their understanding of how research leads to knowledge development; (3)
providing teachers with professional development (mentoring on curriculum
development, etc.) both during their research experience and the following
academic year; (4) creating strong communication between the teacher, the RET
leadership team and industrial advisory board to provide the teachers with
support as they refine their curriculum modules; (5) increasing teacher self-
efficacy related to manufacturing content knowledge and inquiry-based teaching;
(6) increasing teachers’ knowledge of regional career opportunities in advanced
manufacturing to inspire their students to consider advanced manufacturing
careers. The RET evaluation work will result in increased understandings of
regionally-important questions related to workforce development, teacher
learning and professional development, and post-secondary educational
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.