* 2206523
* Collaborative Research: Unravelling Stripped Supernovae - Synergy between Observations and Modeling
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Wolfgang Kerzendorf, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2025
* USD 415,181.00

It has long been known that massive stars in the universe die in massive
explosions known as supernovae (SNe). Supernovae resulting from the core
collapse of massive stars are classified by astronomers in several ways. One
type is normal SNe, whose massive progenitors have been stripped of their
hydrogen and helium envelopes, thus known as “stripped supernovae.” Another type
is classified as SNe Ic, with or without an accompanying gamma-ray burst (GRB),
which emits relativistic jets of high-energy radiation. These explosions can be
seen to large cosmological distances and are important for many fields of
astrophysics. A research collaboration between the University of Virginia and
Michigan State University will address some of the outstanding questions about
SNe, such as which massive, stripped stars die in which kinds of deaths, and
what is the detailed progenitor makeup for these explosions? The work will
involve analyzing data from a large set of stripped SNe, as well as modeling
those data and other published data via the open-source radiative transfer
software called TARDIS, in combination with use of the machine-learning
technology known as emulators for efficiently scanning large sets of parameters.
In addition, to increase the number of members of underrepresented groups in
STEM, the lead investigators will collaborate with two different programs (one,
Girls Exploring the Universe, a summer program for middle school girls in
Virginia, and the other at a high school in East Lansing, MI) to involve their
students in different research projects that range from contributing to the
TARDIS code to using the proposed widget that compares TARDIS simulations to
recently observed SN spectra. Evidence suggests that school-age programs
incorporating hands-on research, coding activities, and role models tend to
increase self-confidence and interest of girls and minorities in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers aim to resolve two recent
controversies in the SN community, with strong implications for stellar
evolution, understanding the conditions needed for jet production, and for the
hotly debated SN-GRB progenitor models. A clear understanding of the stellar
progenitors and explosion parameters of SN and GRBs is an essential foundation
for using them as indicators of star formation over cosmological distances and
for assessing them as sources of re-ionizing the Universe. The proposed
activities will transform the field of stripped SNe: they will quantify, for the
first time, the systematic and statistical uncertainties in modeling these
explosions and increase the total number of objects whose spectra have been
modeled to at least 185 SNe, which constitutes the largest data set of Stripped
SN in the world and allows the field to fully transition from individual objects
to population studies. Moreover, the proposed framework will do so in a
homogeneous and consistent manner. The proposed rapid and statistically solid
theoretical interpretation framework will be made
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.