* 2206813
* Collaborative Research: Exploring Early Galaxy Formation and the Epoch of Reionization with the Hawaii-Two-0 (H20) Survey
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Bahram Mobasher, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 09/30/2025
* USD 426,848.00

Understanding how and when galaxies form necessarily involves the study of
incredibly distant and faint objects. Since spectroscopy of many hundreds of
millions of extremely faint galaxies is not feasible currently, deep- and high-
resolution imaging surveys covering many square degrees are the preferred method
for identifying targets for spectroscopic follow-up. Images obtained through
multiple filters spanning a wide wavelength range – in effect, a form of very
low-resolution spectroscopy - can be used to derive important properties such as
approximate redshifts (distances), stellar masses, and star formation activity,
in addition to morphology and their environments. This award will support the
completion and early analysis of the Hawaii Two-0 (H20) survey, an ultra- deep
and multi-wavelength galaxy survey covering two contiguous 10-square degree
regions of the sky in eight bands spanning 0.36 to 4.5 microns in wavelength.
The survey includes follow-up spectroscopy with Keck and overlaps fields
targeted for deep observations by the Euclid Space Telescope. The award also
supports graduate student research, enables the participation of undergraduate
and local high school students in research activities, develops general
educational classes in Spanish, and multiple public outreach
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The H20 imaging data will provide the largest and
only cosmologically significant sample for the foreseeable future and is
expected to uncover 500,000 high-z Lyman Break galaxies, 12,000 quiescent
systems and 50-100 proto-clusters at z= 3-7, with derived photometric redshifts,
stellar masses, star formation rates and extinction. These data will provide the
first definitive constraint on the evolution of massive high-z galaxies, a study
of the mass function for different populations of galaxies as a function of
redshift and environment, the identification of proto-clusters, and a search for
rare objects believed responsible for re-ionizing the Universe during the
initial epoch of galaxy formation. Guaranteed Keck spectroscopy will be used to
find redshifts and calibrate photometric redshifts, confirm proto-clusters,
measure the strength of the Ly-alpha lines to search for high- escape fraction
objects and to measure spectral line diagnostics of galaxy physical parameters.
Innovative data science techniques (e.g., self-organizing maps; SOMs) will be
developed and applied to the multi-dimensional H20 data to extract maximum
scientific information. The H20 catalogs will additionally be essential for
building the Euclid calibration fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.