* 2206270
* Nonlinear Wave Models in Domains with a Boundary
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Dionyssios Mantzavinos, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 08/31/2025
* USD 168,087.00

Physical phenomena in water waves, optics, and other fields of science naturally
occur in spatially confined regions. Capturing in the modeling of such phenomena
the behavior at the boundary of the region presents fundamental challenges,
which in mathematical terms translates into questions of existence and
uniqueness of solutions of dispersive equations and of sensitivity of these
solutions to changes in initial and boundary conditions. This project will
develop a methodology for deciphering the complex behavior of the equations
modeling optics and water waves phenomena in bounded regions and will provide
tools to understand and design physical and numerical experiments, especially in
the direction of capturing novel unexplored behaviors. The investigator will
engage both undergraduate and graduate students in the project, in line with a
commitment to the training of future generations of mathematicians and the
promotion of diversity in the field of mathematics and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves three main components. The
first component considers nonlinear Schrödinger-type equations in higher than
one space dimensions. The second focuses on equations in higher dimensional
bounded domains with an emphasis on completely integrable models. This direction
will exploit the rich mathematical structure of integrable equations and provide
rigorous results on a currently largely unexplored area. The third studies
multi-component systems of nonlinear shallow water wave equations in domains
with a boundary. Such systems arise as approximations to the Euler equations of
hydrodynamics; therefore, results achieved in this direction will be of value to
the broader area of hydrodynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.