* 2206245
* Graphite Haze Formation in sub-Neptune Atmospheres within the Graphite-stability Regime
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Julianne Moses, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2025
* USD 536,661.00

New space and ground-based telescopes will soon observe planets around other
stars and search for signs of life in their atmospheres. The sub-Neptune type of
planets are among the observing targets. However, graphite haze is expected to
form in many of these sub-Neptunes and can block our observations. A team led by
Johns Hopkins University will experimentally explore graphite haze formation in
sub-Neptune atmospheres. They will constrain what type of sub-Neptune
atmospheres are likely to produce graphite hazes, helping choose future
observation targets. They will also measure the graphite’s properties critical
for interpreting future observations. The team will conduct K-12 education and
public outreach programs. This program will provide research internships for six
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will make a
significant impact on the state of knowledge in the field of exoplanet
atmospheric chemistry, and is critical to current and future exoplanet
atmospheric characterization efforts. The team will investigate chemical
processes occurring in sub-Neptune atmospheres within the graphite-stability
regime using a state-of-art laboratory facility specifically designed to
investigate a range of planetary atmospheres. They will determine the reaction
conditions, compositional alternation, and graphite’s impacts on the
detectability of key atmospheric gas spectral features. The specific tasks that
the team will perform include: (1) constraining the conditions for the formation
of graphite and determine the transition efficiency under those conditions; (2)
measuring the gas phase compositions and identify plausible chemical processes
for the formation of graphite; (3) Measuring optical properties of the resulted
graphite hazes from visible to mid-infrared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.