* 2206374
* The Henrietta Project
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Nicholas Konidaris, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2025
* USD 894,830.00

Over the past several decades thousands of planets have been found orbiting
stars other than our sun. These are referred to as exoplanets. By studying the
atmospheric gas surrounding these exoplanets, insight is obtained into how the
planets formed and changed over their lifetimes. To accomplish such a study,
this project would build a specialized detector for the 40-inch diameter Swope
Telescope in Chile. This detector is sensitive to infrared light which is
optimal for measuring the atmospheric gasses of exoplanets. This work is
challenging because of the distance and faintness of this signal. Measurement of
the large number of exoplanets now known will be important in order to
understand the diversity that exists among them. A postdoctoral scholar will
lead the design and construction of this detector. The investigators will
provide lectures and mentor summer undergraduate internship program at The
Carnegie Institution for Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will complete construction of a spectrograph for use on the 40-inch (1-m) Swope
telescope at Las Campanas Observatory. This will be accomplished through the
procurement and integration of a new infrared detector and controller.
Techniques will also be developed that will deliver ultra-precise (100 ppm or
better), near-infrared, exoplanet atmospheric spectra from the ground, allowing
information on gas giants and sub-Neptunes to be recovered. This instrument will
be utilized in an observing campaign to develop the protocols needed to allow
such routine high-precision spectrophotometry. Careful design of the instrument
and such protocols will mitigate systematic effects such as atmospheric
scintillation noise, subpixel sensitivity noise, and scattered light that
otherwise limit precision to &gt;350 ppm. Exoplanet atmospheric spectra are
imparted with molecular absorption features that permit the measure of
atmospheric compositions and pressure-temperature profiles, and unravel the
interplay of atmospheres with formation, clouds, oceans, and host star
illumination. The PI will be a lecturer in Carnegie's ten-week summer student
program over a three year period teaching a total of about thirty under-
represented undergraduate students the principles of astronomical
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.