* 2206519
* DISES:  RUI:  Emplacing Algal Blooms to Advance Sustainability Theory and Praxis (EMBAST)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Stephanie Spehar, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/28/2027
* USD 1,581,493.00

This project studies the social and environmental conditions that contribute to
toxic algal blooms in freshwater systems. Harmful algal blooms affect freshwater
systems worldwide and result in billions of dollars in economic losses to
industry, recreation, and public health. The role of historical, socio-cultural,
policy and ecological characteristics of lake systems are investigated through
partnerships between researchers and community organizations to identify key
social and environmental drivers of toxic algal blooms. The project advances the
theory and practice of sustainability science research by developing the concept
of emplaced sustainability, which proposes that sustainability solutions must be
based in the histories, cultures and ecologies of specific places. The project
provides high-impact research experiences for &gt;45 undergraduate students.
Broader impacts resulting from project activities include policy briefs,
workshops for regional stakeholders, a traveling multimedia pop-up exhibit, K-12
teaching resources, a project website with blog, and articles in popular media.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyanobacteria blooms develop through a set of interrelated
social and environmental conditions. Land use decisions by distal land owners
contribute to algal blooms resulting in a disconnect between critical actors and
the place of impact. This negative spatial externality poses a particular
obstacle to developing effective policy solutions to reduce the prevalence of
algal blooms and mitigate their impact. Researchers and community organizations
will co-develop social and environmental practices through application of a
theoretical approach grounded in place-based research methods. This project
integrates analysis of policy and regulatory documents, archival research,
spatial analysis of environmental conditions, participant observation, in-person
and online surveys, focus groups, interviews, and sampling and analysis of water
quality and bloom severity to inform a predictive model to forecast severity of
cyanobacteria blooms. Data from narrative journaling, histomapping, and focus
group discussions are used to consider perspectives of diverse stakeholders in
developing place-based policy solutions. Through application of a framework
grounded in emplacement, this project furthers fundamental development of
sustainability as an ongoing dialogue among people and places. In addition to
theoretical contributions, empirical research on toxic cyanobacteria blooms will
generate novel methodologies with which to examine and address this important
environmental problem. A large cohort of undergraduate students will receive
training in sustainability science and the development of environmental policy
solutions through participation in project workshops, training in data
collection protocols and development of public education
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.