* 2206279
* Analytic and Numerical Methods for Emerging Tomography Techniques
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Fatma Terzioglu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Tomography techniques, which are used for non-invasive visualization of the
interior structure of an object of interest, have transformed many fields,
including astronomy, medicine, industrial non-destructive testing, homeland
security, archaeology, biology, geophysics, and others. Together with
technological innovations, mathematical approaches have been instrumental in
advancing these techniques. The project will address mathematical problems
arising from two promising tomography techniques: Multi-energy Computed
Tomography (MECT) and Compton Camera Imaging (CCI). Both methods are highly
useful in imaging applications. MECT is an x-ray transmission imaging method
that uses the energy dependence of x-ray attenuation to determine the elemental
composition of an object of interest. The conventional single-energy CT uses a
simplified (linear) model for x-ray transmission, and thus, produces a grayscale
image revealing only the morphology of scanned objects. In contrast, MECT can
provide quantitative information and visualization in color, as a result of the
more accurate modeling. MECT is regarded as a reinvention of CT imaging and is
anticipated to have a significant impact on medical imaging in the coming years.
Compton cameras have been used in astronomy as a telescope to detect atmospheric
or cosmic gamma-ray sources. Pilot studies have shown that it can be used in a
wide range of medical imaging applications, as well as radioactive
decontamination. The result will also be useful in homeland security imaging for
detecting illicit nuclear materials. Besides its practical benefits, the project
will create opportunities for training, research experience, and career
development for graduate and undergraduate students. It will also facilitate
interdisciplinary collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Image reconstruction in
MECT requires solving a nonlinear inverse problem, for which iterative
approaches must be used because an analytical solution has yet to be discovered.
Although developing image reconstruction algorithms in MECT has been a very
active research area, the studies systematically analyzing the uniqueness and
stability of inversion have been limited. In the current practice, the scan
protocol yielding unique and stable reconstructions is primarily determined by
examining the noise in images obtained from physical phantom experiments. A
major goal of the project is to develop a systematic approach for the design of
MECT scan parameters based on the stability estimates for the MECT measurement
model. A major challenge for using Compton cameras in medical applications will
be overcoming the complexity of image reconstruction. The investigator will
develop effective and computationally efficient image reconstruction methods for
Compton cameras as well as analyses for admissible detector geometries and
measurement uncertainties. Numerical techniques for the assessment of the
theoretical results of the project will also be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.