* 2206140
* DISES-RCN: Developing new strategies for urban-rural systems to overcome interconnected social, environmental, and technological challenges
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Charles Nilon, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 01/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

This Urban-Rural Systems Research Coordination Network will address challenges
facing many regions of the United States. These challenges include urban and
suburban sprawl, disconnected food, energy, and water systems. Other challenges
include frequent floods and uncontrolled water runoff, urban heat induced
hospitalizations, and failure of ecosystem services. These situations have
disproportionate impacts on vulnerable populations and are common throughout the
Mississippi River Basin. This project will bring together an interdisciplinary
group of researchers and stakeholders to develop new research collaborations and
directions that address the multi-dimensional natural and human-made challenges
faced by communities at urban-rural interfaces. Five metropolitan areas within
the Mississippi basin will be studied. This network of mid-sized cities,
together with their satellite communities and adjacent rural areas, constitute a
large, interconnected social and environmental system from the headwaters of the
river to the Louisiana delta. Addressing these social-environmental challenges
in mid-sized cities will provide significant societal impacts. The RCN will
establish a foundation for innovation in STEM education, preparing students to
work in regional, transdisciplinary systems science. Project outcomes will
facilitate research that leads to new regional policies and government actions
to create more resilient and sustainable urban-rural environments across scales
for people living within regional watershed landscapes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Network will focus on the Minneapolis/St. Paul,
Davenport, St. Louis, Memphis, and Baton Rouge metro areas. It will create a
comparative classification system describing the similarity of geographically
linked cities and nearby rural and agricultural places. Similarity and
distinctiveness will be delineated by geographic proximity to the Mississippi
River, historical development timelines, and socio-economic qualities. A
classification method for urban-rural typologies will be developed across four
working groups, their interwoven activities, and a justice lens. The groups will
cover; 1) land use housing, food production, and energy use; 2) urban-rural
transboundary flows; 3) vacant land and urban ecosystem services delivery; and
4) urban heat island and climate change impacts. Network activities will be
based on systems theory. The goal will be development of a system-of-systems
interpretation of urban-rural gradients across metropolitan areas within this
landscape. Participants in this RCN will consider linkages between social
systems governing land policy such as land use and zoning, urban density/floor
area ratios, land use patterns, urban nature, urban expansion plans, building
designs, and infrastructure, as well as urban environmental systems such as
ecosystems, biodiversity, and climate. Further, the network will examine
residentsâ€™ perceptions actions leading to feedbacks between and changes within
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.