* 2206234
* DISES: Valuing and managing engineered ecosystems: Primary and secondary services provided by stormwater ponds in urban landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2023,10/31/2027
* Alexander Reisinger, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robyn Smyth
* 10/31/2027
* USD 1,599,994.00

Stormwater wet ponds (SWPs) capture rainwater that runs off urban and suburban
landscapes before it enters natural waters like lakes or rivers. SWPs are mainly
built for flood control and water quality benefits, but they can also improve
people’s daily lives. For example, SWPs can add recreational area and increase
home values in a neighborhood. This project combines environmental, economic,
and social research to understand how human behaviors and management of SWPs
interact with natural processes in SWPs. These interactions influence the
benefits that SWPs provide to people and nature. The project will investigate
tradeoffs in how management affects algal blooms and other SWP water quality
issues. Researchers will also study how people value SWPs and estimate their
effect on the sales price of nearby homes. Results will be combined to find ways
to increase the ecological, social, and economic value that SWPs provide to
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will quantify ecosystem services
provided by SWPs such as improved water quality and pollutant removal, enhanced
property values, and increased biodiversity. The benefits and tradeoffs in
ecosystem services will be documented through research on variations in social
norms, values, and decisions across different social levels (from the individual
to the community) and how these variations interact with ecological processes.
Further, this research will occur at local and regional scales to 1) reveal
differences in perceptions and values of SWPs across different levels of society
and governance, 2) quantify ecosystem services (nutrient removal, protection
from harmful algal blooms, carbon sequestration) provided by SWPs, and 3)
establish societal preferences for these services. In the social science realm,
economists and anthropologists will use a combination of surveys, focus groups,
and hedonic housing models to identify the value of SWPs to society. In the
natural science realm, biogeochemists, ecologists, and phycologists will
quantify spatial and temporal aspects of SWP biogeochemistry and microbial
community dynamics. The natural and social science realms will be linked through
local and statewide socioecological surveys of SWPs and their communities,
experiments testing efficacies of different algal management approaches, and
synthetic analyses using geospatial approaches to identify relationships between
social demographics and SWP ecosystem services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.