* 2206200
* Control Theory, Qualitative Analysis, and Approximation of Coupled Structure-Flow Interaction Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Pelin Guven Geredeli, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

The project aims to develop qualitative and quantitative analysis of certain
fluid structure interaction (FSI) partial differential equation (PDE) systems.
Such coupled PDE systems mathematically describe various biological phenomena,
such as interactions of blood flow within encapsulating blood vessel wall
structures. In particular, mammalian blood vascular walls, being composed of
viscoelastic materials, undergo large deformations due to the hemodynamic forces
generated during the blood transport process. This interaction between arterial
walls and incompressible blood flow is mathematically realized by a composite
(multilayered) FSI PDE precisely of the type under consideration in this
project. In addition, this project will focus on those FSI PDE models, generally
composed of elastic dynamics coupled to compressible or incompressible Stokes or
Navier Stokes fluid flows, that are known to describe a variety of phenomena
seen in civil engineering: for instance, the interaction of fluid or gas flows
with displacing elastic membranes, and the aerodynamics of structures such as
bridges and tall buildings. For such FSI dynamics, the focus of the project
research will be the development of a continuous and numerical approximation
theory, relevant to cases when the fluid flow PDE component manifests the
Navier-Stokes nonlinearity, as well as when nonlinearities emanate from the
plate PDE component. This project will also provide research training
opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students. Moreover, to promote
study in the STEM fields, this project will include K-12 outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research entails the development of novel
methodologies to address issues of existence, uniqueness, longtime behavior, and
numerical approximation of solutions to multilayered FSI systems. Part of the
project research aims to: (I.i) establish novel mathematical methodologies to
determine the existence and uniqueness of solutions to those FSI that consist of
multilayered elastic equations coupled to incompressible fluid flows; (I.ii)
ascertain the qualitative behavior of such solutions, including the possibility
of obtaining optimal rates of rational decay, as time evolves. Such results in
(I.i) and (I.ii) could provide qualitative insight concerning the incidence and
pathology of those aneurysms caused by arterial wall deformations during the
mammalian blood transportation process. Moreover, the project research aims to:
(II.i) provide intrinsically novel mixed variational formulations to obtain
solutions of coupled (compressible and incompressible) Navier Stokes-fully
nonlinear Kirchoff plate FSI systems which describe certain phenomena in civil
engineering; (II.ii) construct a mathematical control theory relative to the
boundary control of said FSI PDE systems, in the physically relevant case that
boundary control is active in the plate component. This project anticipates that
the mixed variational approaches to wellposedness noted in (II.i) will give rise
to implementable numerical approximation schemes for the solutions of
multilayered FSI systems, with faster convergence rates than those in the
existing literature, and with less computational cost. Moreover, the boundary
controllability project work noted in (II.ii) is consonant with certain fluid
mechanical applications; namely, the intent of the boundary control law is to
induce a mixing of the fluid velocity within its 3D chamber, to ultimately
attain a nonchaotic or quiescent flow state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.