* 2206439
* Electronic spectroscopy of astrophysically important silicon-bearing molecules
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Neil Reilly, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2025
* USD 465,508.00

Molecules containing silicon are key reactive intermediates and are thought to
be the progenitors of dust in evolved stars. This research project will generate
new spectroscopic data on small silicon carbides – molecules containing silicon
and carbon – that reside in the dust-forming regions and circumstellar envelopes
of evolved carbon stars. Results from the study will allow determination of the
structures and properties of these molecules and expedite laboratory searches at
radio and infrared wavelengths. This will permit their unambiguous
identification in space, allowing astronomers to better understand the
conditions within circumstellar environments and shed some light on the poorly
understood nature of interstellar dust. This project will contribute to the
professional development of a postdoctoral scholar, train graduate students in
advanced methods of laboratory astrophysics, provide research opportunities to
undergraduate students, and expose local public high school students from non-
traditional backgrounds to cutting edge research in
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using advanced laser spectroscopy techniques,
including two-dimensional laser induced fluorescence (2DF) and stimulated
emission pumping (SEP), the investigators will study the electronic spectra of
SiC2, Si2C, and other silicon-bearing transient molecules. Exploiting the strong
optical transitions of these molecules, SEP will provide a broad overview of
rovibrational transitions within highly excited vibrational levels, yielding
spectroscopic constants of sufficient accuracy to significantly reduce the
frequency range required for laboratory microwave searches. Similarly, 2DF will
be used to unravel the complex optical spectrum of Si2C and expedite searches
for non-polar or weakly polar silicon-bearing molecules or ones containing other
abundant circumstellar elements. Complementary mass-resolved resonant ionization
experiments will be used to secure the molecular identifications. Some of the
molecules investigated are also important in thin film fabrication, so a
knowledge of their optical spectra could help elucidate and improve the
manufacturing processes of advanced optical and electronic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.