* 2206187
* Topics in Kinetic Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Maja Taskovic, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 07/31/2025
* USD 195,663.00

Kinetic theory provides a description of the dynamics of a large system of
interacting particles by considering the particle density function instead of
tracking each particle separately. Such averaging approach was first used to
derive the Boltzmann equation that models the evolution of rarefied gases with
predominantly binary interactions, and it has been successfully applied to
derive kinetic equations modeling a wide range of applications, from gas and
plasma dynamics to high atmosphere aerodynamics and collective behavior in
social networks. This project will focus on two types of kinetic equations. The
first type is a kinetic model which goes beyond binary interactions via
incorporating a sum of higher order interaction terms, and as such serves as a
basic model for a non-ideal gas. The second type of equations to be considered
model dilute hot plasmas, which appear in nuclear fusion and
tokamaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to advance the
mathematical understanding of nonlinear partial differential equations arising
in kinetic theory. The first part of the project focuses on questions of well-
posedness, moment estimates, and description of long-range interactions of
equations that generalize the Boltzmann equation. One such generalization is the
binary-ternary Boltzmann equation that models the evolution of denser gases
which allow both binary and ternary interactions. The second part considers the
long-time behavior, including the rate of convergence to the equilibrium, moment
estimates, and propagation of smoothness versus formation of blow up in finite
time, of the relativistic Landau equation. This equation captures the effects of
Einstein’s’ theory of special relativity due to high particle velocities in hot
plasmas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.