* 2206803
* Precision Models for a Reference Set of Mira Variables
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Michelle Creech-Eakman, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Luca Rizzi
* 07/31/2025
* USD 525,731.00

Mira variable stars are a special class of variable stars that lie at the heart
of several important physical processes affecting the evolution of galaxies.
They play a critical role in the galactic recycling process: over time they
return much of their material to the interstellar medium and they strongly
affect the appearance of galaxies. They are also extremely luminous and are
excellent distance indicators, which makes them ideal candidates to map out
galactic distributions. On the other hand, they are complicated stars, which can
appear very differently across different wavelengths and time scales. This
proposal will create the most extensive reference set of Mira variables to date,
by examining a vast amount of archival data spanning several years in the past
and combining them with recent observations from multiple space missions.
Pairing these observations with state-of-the-art modeling tools, the team will
provide a wealth of fundamental parameters for each star, such as variability
periods, bolometric fluxes, radii, masses, luminosities, effective temperatures,
distances. Besides the substantial direct impact on the field, the work proposed
will have significant broader impacts: both the PI and Co-PI have long track-
records of outreach to their local, predominantly Hispanic communities, and
other members of the team are active in teaching STEM preparatory courses for
young women. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will address three fundamental
questions: (1) What are the dominant pulsation modes for the various types of
Miras? (2) What are the nuances in the Period-Luminosity relationship with
respect to chemical subtype and mass-loss history as traced though available
spectroscopic data? and (3) What is the detailed atmospheric behavior as a
function of phase of molecules found at and above the photospheric surface? Most
of the observations will be extracted from the Caltech-JPLâ€™s Palomar Testbed
Interferometer (PTI) using H and K bands. Periods will be determined using
recent TESS data, supplemented by the long-time baseline AAVSO and AFOEV
databases. The bolometric flux will be determined using 2MASS, COBE, MSX and
WISE data and by custom analysis of the PTI data. Finally, distances will be
determined using Gaia data. Additional photometric data will be obtained in
queue mode using a dedicated, robotic 20-inch telescope. A radius-temperature
modeling tool will be used to determine the additional
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.