* 2206202
* DISES: Co-producing knowledge to sustain pastoral socio-environmental systems: System feedbacks, future scenarios, and adaptive responses
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Aaron Thompson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,599,629.00

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thriving
family farms are critical to feeding the world, sustaining vibrant cultures, and
protecting the environment, but they are under threat. In most regions, farms
are being abandoned as children choose alternate careers due to increasing
economic pressures, a changing climate, new pest and weed challenges, and
shifting ideas of what constitutes a viable livelihood. There is an urgent need
to understand the factors and relationships that allow pastoral systems to adapt
to changing conditions and what factors allow small-scale farming to remain
resilient in certain socio-environmental contexts. This project examines the
complex linkages between climate, land management, landscape, and policy to
learn how we can best support healthy pastoral systems through policy or other
interventions. This project integrates social science, climate science, and
plant and soil sciences to understand what variables are most likely to sustain
small-scale pastoral systems. The team includes local farmers as equal partners
in the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pastoral landscapes are complex socio-
environmental systems (SES) in which the natural components of the system both
support human livelihoods and culture and require human intervention for their
continued existence. They cover almost 60% of the global landmass and may
support as many as 500 million people. They are, however, facing increasing
challenges, most notably climate change and declining interest in farming among
youth. These challenges underscore the urgent need to understand the factors and
relationships that support the ability of pastoral systems to adapt to changing
conditions. This project explores a longstanding pastoral system that is an
ideal setting for addressing these gaps in knowledge. Livestock grazing and
human use of fire over thousands of years have created productive high-elevation
meadows that support biodiversity and other ecosystem services, as well as human
livelihoods and vibrant cultural practices related to pastoralism. Though
subject to many of the same pressures confronting other pastoral systems, this
SES has remained relatively robust over time, with one of the highest rates of
new farmer installations in Europe. The overarching goals of this project are a)
to understand the relationship among factors that influence farm transmission,
continuity of pastoral practice, and the resilience of this landscape and its
ecosystem functions, and b) to develop a process for the co-production of socio-
environmental knowledge with pastoralists that improves scientific knowledge and
strengthens local governance institutions. This research will address those
goals by accomplishing two research objectives: 1) characterize the pastoral SES
by measuring constituent environmental and social components, determining the
historic and current controls on the system, and modeling relationships between
system elements; and 2) analyze and model future changes in the system by
integrating long-term socio-environmental data collection with climate and
policy forecasts. This research builds on, and continues, collaborative
transdisciplinary research that integrates local residents as full partners in
the co-production of knowledge on pastoral system sustainability. Pastoralists
have been full partners in the design and development of this proposed research
since its inception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.