* 2206864
* RET Site: Integrating data-driven research in Renewable Energy Across Disciplines (I-READ)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kai Jin, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

The overarching goal of this Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) site at
Texas A&amp;M University-Kingsville is to create a dynamic multidisciplinary
environment and a Community of Practice where research, education and outreach
are integrated to provide middle and high school (Grades 6-12) STEM teachers
with opportunities to conduct authentic cutting-edge research and develop a
series of innovative curricular modules for promoting renewable energy and data
science in South Texas. A Community of Practice (CoP), where individuals share
knowledge, learn together, and share common practices, will be established in
this project. The project will bring together a very diverse population of
teachers, teacher educators, researchers, industrial advisors, education and
engineering graduate students around a shared goal of expanding and sharing
knowledge on data-driven renewable energy. This RET site will facilitate the CoP
to develop deep and rich understandings of data science and renewable energy as
well as explore effective pedagogies to support middle and high school students’
learning in the field. With industrial advisors involved, this RET site will
enrich the STEM research and education environment in South Texas through
establishment of the CoP where laboratory research, classroom teaching, and
real-world industry experiences are synergistically integrated. It is expected
that the collaborative work of the CoP will enable the free flow of information,
shared knowledge, and ongoing and engaging dialogue among all members. This RET
site addresses the pressing challenges in data-driven renewable energy research
and two important fields (renewable energy and data science) in Texas Essential
Knowledge and Skills curriculum requirements. The RET site builds on a vision of
grooming budding researchers and educators from underrepresented communities to
embrace the challenge of data-driven renewable energy research and building
future leaders who proactively contribute to the nation’s energy self-reliance
agenda.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Renewable energy research is a complex, multi-
faceted theme where many disciplines interact to address different and sometimes
contradictory issues. A data-driven research approach can expedite the
technological advancement in renewable energy sector by utilizing the data
available around the world. The objectives of this Research Experiences for
Teachers (RET) site at Texas A&amp;M University-Kingsville are to: 1) provide
research opportunities on different facets of data-driven renewable energy
research to middle and high school (Grades 6-12) STEM teachers, especially
Hispanics, women, and/or teachers who were first generation college graduates;
2) increase the number of underrepresented students pursuing STEM majors and
careers through a series of innovative curriculum development and
implementation; and, 3) build a sustainable bond through the Community of
Practice among university faculty, STEM teachers, researchers, community college
faculty, graduate students and industries to accelerate STEM education in South
Texas. This RET site focuses on data-driven renewable energy research that is a
theme of local significance and global implications. The proposed research
covers data collection, data analysis, data visualization and decision making in
three major research areas: 1) Energy Harvesting, 2) Energy Utilization, and 3)
Energy Policy and Its Impacts. Ten RET participants will be trained every year
during six weeks of summer research in a collaborative group setting. The RET
participants will tackle various topics of data-driven renewable energy
research, interact with faculty and student mentors and industrial advisors, and
develop a holistic systems’ perspective of renewable energy research and
awareness about the importance of data science. The RET participants will learn
the essentials of developing a research plan, and driving the project forward to
achieve milestones. They will design a series of curricular modules based on
their research with authentic mentorship from an education faculty, research
mentors, and industrial advisors, and will use these curricular modules in their
classrooms along with other academic year follow-up activities to inspire
students’ interests in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.