* 2206123
* Radio Emission from Intermediate Mass Black Holes: Evolution with Accretion Rate
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Richard Plotkin, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2025
* USD 323,324.00

Black holes are ubiquitous in the universe and have a wide range of masses. Some
black holes are a few times more massive than the sun and are formed when the
core of a massive star collapses at the end of its life. Other black holes are
found in the centers of galaxies. These are typically millions or hundreds of
millions times more massive than the sun and are known as Super Massive Black
Holes (SMBHs). A team from the University of Nevada, Reno, will better
understand the growth of SMBH by studying black holes that have masses
intermediate between stellar and SMBHs. These Intermediate Mass Black Holes
(IMBHs) are crucial because it is thought that IMBH grow into SMBH either by
merging with other black holes or accreting material - dust, gas, and stars - in
their immediate vicinity. Specifically, the team will investigate how the the
radio emission differs in IMBHs that are accreting slowly vs. those that are
rapidly accreting. The team will work with local education organizations to
develop outreach materials for K-12 schools. The outreach materials will be
based on student observations with the Great Basin Observatory, an 0.7m robotic
telescope in eastern Nevada. In addition, two graduate students will be trained
in radio interferometry techniques. This project is jointly funded by NSF AST
and by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the team will scrutinize radio emission
from IMBHs. Using radio data from the Karl G Jansky Very Large Array, in
conjunction with existing multiwavelength information, they will: (1) Reveal the
accretion state and radio emission mechanisms of rapidly accreting IMBHs
(Eddington ratios &gt;1%). (2) Determine if weakly accreting IMBHs (Eddington
ratios &lt;1%) launch radio jets with radiative powers matching current
expectations, to validate current radio-based IMBH selection techniques. (3)
Compare radio emission between the rapid and weak accretion regimes to
investigate if IMBHs follow similar patterns as their lower- and higher-mass
cousins (i.e., stellar and SMBH, respectively).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.