* 2206987
* Discovery and Control of Skyrmions in 2D van der Waals Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Sefaattin Tongay, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 05/31/2025
* USD 451,551.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Engineering magnetic materials has led to
ground-breaking discoveries in data storage (hard-drives, records), sound
engineering (electric guitars, speakers), transportation (bullet trains,
suspensions), and many others. This federally funded project aims to take
traditional magnetism into nanometric dimensions to realize atomic-scale
magnetic patterns resembling a hedgehog’s spikes, called skyrmions. Skyrmion
formation offers new functionalities in logic and information storage that are
not possible in traditional magnetic materials. Through this funding, the team
aims to realize skyrmions in atomically thin materials, understand their
magnetic behavior, and manipulate their properties. While doing so, the project
aims to discover novel classes of magnetic materials and technologies that will
increase the U.S military and economic competitiveness at a global scale and
open ways to realize high-performance and next-generation applications towards
quantum memory, logic, and communication devices. The immediate societal impacts
of the project will manifest through high-school, undergraduate and graduate
student training in an active research environment as well as K-12 outreach
efforts to introduce students to STEM fields and materials science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic skyrmions are
topologically protected nanometric size spin textures with exciting quantum
properties towards information and neuro-inspired technologies. To date, the
experimentally known skyrmionic platforms are restricted to bulk crystals and
metallic multilayer films. The ultimate goal of this project is to
experimentally stabilize skyrmions in two-dimensional (2D) and van der Waals
layered materials and investigate emergent properties arising from reduced
dimensions. The project will use transition metal dihalide monolayers and their
moiré superlattices as a platform and it will combine theoretical and
experimental studies to explore three different mechanisms for skyrmion
realization: 1) inversion symmetry breaking in ferromagnetic monolayers, 2)
tunable electric fields in ferromagnetic monolayers, 3) twistronics in
homobilayers. The project will utilize magneto-optical Kerr, Lorentz microscopy,
and diamond-NV atomic force microscope techniques to experimentally understand
their magnetic properties. Density functional and Monte-Carlo studies will offer
theoretical insights for complete understanding of these 2D skyrmionic
platforms. The results from this project will fill a large fundamental knowledge
gap in the field by establishing what hallmark characteristics are important for
skyrmion formation in the monolayer and few-layer limit. Societal impacts of the
project will manifest through new applications towards memory, logic, and
communication devices and through cutting edge K-12 and general public outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.