* 2206543
* Collaborative Research: Chemical History of the Milky Way as Seen Through Open Clusters using SDSS and Gaia
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Katia Cunha, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2025
* USD 55,375.00

Throughout the history of the Universe galaxies change and grow. Astronomers are
working to understand how the chemical make-up of the stars within galaxies
change with time. By measuring how, and when, specific elements increase, the
investigators will create 'chemical clocks' that trace the chemical changes
during the life of the Milky Way Galaxy. This research team will measure the
chemical makeup of nearly all the suitable star clusters in the Milky Way disk.
This project will serve the national interest and promote the progress of
research in astronomy by providing a unique catalog that can be used to probe
the history of the Milky Way. The investigators will carry out mentoring and
outreach activities at the University of Utah and at Texas Christian
University's Monnig Meteorite Gallery. They will also train graduate and
undergraduate students in modern data science research and analysis
techniques.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Using high-resolution spectroscopy from the
Sloan Digital Sky Survey V (SDSS-V) and astrometry from the Gaia satellite, this
research team will observe, compile, and analyze a catalog of open star
clusters. This catalog will be revolutionary in its size and uniformity.
Additional high-resolution optical spectroscopy will supplement the SDSS-V data
with neutron-capture elemental abundances to create a unique catalog comprising
up to 90% of the Gaia-confirmed open star clusters with homogeneous data,
including consistently measured ages, distances, reddening, dynamics, and
detailed abundances for more than 20 elements. This data set, which will be
publicly released, will provide key constraints on whether chemical tagging can
work in the Milky Way disk, on the participation of open clusters in radial
migration, and on supernovae element yields. The catalog will be used to better
understand stellar feedback over time and test cosmological models of galaxies
like our Milky Way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.