* 2206796
* Rapid response asteroid science from ZTF and LSST data
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* David Trilling, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2025
* USD 452,885.00

The team will identify rare asteroids in all-sky survey data, focusing on two
kinds of extreme behavior. First, they will measure the occurrence rate of
active asteroids to constrain the amount of water present in the Solar System.
Second, they will identify asteroids with very short or very long rotation
periods. These observations will provide critical information about how the
Solar System formed and evolved. The team will broadcast a real-time outlier
alerts using machine learning techniques. They will also provide updates to the
Solar System Products Database to increase its value to a wide range of users.
The team will construct three observing stations in locations that will maximize
public engagement. Site 1 will welcome thousands of general public visitors at
NAU’s campus observatory. Site 2 will provide the opportunity for dozens of
students at Flagstaff High School to participate in the construction of a high-
end amateur robotic telescope. Site 3 will be at an outdoor experiential camp
that is visited by every sixth grader in Flagstaff, Arizona.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will utilize data from the ongoing Zwicky
Transient Facility (ZTF) and the upcoming Legacy Survey through Space and Time
(LSST) done by the Vera C. Rubin Observatory. The proposed tasks leverage the
team’s existing work on the Solar System Notification Alert Processing System
(SNAPS). The results will allow the team to probe the conditions present at the
time of the Solar System’s formation. The team will identify unusual asteroids
in the ZTF and LSST data streams. These outliers will allow them to refine their
understanding of the formation and evolution of asteroids and the Solar System
by using these rare events as important physical constraints. The team will
develop a tightly integrated system that ingests alerts and produces science,
including follow-up using robotic telescope resources. This new capability will
maximize the asteroid science yield from ZTF and LSST. Critically, this includes
rapid processing of outlier observations — objects where unusual and time-
critical behaviors require immediate confirmation. This rapid response
capability will be necessary for both ZTF and LSST.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.