* 2206124
* I-Corps:  Blockchain-Enabled Patient Centric Consent To Improve Access To Care
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Ahmed Gomaa, University of Scranton
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software system that will allow patientsâ€™ efficient
accessibility to medical second opinions using distributed ledger technology.
The proposed solution is fundamentally different than existing solutions. Recent
studies identified barriers to the market including long waiting times and
unclear costs. The current second opinion solutions do not address the
interoperability and information silo problem, and they keep the burden of
collecting information on patients. Patients provide records to the best of
their ability, but unfortunately many times the information they provide is
insufficient, and not specific to their visit, which occasionally requires
repeat imaging/testing/studies. The proposed solution saves physicians time and
addresses current barriers of non-technical patients as it simplifies,
organizes, and efficiently presents this information to a physician for a clear
picture of the patient's condition. Current medical second opinion market size
is estimated to be $7.1 Billion by 2025.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a distributed ledger technology that
solves the challenge faced by patients to have their complete medical charts
available for dissemination. Currently, the information resides is with
different modalities and transparency requirements and is scattered among
various physicians and institutions. The proposed technology uses the
distributed ledger built-in infrastructure to support seamless patient control,
notification, and even compensation, when permitted by law, every time their
data is accessed and used. Having the data attached with a distributed ledger
infrastructure enables an automated tracing mechanism that may support a
transparent use of data any time. The technology helps minimize the patients
waiting time by ensuring the accessibility of the collected patient records to
physicians. In addition, it helps the patient with the cost estimation of the
second opinion by preventing unnecessary tests already
done.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.