* 2206934
* World Meeting of the International Society for Bayesian Analysis 2022
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Matthias Katzfuss, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 04/30/2023
* USD 12,000.00

This award provides travel support for US-based participants in the 2022 World
Meeting of the International Society for Bayesian Analysis (ISBA), to be held
from June 25 to July 1, 2022, in Montreal, Canada. The conference themes are
theory, modeling, and applications of Bayesian statistics. The focus of this
award is on funding for junior researchers (graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers) from U.S.-based institutions to travel to the conference. Emphasis
will be placed on supporting women and members of underrepresented groups.
Participating in the conference will inform junior statisticians about key
problems and methods that shape research in modern Bayesian statistics and
provide them with opportunities to learn from more established researchers and
to build mentoring and collaborative relationships. More information on the
conference is available on the meeting web page:
https://isbawebmaster.github.io/ISBA2022/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statisticians
play an indispensable role in making decisions based on noisy, complex data
structures. Statistical methods find application in myriad areas, including
biomedical research, environmental science, finance, marketing, psychology,
public health, and genomics. Within statistics, the Bayesian approach offers
many appealing features: Bayesian methods provide a coherent framework for
integrating information from different sources and communicating findings and
conclusions using probabilities; Bayesian hierarchical models can capture
different sources of variability in data and processes; relevant knowledge can
be incorporated easily; and all relevant uncertainties are coherently propagated
and incorporated into the final inference. Consequently, Bayesian analyses are
commonplace across a wide variety of application areas. ISBA 2022 will bring
together a diverse international community of researchers and practitioners who
develop and use Bayesian statistical methods to share recent findings, exchange
ideas, and discuss new, challenging questions. As a truly international meeting,
it will provide participants with access to ideas and colleagues from other
countries with whom they may not ordinarily interact. Meeting organizers hope to
provide a venue that facilitates the exchange of ideas and cross-fertilization,
is welcoming to young researchers, and promotes collaborations and
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.