* 2206344
* Millimeter-wavelength transients and sources with the Atacama Cosmology Telescope and the Simons Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kevin Huffenberger, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2025
* USD 647,818.00

Precision measurements of the cosmic microwave background radiation seek a
clearer picture of the physics of the Big Bang. The telescopes that take such
data also capture light from stars and galaxies that emit at the same
wavelengths. This project would build software pipelines that take advantage of
these measurements. Each day, these telescopes scan the sky and make an updated
image, letting sources that are variable to be identified. During this decade,
upgraded telescopes will produce more and better data of this kind. Such time-
resolved data will permit new classes of unknown phenomena to be found. This may
include exceptional supernovae, gamma ray bursts, tidal disruptions of stars
around supermassive black holes, stellar flares and the discovery of additional
bodies in the solar system, including a hypothetical and undiscovered Planet 9.
The excitement of this project will be conveyed to the public via a variety of
outreach programs including one targeting people living in rural areas near
Tallahassee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New, time-domain studies of wide-field
millimeter-wave surveys are opening a vast, unexplored discovery space. In this
project, millimeter-wave transients and point-like sources will be identified
using data from the Advanced Atacama Cosmology Telescope, now surveying areas
that exceed 18,000 square degrees, and the Simons Observatory, which by the
mid-2020s will produce more sensitive measurements over a similar area. Software
tools and pipelines will be developed to (1) develop and implement a system to
mine daily Simons Observatory data based on real-time transient alerts; (2)
perform triggered and blind searches for mm-wave transients in archival and live
data; (3) prepare and release point source catalogs in temperature and
polarization for the ACT and Simons Observatory surveys; and (4) support a
follow-up program for high redshift source candidates. The project supports a
number of outreach programs that involve the general public, K-12 students and
undergraduate as well as graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.