* 2206955
* CAS: Terpene-Derived Polymers as Platforms for Structure-Property Studies of Sustainable Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Johnathan Brantley, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2025
* USD 270,299.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a critical need to
understand the intrinsic relationships between chemical structure and the bulk
physical properties of bio-based polymers. This is especially true so that
biologically-derived materials can be designed to mirror the properties of
petroleum-based plastics. Terpenes, which display a rich variety of structures,
are valuable building blocks for preparing polymers that lend themselves to such
systematic structure-property studies. This proposal entails the synthesis of
novel polymers that are derived from terpene feedstocks, as well as the
characterization of their fundamental properties in order to connect molecular
and mesoscale structure to performance. Emphasis will be devoted to
understanding how backbone connectivity and orientation modulate the thermal and
mechanical properties of terpene-based (co)polymers. The insights achieved
during this work will accelerate the development of biologically-derived
plastics with precisely tailored properties and functions. Moreover, this work
could shed new light on how unique structural elements can be leveraged to
design a wide range of polymers with targeted properties. This research will be
integrated with a broader effort to promote science literacy and engage academic
and public communities at the state and national levels. A multifaceted plan
will develop new curriculum initiatives, promote collaborative learning, and
promote science literacy through web-based platforms (i.e., YouTube) by
connecting research outcomes to real-world applications and
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a critical need to understand the
intrinsic relationships between the rich structural complexity of bio-based
polymers and their physical properties. This is especially true in the context
of designing biologically-derived materials that can mirror the properties of
petroleum-based plastics. Terpenoids, which display a wide range of carbocyclic
structures, are valuable platforms for preparing polymers that lend themselves
to systematic structure-property studies. Indeed, polymers comprised of rigid
carbocyclic motifs (e.g., cyclic-olefin copolymers) are enticing materials that
exhibit unique (and, in certain cases, predictable) physical properties.
Unfortunately, the limited scope of carbocycles that can be incorporated within
macromolecular architectures has significantly hindered efforts to
systematically probe more subtle structure-property relationships. This research
seeks to elucidate the interplay between constitutional isomerism, backbone
stereochemistry, and bulk thermomechanical properties in terpenoid analogues of
cyclic olefin (co)polymers. The work is expected to dramatically expand the
chemical space available to polymer science and reveal fundamental insights into
an unexplored family of biologically-derived polymers. The insights gained from
this research will accelerate the development of biologically-derived plastics
(including thermoplastic elastomers) with precisely tailored properties and
functions. This research will be integrated with a broader effort to promote
science literacy and engage academic and public communities at the state and
national levels. A multifaceted plan will develop new curriculum initiatives,
promote collaborative learning, and promote science literacy through web-based
platforms (i.e., YouTube) by connecting research outcomes to real-world
applications and challenges.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.