* 2206932
* RET Site: Research Experiences for Teacher Advancement In Nanotechnology (RETAIN)
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Mangilal Agarwal, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 05/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site, RETAIN at the University of
Indiana, provides an immersive research and training program for high school
teachers and 2-yr college educators in surrounding high-needs metropolitan
school districts. By coupling true academic research experiences, significant
professional development programming, post-program support, and the creation of
a supportive network of faculty mentors, local industry partners, and
colleagues, RETAIN fosters teachers’ abilities and provides the resources needed
for them to create and implement engaging nanotechnology-content in their
classrooms. Program activities have been specifically designed to train teachers
in inquiry-based learning and translating research experiences into classroom
through the creation of learning modules capable of boosting students’ interest
in higher-learning and career opportunities pertaining to STEM. Notably, the
exciting and cutting-edge research focus area of nanotechnology is not only well
suited to capture student interest, but its multidisciplinary nature allows
teachers to integrate multiple STEM subjects into their curriculum to provide
students with subject-to-subject connectivity comparable to real-world
collaborative expectations. Importantly, IUPUI’s urban location, along with
surrounding metropolitan school districts and local industry, provide an
established infrastructure for this RET site, which is dedicated to advancing
STEM education in historically underserved student populations to boost
diversity in the future STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RET Site
(RETAIN) at the University of Indiana has two specific goals: 1) Training high
school teachers and 2-yr college educators in inquiry- and discovery-based
science and engineering: from hypothesis development and experimental design to
data collection and dissemination of results, all while introducing exciting new
nanotechnology-focused STEM concepts, applications, and career options; and 2)
Integrating new content into the K-14 curriculum by guiding teachers in the
translation of their research experiences into inquiry-based, nanotechnology
teaching modules designed to boost excitement, engagement and student interest
in STEM. In order the fulfill these goals, over the next three years RETAIN
will: 1) Provide 30 K-14 metropolitan educators (high school and 2yr college)
with research experiences and workshops designed to increase their understanding
of challenges/demands of nanotechnology and associated college/career
opportunities and pathways; 2) Lead educators in creating and implementing new
classroom learning modules that integrate multiple STEM disciplines, convey
scientific-process skills, and align with State and Next Generation Science
Standards; 3) Assess teacher-developed learning modules and ensure they promote
a culturally responsive image of, and greater interest in, STEM fields among
urban secondary students; 4) Create a supportive network of faculty mentors,
local industry partners, and educators; and 5) Support communities by
disseminating both teacher-developed learning modules and program logistics,
schedules, outcomes, deliverables, best practices, and evaluation procedures so
that RETAIN framework and its products can be implemented at other institutions
and classrooms on a national level. In this, products and outcomes of RETAIN
will not only serve local students, but will invest in the broader, national
K-14 community to produce diverse graduates with STEM interest and college-ready
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.