* 2206540
* Collaborative Research: Reimagining Urban Watershed Management: A Systems Approach to Stormwater Control and Ecological Rehabilitation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Michael Blum, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2025
* USD 399,812.00

It is expected that a greater number of larger and denser cities will manifest
more potent and pervasive pressures on stream ecosystems worldwide. Urbanization
leads to greater stormwater runoff, which can result in a slate of ecological
impairments that collectively have been identified as the “urban stream
syndrome” (USS). Stormwater control is thus central to protecting and
rehabilitating urban waterways, but stormwater management has largely
prioritized objectives motivated by societal concerns, like flood control and
protecting infrastructure, over consideration of ecological functions in
receiving waters. Consequently, little progress has made towards ‘solving the
syndrome’. This project aims to transform how urban runoff is managed by
designing and demonstrating a systems approach to upland interventions to
rehabilitate in-stream ecological conditions. The expectation is that the work
will yield fundamental technological and conceptual advances to realize much-
needed next generation stormwater infrastructure, addressing the grand challenge
laid out by the National Academy of Engineering to Restore and Improve Urban
Infrastructure. The project could substantively improve the condition of surface
waters across the US and abroad. According to the US EPA, urban runoff is the
probable source of impairment for over 49,000 miles of rivers and streams that
have been assessed in the US, a staggering number that illustrates the potential
impact of innovative stormwater management solutions. It is the goal of the
project to provide the foundation for transforming how urban runoff is managed
by creating a new framework for rehabilitating and protecting surface waters.
The project will recast stormwater runoff as an environmental flows problem that
can be addressed by upgrading traditional stormwater infrastructure into cyber-
physical ‘smart stormwater’ systems capable of adaptively meeting ecological and
regulatory objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Static and decentralized replacement
of grey stormwater infrastructure with green alternatives (e.g., bioswales, wet
ponds) has not provided corrective remedies of USS. This has led to increasing
advocacy for operational shifts towards basin-scale coordination of stormwater
interventions and conceptual shifts towards viewing urban stormwater management
through the lens of environmental flows. Recent advances in sensors and controls
now allow stormwater infrastructure to be operated as a ‘smart’ system for
managing how and when runoff is discharged into a receiving stream, affording
unprecedented opportunities to (re)establish desired flow regimes based on a set
of multiple objectives. In this project, the target is to determine and
demonstrate how stormwater systems can be tuned to achieve environmental flows
as an objective function to meet ecological and regulatory goals. The project
will combine model parameterization and simulations with empirical tests, with
the aim of assessing whether achieving environmental flows (1) is possible using
a ‘smart stormwater’ approach; (2) alters ecosystem attributes and functioning
in urban streams; and if so, (3) alleviates impairments characteristic of USS.
This will entail (1) identifying and defining ecologically-informed performance
objectives for urban watersheds; (2) using a systems approach to optimize
stormwater interventions that leverage controllable outlets and adaptive control
algorithms; and (3) empirically demonstrating and evaluating site- and system-
level smart stormwater management at two experimental testbeds. The project also
will also pursue public outreach through educational partnerships. The project
team will continue to work with Tennessee's Knox County Schools to host biannual
“Meet the Creek” citizen science events that offer students opportunities to
learn about the effects of urbanization on streams and automation of storm water
control, as well as collect physical and biological data on in-stream conditions
that will support K-12 curricular goals. Additionally, aspects of this study
will be integrated into topical courses taught by the investigators at their
respective institutions, including a graduate seminar on ecological restoration
and engineering courses focusing on modeling and analytics. The project will
help advance diversity, equity and inclusion in STEM fields by involving
students from underrepresented groups, who will be recruited through
organizations like the UTK Engineering Office of Diversity Programs, and will
afford excellent opportunities for graduate education and career
advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.