* 2206743
* SBIR Phase I:  Engineered B-cell Therapeutics for the Early Detection and Treatment of High-risk Breast Cancer
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Steven Deitcher, BESPOKE BIOTHERAPEUTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves creation of a new, immune-cell-based
treatment to address the unmet physical and psychological health needs of women
with locally advanced (Stage III) breast cancer at high risk for relapse
following standard-of-care surgery and drug therapy. Called cancer sentinels,
these “living drugs” are made from patient blood-derived B-cells that have been
isolated, chemically activated, and genetically modified to selectively seek and
destroy residual breast cancer cells before they form detectable tumors and
spread to vital organs. Cure is dependent on early detection and cancer cell
elimination prior to distant spread. These engineered therapeutics may promote
the destruction of breast cancer cells in multiple ways, including activation of
immune system and the secretion of cancer-killing antibodies. Additional solid
tumor cancer types, such as colorectal cancer, lung cancer, and ovarian cancer
may also be addressable by future cancer sentinel products. In total, greater
than 200,000 American cancer patients each year may benefit.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project addresses unmet needs of nearly 50,000 American women annually who are
subjected to anxiety, fear, and lifestyle disruption because of newly diagnosed,
locally advanced breast cancer. Emotional toxicity, beginning at cancer
diagnosis, tends to peak during standard “watch and wait” cancer surveillance
and the relapse uncertainty that follows initial surgical resection and post-
surgery adjuvant therapy. This project combines the natural and unique antigen
binding, lymph node-homing, antigen presentation, protein secretion, T-cell co-
stimulation, and immune memory capabilities of human B-cells with large-cargo,
non-viral, CRISPR/Cas9 and homology-mediated end joining-based genome editing
techniques, to create cancer sentinels. Cancer sentinels are intended to destroy
residual and relapsed breast cancer cells by locally secreting engineered anti-
cancer antibodies and/or cytokines at the time of minimal residual cancer and
prior to distant metastasis. To achieve such a multi-functional B-cell drug,
autologous blood-derived B-cells will be genetically modified to express surface
B-cell receptors (BCRs) with affinity for specific tumor-associated antigens
(TAAs). Engineered BCR binding to TAAs may trigger local secretion of the
engineered anti-cancer response molecules. Detection of these response molecules
in the blood may also serve as a biomarker and alert physicians to the presence
of residual cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.