* 2206769
* ECLIPSE/Collaborative Proposal: Studying Microwave-Plasma interactions at Solid Interfaces Using Microwave Microstrip Architectures
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Gerardo Gamez, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2025
* USD 274,999.00

This project explores the effect of microwave radiation on low temperature
plasmas composed of electrons, ions, and neutral particles. Low temperature
plasmas are routinely used in fields from manufacturing to medicine to clean
energy technology, and it is desirable to be able to modify a plasma in real-
time based on the requirements of the application at hand. A promising method of
changing plasma conditions is through the use of microwave energy. Microwave
fields are often used in plasma science for diagnostic measurement and as a
means of creating and sustaining plasmas. However, relatively little is known as
to how microwaves can be used to augment and modify plasmas created by other
means. In this project, the effect of highly-focused microwave radiation will be
studied in order to develop an improved understanding of microwave coupling into
plasmas with the goal of providing a means of predictably changing plasma
conditions. This work is supported through the ECosystem for Leading Innovation
in Plasma Science and Engineering (ECLIPSE) program as a collaboration between
the State University of New York at Buffalo and Texas Tech
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will design and develop a set of
microwave stripline and microstrip structures aimed at different microwave
frequencies and adapted specifically to the plasma conditions found within
different plasma types. The interaction of focused microwave fields with laser
induced plasmas and reduced-pressure glow discharges in the proximity of solid
interfaces will be studied by real-time electrical impedance and vector network
measurements, optical emission spectrometry, tunable diode laser absorption
spectroscopy, and Thomson scattering measurements. These measurements will be
used to calculate fundamental parameters, such as electron number density and
temperature, Boltzmann equilibria excitation temperatures, ionization
temperatures, rotational temperatures, and vibrational temperatures. A major
focus of the project will be to determine how interactions with microwaves alter
these fundamental plasma parameters, and thereby to understand how microwaves
perturb the different energy pathways in the plasma. The outcomes of the
proposed work will include an improved understanding of microwave coupling in
plasmas. This can be exploited in order to create improved means of optimizing
microwave/plasma interactions that will lead to the development of new energy
efficient systems and technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.