* 2206406
* ECLIPSE/Collaborative Research: Unravelling the Coupled Physics of Piezoelectric and Plasma Behavior in Piezoelectric Stimulated Plasma Sources
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Tanvir Farouk, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 406,006.00

This award will enable a foundational study of atmospheric pressure plasmas in
piezoelectric plasma discharges. The application of atmospheric pressure non-
thermal plasmas – which are highly reactive and can be used for applications
ranging from water purification and clean energy technology to sterilization –
can at times be limited by requiring exotic, expensive, or bulky electronics and
circuits for their operation. Piezoelectric materials could relax the need for
high-end power supplies by using mechanical motion to produce the plasma forming
piezoelectric stimulated plasma sources. The key feature of a piezoelectric
stimulated plasma source is that the piezoelectric material is capable of high
voltage gain and possesses high dielectric permittivity, enabling direct
formation of a plasma at the piezoelectric surface. Current understanding of the
interaction between piezoelectric materials and plasmas is very limited and
there are unanswered fundamental questions about the coupling between the
dynamics of the solid phase piezoelectric and plasma processes. The research
project will provide understanding of a new area of plasma science that can be
translated to sensor, biomedical, chemical, fluid dynamics, and materials
applications. As such, this collaborative project between the University of
South Carolina and the University of Notre Dame is being supported under the
ECosystem for Leading Innovation in Plasma Science and Engineering (ECLIPSE)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental understanding of piezoelectric
stimulated plasma sources will be advanced through combined and cohesive
modeling and experimental efforts. A new multi-physics modeling framework,
benchmarked against experiments, will be developed that resolves both the solid
phase piezoelectric material and gas phase plasma in a fully integrated fashion
that is currently not available. Understanding at a fundamental level will help
advance the understanding of plasma-surface interactions that is important to a
large variety of plasma devices. The outcomes of this effort are expected to be
a major leap in predictive modeling and transformative knowledge on
piezoelectric stimulated non-thermal plasma discharges, outreach to the global
plasma community through focused virtual workshops, YouTube-based short video
modules on piezoelectric direct plasma discharges, and student exchange and
outreach activities to inspire under-represented students and the general public
towards STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.