* 2206479
* DISES: Drivers of Ecosystem-based Adaptation to extreme events in mangrove-reef social-ecological systems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Stacy Jupiter, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,599,006.00

This project focuses on social and environmental processes and interactions that
shape the effectiveness of Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA) to tropical cyclones
in mangrove-reef-dependent coastal communities. EbA has emerged over the past
decade as an adaptation approach that focuses on strategies such as restoration,
management, and conservation to help reduce the impacts of extreme events.
Several studies show that mangrove forests and coral reefs can significantly
reduce flood damage to people and property during tropical cyclone events, while
also providing valuable resources such as timber for reconstruction and fuel in
their aftermath. These ecosystems are, in turn, affected by cyclone impacts and
the communities that use and manage them. In other words, EbA are an inherently
dynamic Social-Ecological System (SES) with strong feedbacks between the
ecosystems, the people and communities depending upon and managing them, and
external shocks like cyclones. With an integrated approach that combines social,
ecological, and engineering methods, the insights from this project will inform
the design of EbA strategies for cyclone-prone communities worldwide. The
investigators are training graduate students to conduct interdisciplinary
coastal science and results are enhancing curricula for undergraduate students
studying coastal issues. Research outcomes are being made available to resource
and disaster risk managers in Fiji and Puerto Rico through workshops, policy
briefs and online maps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is advancing
understanding of how Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA) in mangrove-reef Social-
Ecological Systems (SES) respond to cyclone impacts among vulnerable communities
in Fiji and Puerto Rico. Both are natural resource-rich small island states
frequently experiencing cyclones, yet have different environmental governance
systems. Using an SES framework, this project is identifying how interactions in
a mangrove-coral reef SES and extreme events shape existing and emerging EbA
actions and outcomes. The project takes a convergent approach, combining natural
resource management, ecology, and engineering to assess the social and
environmental drivers that shape the implementation and effectiveness of EbA.
The study incorporates: social-science methods to identify socio-economic and
governance drivers of EbA actions; remote sensing methods to detect drivers of
ecological change; an agent-based model to describe how social processes and
interactions with the environment influence EbA actions, and; a coastal flood
damage model to quantify the flood protection benefits derived under different
scenarios of mangrove and reef ecosystem extent and condition. Outputs from
these methods will develop predictions of the social and ecological outcomes of
EbA under different scenarios of future cyclone events and mangrove-reef
management strategies. Results will inform future EbA efforts on similar
coastlines worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.