* 2206703
* Collaborative Research: Unearthing the Young Stars in Aquila
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Lisa Prato, Lowell Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2025
* USD 160,713.00

A major goal in astronomy is to understand the conditions necessary to form
stars. Stars begin their lives in giant, dusty clouds of gas. The Orion Nebula
is a spectacular example of such a cloud in which many stars are forming. A
particularly interesting star forming region is the Aquila Rift, a massive
expanse of dark gas clouds. The Rift is important because no other nebula so
large and potentially rich in young stars lies this close to the Sun. For many
decades astronomers have been puzzled by the lack of young stars in the Rift
because it contains enough gas to form about a hundred thousand Suns. Yet only a
few young stars had been identified in the Rift. One way to find evidence of
forming stars is to look for Herbig-Haro (HH) objects- distinct jets of gas that
are produced by young stars. A new method has proven successful in finding
several dozen new HH objects in the Rift, many in places where none had been
seen before. Their discovery shows that many more stars are forming in the Rift
than previously thought. The goal of this project is to complete a comprehensive
survey of the Rift to better understand the extent of star formation within its
clouds. The survey will use the "Dark Energy" Camera (DECam) on the Blanco
4-meter telescope at the Cerro Tololo Interamerican observatory, which is
operated by NSF's NOIRLab. It is the only telescope in the world that can do
this search.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This search for HH objects in the Rift will be
developed by Dr. Rector into a "Curriculum for Undergraduate Research
Experience" (CURE). CUREs are an established instructional model that integrates
scientific research with education by giving introductory-level undergraduate
students an opportunity to do authentic research with real data. Its goals are
threefold: (1) to teach that science is a process of discovery, not just a body
of knowledge, (2) to improve attitudes towards science and STEM careers, and (3)
to develop critical thinking, teamwork and goal-driven work skills important in
any career. Dr. Prato will also mentor her undergraduate students and
participate in outreach activities, particularly as a role model to women in
science and to girls interested in pursuing science as a career. Prato actively
mentors professional junior women at Lowell and NAU. Furthermore, Prato is
developing a curriculum for a professional development workshop aimed at
providing advanced undergraduates and early-career graduate students with
critical professional advice of the type that is not typically taught in class.
Prato is also leading a major effort to provide information and resources for
high school students in under-resourced communities to pursue secondary STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.