* 2206557
* Midisuperspace Laboratories for Loop Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Jorge Pullin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2025
* USD 540,000.00

The study of how black holes evaporate is perhaps the most important outstanding
problem in theoretical physics today. It requires understanding the behavior of
two of the pillars of modern physics, gravity and quantum field theory, in their
most extreme regimes. Understanding how physical theories fit together in
challenging regimes has in the past led to insights of spectacular consequences.
An example of this could be Maxwell understanding how electricity and magnetism
fit together led to the discovery of radio waves, with the ensuing
transformational changes they induced in our society. A second very important
objective of this type of work is the formation of human resources of very high
quality. Physicists trained in these disciplines have proved valuable in
industry and in finance. The PI will continue the outreach activities via the
International Loop Quantum Gravity Seminar and the Loop Quantum Gravity Portal
and its blogs for the general public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The application of
techniques of loop quantum gravity in spherically symmetric contexts with the
ultimate goal of understanding black hole evaporation will continue. Among the
topics to be considered are: A) The study the applicability of the weak gravity
conjecture in loop quantum gravity. This conjecture states that theories that do
not make gravity the weakest interaction may lead to naked singularities. Loop
quantum gravity eliminates singularities and therefore could bypass the negative
consequences of the conjecture. B) Models of black hole evaporation in which the
Hawking radiation is modeled via matter fields. These models have not been
studied up to now in the context of loop quantum gravity. C) Extend our previous
study of criticality in the collapse of scalar fields in loop quantum gravity to
probe what happens close to where the singularity is in the classical theory. D)
The treatment of axisymmetric space-times in loop quantum gravity proposed by
the group will be further analyzed to probe if the singularity is eliminated in
such cases as it is in spherical symmetry. E) Investigations in the formulation
of gravity in terms of observables first proposed by Mandelstam in the 1960â€™s,
which faced an obstacle in its development the groups was able to remove
recently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.