* 2206941
* RET Site: Chip Design Experiences for Teachers to Stimulate Semiconductor Education in Oklahoma
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* James Stine, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 12/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Within the United States, there is a shortage of skilled semiconductor workforce
across the board, from the very advanced integrated circuit (IC) design to mass
production. The CHIPS for America Act calls for a $52 billion investment in
domestic semiconductor manufacturing and research, which will create 42,000
semiconductor jobs in 6 years. However, universities alone cannot meet this
demand because many semiconductor jobs are more suitable for high school and
community college students. This RET site addresses the semiconductor talent
development challenge by introducing Stillwater and Tulsa area high school and
community college teachers to a six-week open-source, cyber-secure chip design
experience. These experiences will develop teachers' fundamental knowledge about
semiconductors. Teachers will also translate their research into much-needed
inquiry-based, culturally relevant semiconductor curricula in Grade 9-14 levels.
With more students interested in semiconductors, our nation will have a
sustainable talent pipeline to reclaim our technological leadership in
semiconductors and semiconductor-enabled technologies, such as 5G/6G, artificial
intelligence, and quantum computing. The project also serves a region with a
high minority student population. Higher participation in semiconductors would
also improve the economic outlook of the area around Oklahoma, an EPSCoR
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RET program will invite ten high school and
community college teachers per year from Stillwater and Tulsa metropolitan area
for three years for a six-week research experience on open-source, cyber-secure
chip design at Oklahoma State University (OSU). Teachers will then translate
their research experience into inquiry-based and culturally relevant
semiconductor curricula in Grade 9-14. The objectives of the RET project are: 1)
Develop teacher's knowledge in semiconductors, 2) Create innovative
semiconductor curricula at grade 9-14 level, and 3) Build a long-term
sustainable relationship between OSU, Tulsa Regional STEM Alliance (TRSA),
participating school districts and community colleges to increase student
interests and stimulate semiconductor education in Oklahoma. The intellectual
merit includes increasing awareness of cybersecurity issues related to hardware
and lowering teachers' burden in developing new courses through open-source
tools. The broader impacts include rapid semiconductor talent pipeline
development in response to the CHIPS for America Act by increasing the interest
levels for semiconductors among non-college grads, including minorities and
underrepresented groups. The project will also help fill the semiconductor
curriculum gap at Grade 9-14 levels and democratize chip design for everyone
through open-source tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.