* 2206122
* Establishing the synthesis/structure relationship of molybdenum/lead chalcogenide quantum dot mesocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Tobias Hanrath, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 11/30/2023
* USD 180,000.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this project, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, Professor Tobias Hanrath at Cornell University will explore the
synthesis-structure relationships of a novel class of materials that combines
nanoparticles with two-dimensional (2D) materials. By analogy to the rock-paper-
scissors game, the investigators will use colloidal nanoparticles (i.e., rocks)
to template the formation of molybdenum sulfide sheets (i.e., paper) on specific
sections of the nanoparticle. Instead of scissors, the proposed synthesis
approach leverages the well-defined nanoparticle shape (e.g., truncated cubes)
to define the geometry of the particle-sheet composite. This project will have
significant broader impact beyond the creation of new knowledge of scientific
and societal importance, potentially leading to the development of new
nanostructured composite materials with unique optical, electronic, and
catalytic properties. Graduate students will receive extensive training and
experience at the confluence of material fabrication and characterization
approaches to investigate, understand and predict the formation of composite
nanostructures. Outreach and education are closely integrated with the
scientific work. The investigators will develop a ‘back-to-the-future’ workshop
to engage participants by developing their vision for the future of their
specific research field, the broader technological implications, and their
personal roles and opportunities in bringing this future to fruition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
objective of the proposed project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, is to establish the
foundational synthesis/structure relationship of molybdenum/lead chalcogenide
quantum dot mesocrystals. Mesocrystals are defined as assemblies of smaller
constituent crystals arranged with high degree of translational and
orientational ordering in their superlattice sites. Access to colloidal quantum
dot (QD) building blocks with precisely defined size, shape, and composition as
well as concurrent progress in understanding of and control over directed
assembly and attachment have enabled remarkable advances in QD mesocrystals.
Currently available QD mesocrystals are limited to single composition
structures, yet the scientific and technological evolution of isolated QDs has
taught us that moving from single-components to multi-composition
heterostructures (e.g., core-shell or Janus-like) introduces advanced and
programmable functionalities. The PI has identified the synthesis and analysis
of heterostructured QD mesocrystals as a scientifically interesting and
technologically important research challenge. The PI embraces the challenge of
establishing processing/structure relationships as an opportunity to closely
integrate synthesis, assembly, and materials characterization. The proposal
presents a hypothesis-driven approach with three complementary objectives
focused on formation of facet-specific PbX-(MoS2)m misfit layer
heterostructures, and directed assembly of isolated PbX-(MoS2)m into a new class
of superstructures. The proposed research presents an exciting opportunity to
significantly improve upon the knowledge of QD mesocrystals with properties by
design. The goals of the proposed research are ambitious, and the generated
knowledge will significantly advance basic understanding, design, predictability
and control over heterostructured QD mesocrystals with compelling far-reaching
prospects for future advances in electrocatalysis and
optoelectronics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.