* 2206920
* TRTech-PGR: Advancing Developmental Regulator (DR)-enabled and Genotype-independent Plant Transformation and Genome Editing (DR-CRISPR)
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Bing Yang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,197,466.00

A major challenge for plant science is to produce sufficient food and plant-
derived products for an ever-growing population despite a changing climate.
Substantial public research investments have led to significant advances in
decoding plant genetic and genomic information. Translation of this knowledge to
create improved crops often requires genetic engineering or genome editing
technology to develop or combine desired traits. At present, efficient genetic
modifications are only achieved in a small number of crop species or varieties
due to limitations of current plant transformation methods. The overall goal of
this project is to develop an efficient and open-source genetic transformation
and modification system for the agronomically important crop, soybean. The
developed tools and resources can be easily extended to different soybean
varieties and will be disseminated to the public research community for soybean
crop improvement. Genome edited materials produced through this project will be
used for public education in partnership with the K-12 Plant Genome Engineering
Outreach and Market Science Programs organized at University of
Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent progress in genome editing technology is
poised to advance plant functional genomics and accelerate translational
research for crop improvement. However, ubiquitous applications of genome
editing are often hindered by the lack of efficient genetic transformation in
many crop species. Recently, an emerging technology has provided the potential
to significantly improve genotype-flexible plant regeneration and transformation
by ectopic expression of developmental regulator (DR) genes in several crop
species, such as maize, wheat and sorghum. However, additional work is needed to
thoroughly investigate and extend the DR-mediated regeneration and
transformation technology to other crops. This project is designed to develop a
facile, genotype-independent and open-source plant transformation platform for
efficient genetic engineering and genome editing in soybean. Research will be
conducted to: 1) identify a suite of DR genes (or combinations of them) that
enhance Agrobacterium-mediated transformation efficiency in soybean; 2) achieve
a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying DR-mediated regeneration in
soybean through gene regulatory network analysis; 3) develop efficient and open
source DR-enabled genome editing toolkits that can be broadly applicable to
different soybean varieties; and, 4) disseminate knowledge and train the next
generation of scientists in cutting-edge plant transformation and genome editing
technologies. The tools and resources developed in this proposal could be
readily extended to other related crop species and will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.