* 2206321
* Collaborative Research: WoU-MMA  Constraining the nuclear equation of state and population of neutron star mergers through observations of transient and persistent phenomena
* MPS,AST
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Richard O'Shaughnessy, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 11/30/2025
* USD 446,861.00

Neutron stars (NSs) are formed when a massive star reaches the end of its life:
the outer layers of the star are ejected in a violent explosion but the core of
the star collapses to form a small, dense remnant. NSs that form a binary system
with another NS sometimes in-spiral and merge, producing gravitational waves and
a bright transient that is thousands of times more luminous than a nova (a so-
called kilonova). NS-NS mergers have been detected by the NSF-funded Laser
Interferometer Gravitational wave Observatory (LIGO). A team from the Rochester
Institute of Technology and the University of Tennessee Knoxville will continue
their program to use advanced computational models to better understand NS-NS
mergers and NS physics. They will produce realistic models of the kilonova
explosion, improve estimates of the neutron mass distribution, and better
understand neutron star populations. The models will be benchmarked against
gravitational wave and electromagnetic detections of NS-NS mergers. The program
includes training and mentoring of graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers; participation in a Rochester Institute of Technology program (ROAR)
that introduces high school students from underrepresented minorities to
research; and development of a new undergraduate course at the University of
Tennessee Knoxville focused on gravitational waves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
detailed science goals of the proposal are; extend ongoing work to produce more
systematic kilonova models, calibrated to simulations and exploring relevant
systematic uncertainties; incorporate rapid r-process observations
systematically into joint inference about NS population properties and the
equation of state (EOS), allowing for alternatives, to assess the origin of
r-process elements; use the tools developed as part of this program to
reconstruct the population of NS, the nuclear EOS, and the origin of r-process
elements; and assess the ability of the tools to draw these inferences. The
proposed research involves producing realistic models of the kilonova explosion
that occurs when neutron stars collide and merge. These models will be
benchmarked against gravitational wave and electromagnetic detections of NS-NS
mergers, thereby improving estimates of the neutron mass distribution and better
understanding neutron star populations. Thus, this project is aligned with the
science mission of the Windows on the Universe: Multi-Messenger Astronomy (WoU-
MMA) Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.