* 2206454
* CIF: Small: RUI: Highly Nonlinear and Pseudorandom Structures for Communications and Sensing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Daniel Katz, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2025
* USD 397,369.00

This project considers the creation and analysis of structures that are of
fundamental and wide importance in information theory, including communications,
sensing, and information security. Protocols for communications networks and
ranging systems (radar, sonar, and navigation) require families of sequences,
which are typically words composed of the symbols 0 and 1, and which must be as
uncorrelated as possible. That is, the sequences should not resemble time-
delayed versions of each other, nor even of themselves. Lack of resemblance
between a sequence and delayed versions of itself aids in synchronization and
timing, which is useful in ranging. Lack of resemblance between two different
sequences (and their time-delayed versions) prevents confusion between different
users in communications networks. Random sequences are difficult to use and have
occasional coincidental resemblances, so it is better to use sequences that
appear random but actually have a deep underlying structure. These are called
pseudorandom sequences, and many of them are related to other objects, called
Boolean functions, that are significant in cryptography. Here the deep structure
allows efficient encryption and decryption, but the apparent randomness avoids
easily detectable patterns that could be exploited to break the code. These
pseudorandom structures find further applications in error-correcting codes,
antenna arrays, scientific instrumentation, and acoustic design, so
understanding them is of scientific and technological importance. This project
is an investigation into these sequences and functions and, at the same time, an
opportunity for students to participate in research that will prepare them for
further studies and work in computing, engineering, scientific, and mathematical
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to discover and
investigate sequences, Boolean functions, and related mathematical structures of
significance in information theory. This project will investigate correlation
spectra of families of sequences, especially with regard to properties that
determine how well they can perform in communications and remote sensing
applications. This project will also study Boolean functions and their
relatives, especially the simplest ones like finite field power maps, which are
often employed as cryptographic primitives. Special attention will be paid to
Walsh spectra, which determine the nonlinearity of Boolean functions, and thus
their resilience to linear cryptanalytic attack. This will be augmented by a
study of the differential spectra of Boolean functions, which determine their
resistance to differential cryptanalysis. In each case, the goal is to
understand better the sequences and Boolean functions that are already known,
and to guide the search for new examples with superior performance. The project
will involve both empirical investigation (calculation of correlation, Walsh,
and differential spectra to determine performance) and theoretical analysis,
which in turn provides guidance for where to look
next.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.