* 2206114
* Variational Fracture with Loads
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Christopher Larsen, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 06/30/2025
* USD 271,932.00

For a large range of applications, from civil infrastructure to national
defense, understanding the failure of materials is critical. The ability to
predict failure depends on modeling and on the mathematics available to
formulate and analyze models, and to justify numerical methods. Over the last
twenty years, there have been significant mathematical advances in this area,
particularly in fracture mechanics, but these results are largely limited to
models without applied forces. However, the inclusion of applied forces is
relevant for applications. This project aims to improve the current mathematical
formulation for fracture in materials in equilibrium with applied forces, to
extend this formulation to models for material evolution, and to study certain
features of these evolutions related to the presence of applied forces. The
project offers training research opportunities for doctoral students.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The ability to accurately predict failure depends on the
quality of the underlying mathematical modeling of defects, as well as on
understanding fundamental properties of solutions. Until recently, variational
models for static and quasi-static fracture have been limited to Dirichlet
boundary conditions, since there do not exist solutions to the seemingly most
natural formulation that includes Neumann boundary conditions, i.e., boundary
loads. The aim of the project is to improve on a recently introduced static
formulation for variational fracture with boundary loads which can have
solutions, to extend this static model to the quasi-static case and show
existence of solutions, and to study the possibility of existence of energy
drops in quasi-static models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.