* 2206563
* Galaxy intrinsic alignments: A new window into structure in the Universe
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jonathan Blazek, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2025
* USD 401,065.00

Observations of galaxies can be used to map out structure in the Universe and
probe some of the greatest mysteries in physics, including “dark matter” and
“dark energy.” Upcoming efforts that involve new big telescopes and large
collaborations of scientists will observe billions of galaxies. To harness these
impressive data sets, it is essential to understand how galaxy properties,
especially their shapes, relate to their surrounding environment. Scientists at
Northeastern University will use state-of-the-art observations as well as
theoretical computer simulations to develop the understanding of galaxy shapes.
These advances will enable more accurate studies of the underlying cosmological
model, a key goal of the scientific community. Through research opportunities
and targeted mentoring, this project will also advance undergraduate training in
physics and astronomy, with a particular focus on first-generation,
undocumented, and low-income (FUNL) students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Galaxy
“intrinsic alignments” (IA) are an important astrophysical effect in which the
intrinsic shapes of galaxies are correlated with large-scale structure in the
Universe. This effect impacts analyses that involve weak gravitational lensing
and galaxy clustering, including planned key studies using data from the
upcoming Vera C. Rubin Observatory. IA must be sufficiently well understood to
allow tests of the cosmological model that are both accurate and precise. This
project will significantly improve the understanding of IA through a coherent
program of targeted observations and novel, efficient simulation techniques.
Using the final data set of the Dark Energy Survey, the team will employ several
strategies designed to probe IA in different regimes, unified through a single
analysis framework. Informed by these measurements, simulated galaxies with
realistic IA will be produced from gravity-only simulations, avoiding the
computational challenges of hydrodynamic simulations, and allowing the
production of mock galaxy catalogs in large cosmological volumes and with a wide
range of IA properties. The insights from these efforts will enable a
substantial improvement in the ability to mitigate IA in future analyses. In
addition, the team will use their results and simulation capabilities to develop
IA as a probe of astrophysics and cosmology with next-generation
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.