* 2206974
* Quantifying the Prevalence and Phenotypic Consequences of Transcriptional Irreversibility in Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Adilson Motter, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2025
* USD 724,483.00

A key question in biology is how genetically identical cells achieve varied
appearances and behaviors. These distinct cell states are realized by variations
in gene expression within certain cells in the population; different genes are
turned “on” or “off” in these cells. These variations in gene expression can
lead to different phenotypes within a population of genetically identical cells.
For example, variations in gene expression can lead some cells in a population
of genetically identical bacteria to become antibiotic tolerant while other
cells in the population remain suspectable to antibiotics. This project will
address how variations in gene expression lead to important phenotypic changes
in bacteria. To complement the research, an interactive series of lessons on
mathematics in biology will be developed for high school students. These lessons
will be distributed through a series of teacher
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Irreversibility, hysteresis, and multistability
in cell state have been quantitatively studied in a handful of specific
bacterial systems — B. subtilis sporulation, the lac repressor, and the lysis-
lysogeny switch are now classic examples. Here, the investigators seek to expand
the understanding of these concepts to the genomic scale: the investigators will
examine the time scales of reversibility, and the prevalence of irreversibility,
following transient repression of all genes with known function in E. coli. To
accomplish this, the investigators will develop a new reagent for light-
inducible transient gene repression called LIT-CRISPRi. They will use a
combination of experimental data and theory to establish expectations for the
time scale of transcriptional, translational, and growth rate recovery following
transient gene repression in the fully reversible case (in the absence of
hysteresis) and characterize behavior for one well-studied irreversible case
(the lac operon). They will then use these tools to characterize E. coli’s
growth rate dynamics before, during, and after transient gene repression for a
genome scale library of LIT-CRISPRi knockdowns under different environmental
conditions. From these data, the investigators will examine the distribution of
growth rate recovery times, identify cases of irreversibility or exceptionally
long timescale recovery (quasi-irreversibility), and further validate these
phenotypes through secondary experiments. Finally, they will use RNAtag-Seq to
perform time-resolved transcriptomics before, during, and after transient gene
repression for several genes exhibiting (quasi-)irreversible dynamics identified
by our screen. Taken together, the work will establish fundamental expectations
for the time scales of cellular adaptation and irreversibility following gene
repression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.