* 2206460
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ecosystems of Teaching and Learning: An Ethnography of Two Inupiaq Dance Groups
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Maureen Porter, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 04/30/2023
* USD 63,432.00

Teaching and learning in Indigenous contexts differ from activities and
experiences within the Western educational tradition. This ethnographic research
explores how teaching and learning occur within two Alaska Native dance and
drumming groups. Dance, song, and drumming are integral Indigenous educational
activities, with culturally distinct traditions across the Arctic. These
activities are embodied modes of teaching and learning that encode information
about interpersonal relations, social values, language, animals and the
environment. This research focuses on how members of dance groups develop and
maintain communities of practice united by common interests and evaluates the
role of dance in youth empowerment, cultural transmission, and engagement with
social issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methods employed in this project include
ethnographic interviews with Alaska Native Elders, educators and youth,
participant observation, and document analysis. Research will take place in
Anchorage and UtqiaÄ¡vik, Alaska, followed by qualitative textual analysis.
Project dissemination plans will be developed in consultation with Alaska Native
collaborators. Anticipated outcomes include scholarly presentations, a
dissertation, and intellectual contributions to comparative education,
Indigenous pedagogy, and practice theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.