* 2206069
* Novel Transportation-Based Geometries, Gradient Flows, and Applications to Data Science
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Dejan Slepcev, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 06/30/2025
* USD 378,158.00

This project will develop mathematical tools to study data science and signal
processing tasks. While differential equations and variational approaches
provide useful models for data science tasks, the effectiveness of many of the
present models diminishes in high dimensions due to computational challenges and
a lack of statistical reliability. This project will provide approaches to
machine learning tasks that take advantage of the geometry of the data and can
be accurately approximated in high dimensions. The project will lead to new and
more accurate ways to sample and represent data distributions. The project will
provide opportunities for training a new generation of mathematicians who will
gain knowledge of modern techniques of applied analysis and be aware of
important questions arising in data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by
problems in data science, partial differential equations (PDE) on graphs, and
tasks in signal analysis, the project will investigate several distinct
settings. A major effort will be devoted to studying ensemble methods for
samplings, such as the Stein Variational Gradient Descent and related models.
The models will provide a deterministic particle-based method for sampling Gibbs
distributions for general potentials. The project will investigate the geometry
and gradient flows in Stein geometry and related models. More broadly, ensemble-
based methods provide a promising avenue to address challenging sampling
problems (multimodal, highly anisotropic energy landscapes). Their connection to
PDE via mean-field limits also allows for analytical study and modeling. The
investigator and collaborators will explore several models and develop both
theoretical understanding and computational approaches. The project will also
study paths in the spaces of probability measures based on the nonlocal
continuity equation and the resulting nonlocal Wasserstein metrics. Regarding
signal analysis, the project will study deformation-based geometries on the
space of signals that allow for both transportation and intensity-based
differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.