* 2206132
* DISES-RCN: Identifying Cross-Cutting Challenges Toward A Net Zero Urban Water (NZUW) Future in the Southwest
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Stephanie Pincetl, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 01/31/2027
* USD 500,000.00

Over 40 million people rely on an overallocated Colorado River for their water
supply. Climate change, drought, urban development, and population growth are
increasing severity of water shortages. Net Zero Urban Water (NZUW) cities meet
the needs of a given community with a locally available and sustainable water
supply, without detriment to interconnected systems and long-term water supply.
The goal of this research coordination network is to move toward NZUW cities in
the US Southwest. Through a series of workshops, literature reviews, stakeholder
interviews, focus group discussions, and pre and post workshop surveys, an NZUW
framework will be developed across seven identified research gaps. Cities of
varying size and location in the US Southwest will be used as testbeds for the
development of this framework (e.g., Los Angeles, Las Vegas, Denver,
Albuquerque, Tucson, Colorado Springs). Participation by all interested parties
will be actively promoted through a website, newsletter, and social media. The
long term impacts of the research coordination network are expected to include:
(1) a novel NZUW conceptual framework to coordinate multidisciplinary research;
(2) the delivery of decision support through comprehensive models to
quantitatively evaluate dynamic trade-offs in NZUW systems across spatial and
time scales; (3) development of new partnerships between academic, public, and
private sectors; and (4) a resilient and sustainable urban water supply for the
40 million people serviced by the Colorado River. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban
water systems are inherently complex socio-environmental systems, connecting
water to humans and humans to water, whose ‘language’ is a technical system
shaped by human decisions. These systems are products of a 20th century
understanding of precipitation regimes, development patterns, engineering
science, and city administrative organizations. The current urban water system
approach and the institutions used to build, manage, and regulate these systems
are no longer adequate to address the uncertainties facing water systems, and
there is a need to integrate new socio-environmental knowledge. This research
coordination network will support a move toward Net Zero Urban Water (NZUW)
cities for a resilient and sustainable water future. Following the conceptual
models of net zero energy and carbon systems, this project will define and
examine the viability and value of pursuing a NZUW approach in arid and semi-
arid urban scenarios of varying size and location serviced by the Colorado River
(e.g., Los Angeles, Las Vegas, Denver, Albuquerque, Tucson, Colorado Springs).
NZUW is a place-based, comprehensive, quantitative framework to guide the
development of resilient and sustainable water systems that can respond to acute
shocks and chronic stressors and integrate dynamic socio-environmental systems
into the analysis. NZUW is a framework that pushes the current conceptual
boundaries of urban water systems by accounting for the integrated socio-
environmental systems necessary to transition to a resilient, sustainable water
future. The first objective of the research coordination network is the creation
of an overall research road map to address the challenges of shifting cities
toward sustainable, resilient urban water systems. Research gaps will be
identified across seven research areas: (1) alternative water sources and
retrofit, (2) distributed soft infrastructure, (3) surface and groundwater
interactions, (4) treatment and management technologies, (5) public preference,
(6) policy and governance, and (7) equity and justice across urban water. The
second objective is the initiation, coordination, and dissemination of NZUW
related research through a newsletter, website, and social media. The third
objective is assessment across multiple time scales. The final research road map
report will comprehensively detail the research gaps across the seven
established research areas and the results of the scenario testing of the NZUW
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.