* 2206691
* Identifying Signature of the QED Plasma Regime
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Nathaniel Fisch, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 299,438.00

This award will enable a study of interactions between light, matter, and
antimatter. A matter-antimatter plasma, comprising electrons and positrons, is
thought to be found in the atmosphere of pulsars and other exotic astrophysical
settings. When electrons encounter positrons, there is mutual annihilation of
the electron-positron pair, releasing a large amount of light; conversely, pairs
of electrons and positrons may be produced by sources of very high intensity
light. To date, only small amounts of electron-positron pairs have been produced
in the laboratory. However, it would be of great interest to produce many
electron-positron pairs to observe the collective interactions in a matter-
antimatter plasma. This regime is called the Quantum ElectroDynamics (QED)
plasma regime, comprising an electron-positron plasma and featuring both strong
field quantum and collective plasma effects. There exists a theoretical model of
the QED plasma regime, but until it is demonstrated in the laboratory we cannot
be sure there will be no surprises. The goal of this effort is to show how the
QED plasma regime may be demonstrated in the laboratory with existing
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Producing electron-positron pairs in sufficient
numbers to observe collective effects will require large facilities to collide
ultra-intense laser beams with each other, with intense beams of particles, or
with a solid target. But even if the pairs are created in large numbers,
collective effects are notoriously hard to observe for several reasons: the
plasma is small; it is ephemeral; it is moving at relativistic speeds; and,
because of the high speeds, collective plasma effects are diminished due to the
relativistic mass enhancement. However, the requirements on the facilities might
be considerably relaxed by identifying very distinct signatures of the
collective effects. For a relativistic electron beam counter-propagating to an
intense laser, there are induced frequency shifts in the laser light as it
traverses through the developing electron-positron plasma. Those signatures
inform importantly on plasma collective effects, suggesting a joint production-
observation solution to observing the QED plasma regime with existing
technology. Optimizing this joint solution, this project will identify
theoretically and evaluate numerically how the radiation reaction reduces the
pair energy, thereby enhancing the collective effects. This project will also
investigate how spatially and temporally structured laser pulses might increase
the pair plasma density, reduce the pair energy, and thereby enhance signatures
of the collective effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.