* 2206828
* Preparing for Science with the Rubin Observatory: Groundwork to Explore the Galactic Population of Exoplanets
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Rachel Street, Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Network
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 09/30/2025
* USD 599,199.00

A team led by the University of California-Santa Cruz will test ideas of planet,
star and black hole formation to compare predictions with measurements of real-
world discoveries. The Vera C. Rubin Observatory's Legacy Survey of Space and
Time (LSST), will produce a groundbreaking set of discoveries. It will find
planets, stars, and black holes at greater distances across the galaxy than has
ever been probed before. But the survey data alone cannot fully characterize
these discoveries. This project will make sure that scientists are ready to
respond to LSST discoveries in real-time. The team will build the software
needed to characterize the discoveries and understand the populations of
planets, stars and black holes. The software they produce will be publicly
available to benefit everyone. The team will upgrade their free educational
website, to help students learn about these fascinating discoveries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Characterizing rapidly evolving transient phenomena like
microlensing events requires a demanding, rapid-response program to identify
candidates from the flood of survey data in real-time. This project will build
the observational and theoretical infrastructure necessary to characterize a
large sample of events discovered by the Vera C. Rubin LSST, and make the
resulting tools available to the whole community. The team will extend our
algorithm to prioritize microlensing events in real-time based on discovery
alerts from low-cadence surveys like LSST, allowing characterization
observations to be made in a timely manner. They will develop the analytical and
software framework necessary to model the large sample of events expected from
Rubin, understand the selection biases, and interpret the sample of detected
events in terms of the underlying populations. In the process, the team will
evaluate the LSST survey strategy to determine where additional observations
will produce the greatest scientific yield and thereby optimize our follow-up
strategy. This will be particularly important in coordinating Rubin's survey
strategy to complement that of the Nancy Roman Space Telescope's contemporaneous
exoplanet survey. All of the team's software tools will be open source and
publicly available to benefit the whole community, and the team will extend the
training materials available from our educational website to make this subject
more accessible to the next generation of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.