* 2206807
* Driving Electrons and Plasmas Using Geometric Group Velocity Control of Intense Ultrafast Laser Pulses
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Charles Durfee, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2025
* USD 291,606.00

This award supports a research team at Colorado School of Mines to develop new
methods to use ultrashort laser pulses to accelerate electrons. There is a
worldwide effort to find ways for lasers to accelerate electrons, in part to
bring the scale of particle accelerators down from a large multi-building
facility to a tabletop. This development would address a number of national
needs: secondary sources of radiation for security inspections, ultrahigh
resolution electron microscopes to analyze the properties of new quantum
materials, and production of electrons that can be efficiently injected into
other laser-plasma based accelerators. This project will be developing methods
to use shaped, intense ultrashort pulses to directly push on electrons. This
approach not only pushes scientific boundaries for optical control of electrons,
but it also addresses the important challenge of accelerating electrons from
rest to relativistic speeds with well-defined energy and direction. The project
will train undergraduate and graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher by
combining theory, computational modeling and experimental work. This cutting
edge research will give them experience that can lead them to careers in
industry or research and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the Colorado School
of Mines (CSM), technology has been developed to produce shaped, ultrashort
laser pulses that have an intensity profile that is tilted relative to the
overall direction of the beam. For focused beams that are wide enough, this
pulse front tilt has the effect of slowing down the interaction speed of the
pulse with surfaces or objects, such as electrons. By slowing down the pulse,
CSM calculations and simulations show that the electrons can be fully captured
and accelerated in a direction perpendicular to the pulse front. Several
experiments to take advantage of this method of all-optical electron
acceleration will be designed and conducted. First, a short ultraviolet laser
pulse will produce electrons from a nano-scale tip, then they will be injected
into the focus of the laser beam. The goals of this experiment are to explore
and characterize the acceleration process, and also to test whether the spatial
coherence of the electrons can be preserved. If so, the result would be a new
source that can be used for time-resolved coherent electron imaging. Second,
tilted pulses will be used to impulsively drive strong oscillations in a plasma
wave. These oscillating electrons should emit light in the terahertz part of the
spectrum that can be used for measurements on novel semiconductor systems among
other applications. Finally, CSM researchers will perform experiments using
tilted pulse acceleration at a high-power laser facility at Colorado State
University that will be the first of their kind, with the aim to accelerate
electrons to relativistic energies in the MeV range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.