* 2206744
* CDS&amp;E: Accelerating Astrophysical Insight at Scale with Likelihood-Free Inference
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Joshua Bloom, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2025
* USD 221,262.00

In future surveys to unprecedented depth and image fidelity, the discovery and
classification of sources will, by necessity, be fully automated, in part by
using machine learning. This project will develop novel algorithms and codebases
to accelerate model-based inference in time-domain astrophysics. Inference is
becoming a fundamental bottleneck, from both a computation and human cost
perspective, and the parameter estimation task can be the main impediment to
scientific progress. Often, domain experts are required to supervise fitting in
order to narrow search spaces and speed up inference. This work will focus on
likelihood-free inference (LFI) approaches using neural networks. It will create
a new open-source LFI Python library, and carry out domain-specific inference
tasks for gravitational microlensing and for eclipsing binary stars. The
software will let non-experts use LFI with smaller computational penalties, and
enable on-the-fly inference continuously during data collection. Running a
multidisciplinary workshop and adding LFI into undergraduate and graduate
courses will improve both the research infrastructure and STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This approach means that the cost and time to
compute forward models are covered during training, and then leveraged for
parameter estimation on new data. This effort will a) create LFI architectures
for irregularly sampled and noisy time-series data, b) advance methods for
anomaly detection and posterior calibration, ensuring LFI parameter estimates
are unbiased, and c) develop approaches for fast model selection. On-the-fly LFI
can inform further data acquisition, and this virtuous feedback loop helps with
more efficient use of expensive follow-up resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.