* 2206810
* DISES:Restoration of a southwestern cultural keystone species: Integrating socio-ecological systems to predict resilience of traditional acorn harvest by western Apache communities
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2028
* Amy Whipple, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 02/29/2028
* USD 1,459,999.00

For many Native American communities, spiritual and cultural activities rely on
natural resources that provide food, dyes, medicines, and materials for
traditional crafts. In the southwestern US, western Apache people use Emory oak
acorns (Chi-chil) to cook traditional or ceremonial foods. For thousands of
years, Apache Tribes managed key processes in oak woodlands, moving acorns
around the landscape, shaping fire patterns, and hunting wildlife that feed on
acorns and young plants. Similarly, oak forests supported cultural practices,
provided nutritious food, and encouraged families to meet, giving elders the
opportunity to teach new generations about traditional life ways. For these
reasons, the health of both Apache communities and oak woodlands are linked. The
relationship between western Apache Tribes and Emory oaks was disrupted after
most Apache people were moved to reservations in the 1800s. Now, Emory oaks are
declining due to factors like drought, which are increasing in severity due to
climate change. At the same time, fewer young Apache Tribal members harvest
acorns than in the past. By examining patterns hidden in the DNA and tree rings
of Emory oak, combined with the knowledge of tribal elders, researchers, and
tribal members piece together key aspects of the traditional relationship
between Apache people and oaks. Lessons from the past combined with an
understanding of modern oak woodlands allows researchers to develop strategies
to better conserve oaks, and in doing so, support Apache traditions related to
acorn harvest. The project will contribute to the training of Indigenous
scholars by reaching out to undergraduate interns and graduate fellows at
historically Indigenous learning institutions. Broder impacts will also arise
from a novel mentorship program that includes Tribal professionals and/or elders
on student advising teams to foster a supportive learning environment, increase
student retention, and integrate traditional ecological knowledge into western
scientific knowledge frameworks. The research will support tribal youth
initiatives and intergenerational knowledge transfer, and it will curate
sociological and ecological information to ensure persistence of regional
Indigenous knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For thousands of years the Apache
people influenced the oak ecosystems, by moving acorns around the landscape,
altering patterns of disturbance like fire regimes, and affecting wildlife
consumption of acorns and seedlings. When Apache communities were relocated onto
reservations, traditional management and knowledge of these oak woodlands was
largely lost. Today, oak populations are declining, and fewer Apache youth
practice traditional harvest. In the case of Emory oaks, climate change drives
habitats to cooler or wetter areas, sometimes away from tribal lands, and
intensifies disturbances like drought and fire that can destroy traditional
gathering sites. To address this problem, this research reconstructs key
components of the past Emory oak-western Apache system using Apache oral history
and ecological messages from the past. Ecological Data will be collected from
tree rings and genetic sampling. The researchers will integrate this historical
information into models, in combination with data describing current ecological
function and cultural practices using multi-paradigm modeling techniques. These
analytical methods will integrate social and ecological variables, flows, and
feedbacks within complex socio-ecological systems and advance socio- ecological
modeling, which necessitates the incorporation of disparate data types into
quantitative frameworks to explore emergent system
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.