* 2206688
* Collaborative Research: The Physical Halo Model
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* EDUARDO ROZO, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* ANDREAS BERLIND
* 08/31/2025
* USD 283,994.00

Dark matter aggregates under its own gravity to form tightly bound clumps called
dark matter “halos”. As these halos form, they pull atoms of regular matter into
them, enabling the formation of the stars and galaxies we see today. For this
reason, dark matter halos are the foundational building blocks for our
understanding of how galaxies are distributed in the Universe. Over the past few
years, a variety of works have demonstrated that our definitions of dark matter
halos do not adequately capture their inner structure, compromising our ability
to use a halo-based description of the Universe when interpreting astronomical
survey data. A collaboration between scientists at the University of Arizona and
the University of Maryland propose to address this deficiency by providing the
first fully physically motivated definition of dark matter halos. Based on this,
the team will then develop an accurate theoretical model for interpreting data
from large galaxy surveys. The Principal Investigator at the University of
Arizona will be an active participant in the Tucson Initiative for Minority
Engagement in STEM Program, organizing workshops, seminars, and coordinating
mentoring activities in the program. The Principal Investigator at the
University of Maryland will develop a user-friendly web-interface for the code
Colossus to allow for simple visualizations that can be adopted for use in
introductory and non-major astronomy courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
proposes a radical redefinition of dark matter halos that will enable the
construction of percent-level accurate halo models of large-scale structure. The
model is built on the inherent dichotomy between particles orbiting a halo and
those falling into the halo for the first time. The proposing team has
demonstrated that the orbiting and infalling contributions to halo correlation
functions roughly correspond to the one- and two-halo terms of the traditional
halo model. However, the orbiting/infalling halo model framework is both
mathematically simpler and significantly more accurate than the traditional halo
model approach. The team will develop the proposed physical halo model framework
based on the orbiting/infalling dichotomy. They will then construct halo
catalogs based on this revised halo definition for a broad range of simulated
cosmologies and redshifts, and use the resulting halo catalogs to calibrate the
halo mass function, bias function, and various halo correlation functions. The
code and halo catalogs produced by this work will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.