* 2206977
* RET Site: Project-Based Learning for Rural Alabama STEM Middle School Teachers in Machine Learning and Robotics
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* Melody Russell, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 02/28/2025
* USD 589,889.00

This award establishes a new RET Site under at Auburn University in Alabama. The
site will provide unique and holistic research experiences for 30 middle school
math and science teachers in the 7th-8th grades from underserved rural areas of
Alabama, particularly the Alabama Black Belt region. The research focus is on
mobile robots enabled by cutting-edge technologies like machine learning and
artificial intelligence. The goals of the site are to equip teachers with
knowledge and skills in robotics and ML/AI and promote their interests in these
areas and facilitate teachers’ development and implementation of engaging
project-based curricular modules for their classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
site will provide research experiences to 10 middle school math and science
teachers in the 7th-8th grades each year via a 6-week summer program and 9-month
academic year follow-up, with the research focused on smart mobile robots. The
site has five primary objectives to reach its goals of providing a rigorous and
engaging RET experience: 1) provide education and training activities on the
fundamentals of robotics and ML/AI, and a novel platform for research and
education of ML-based mobile robots; 2) engage teachers in hands-on research
projects on ML-based mobile robots that match well with faculty mentors’ active
research projects; 3) allow teachers to collaborate with engineering and STEM
education faculty to develop thep roject-based curricular modules; 4) foster
teachers’ leadership and pedagogical skills via teacher leader academies and
practice of teaching the RET curricular modules; 5) assist teachers to implement
the RET curricular modules via academic follow-up.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.