* 2206788
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: A Modeling Based Investigation in Support of Pioneer Array Relocation Design in the Southern Mid-Atlantic Bight
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2023
* John Wilkin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 11/30/2023
* USD 53,057.00

Through a series of NSF sponsored Pioneer Array Innovations Labs, the new
location for the NSF Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI) Pioneer Coastal Array
will be relocated to the Southern Mid-Atlantic Bight (S-MAB), in the region
between Cape Hatteras, NC, and Norfolk Canyon, VA. In order to inform specific
array design decisions, such as mooring siting, spacing, and instrument/sensor
selection and configuration it is important to perform ocean numerical modeling
analysis of the complex and dynamic ocean circulation to provide guidance to the
OOI-CGSN Pioneer Array system design and build group that meets their published
milestones/constraints for the design and build-out timeline. The results of
this modelling effort would strengthen future model-based co-design of NSF-
supported field programs, including the next Pioneer redeployment in another
five (5) years. This project offers opportunities to develop strong partnerships
with stakeholders in academia, government, and industry sectors, including
marine fisheries and offshore renewable energy (wind and
hydrokinetic).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's proposes to perform a
suite of numerical modeling investigations and analyses to deliver actionable
guidance to the OOI-CGSN Pioneer Array system design and build group that meets
their published milestones/constraints for the design and build-out timeline.
Skillful ocean modeling and analysis will offer a virtual ocean framework – a
“digital twin” ocean – that can be used to inform specific array design
decisions, such as mooring siting, spacing, and instrument/sensor selection and
configuration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.