* 2206305
* Novel Phases of Electronic Insulators and Quantum Hall Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Senthil Todadri, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2025
* USD 436,585.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports foundational
theoretical research on the properties of a large collection of interacting
electrons inside an insulating solid. The motion of these electrons is governed
by the principles of quantum mechanics and is affected by the competition
between the electronâ€™s kinetic energy, and the inter-electron Coulomb repulsion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last few years, it has become possible to tune
these different competing effects experimentally in several materials. Most
striking amongst these are two-dimensional moire structures formed by bringing
together two single-atom thick layers of materials whose lattices are slightly
different. Fascinating phenomena have already been found in moire materials, and
there is great promise for other profound future discoveries. This proposal will
develop theoretical tools to study some of these phenomena and materials. The
theory will be developed in the context of the many ongoing experiments on novel
electronic insulators in moire, and other, materials. The goal is to provide a
theoretical foundation and the tools needed to understand and predict the
properties of these insulators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental research on
electronic materials provides the foundational corpus upon which future
electronic technological progress can build. Its focus on the quantum mechanics
of systems with many degrees of freedom will potentially teach us many useful
lessons as we seek to gain control over such systems and develop quantum
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education component involves education
at all levels, including undergraduate students at the frontiers of condensed
matter theory. The Principal Investigator will convey the beauty of modern
condensed matter physics to a broad audience outside this research field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research, and associated education
on the novel phenomena that happen in electronic insulators, and related quantum
Hall systems. Specific areas of interest are the description of strongly
correlated quantum particles that move in a topological band. This problem is
central to certain moire graphene structures, and to quantum hall systems
restricted to a single Landau level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emphasis will be
on general development of new theoretical concepts and field theoretic methods.
When possible, these will be placed in the context of either experiments on
specific materials or numerical work on specific microscopic models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will (1) address basic questions on strong
correlation in a partially filled topological band inspired by ongoing
experiments on quantum anomalous Hall states in moire graphene, and (2) continue
the PI's development of a lowest Landau level theory to solve a wider range of
problems, including fermionic quantum Hall states. A broad range of analytical
and numerical methods will be employed. The overarching goal is to develop a
theoretical framework to describe strongly interacting electrons in a partially
filled topological band that can address both universal and non-universal
aspects of the physics. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained in modern condensed matter physics during this
research. The PI will continue to design lectures to expose graduate students to
experimental methods and the phenomenology of modern correlated materials.
Lectures will be made widely available to the community. He will also continue
his engagement with the high energy theoretical physics community to aid
advances in both condensed matter and high energy
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.