* 2206814
* Comprehensive Analysis of Period Changes in Eclipsing Binaries as a Probe of Stellar Astrophysics
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* William Welsh, SETI Institute
* Standard Grant
* Luca Rizzi
* 08/31/2025
* USD 462,848.00

A natural and very common product of star formation processes, binary stars
provide a vital foundation of stellar studies as calibrators for stellar sizes,
masses, temperatures, and luminosities. They also serve as probes for stellar
structure, formation and evolution, tidal interactions, and other more
specialized fields such as accretion physics, asteroseismology, resonant
dynamics, and the formation and evolution of exoplanets in multiple star
systems. Eclipsing binaries are a special group of binary stars, in which the
two stars periodically eclipse each other, producing variations in their light
curves. A team of scientists at the SETI institute and at San Diego State
University will perform an analysis of deviations from the regular, periodic
behavior in this special type of binary stars. Deviations can be introduced by
the presence of planets and by rotation and tidal forces. By investigating these
deviations, the team will be able to constrain the internal structure of each
component star, providing unique constraints to improve current stellar
structure models. In addition, the team will create a set of 3-days workshops
for STEM teachers, in collaboration with existing national education outreach
programs that partner astronomers with teachers in grades 3 to 9. The workshops
will provide hands-on project-based learning with an overarching theme of
eclipses and transits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project plan has three
components: 1) Measure decades-long period changes for hundreds of eclipsing
binaries; 2) Constrain the internal structure of each star in suitable binaries;
3) Probe for the presence of additional bodies (stars, circumbinary planets).
The investigators will use all available photometric data from ground- and
space-based archives for hundreds of known eclipsing binaries. Furthermore, they
will use a state-of-the-art modeling code that predicts the measured eclipse
times based on the orbital configuration of the particular system and the
properties of its components, as well as on the corresponding tidal and general
relativity effects. Presently, period changes in certain binaries are used to
measure the average apsidal motion constant of the binary. This project has the
potential to measure the apsidal motion constants of each star in a much larger
sample. This will be made possible by using eclipse times measured over many
decades. This is critical because the precession timescales are much longer than
the orbital period of the binaries and, as a result, their detection often
requires photometric observations spanning decades. Studying a large sample of
eclipsing binaries covering different stellar types and environments will also
advance the knowledge of the physics of binary interactions, leading to a better
understanding of tidal forces, migration, spin-orbit coupling, and mass
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.