* 2206950
* Collaborative Proposal: SaTC: Frontiers: Securing the Future of Computing for Marginalized and Vulnerable Populations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Patrick Traynor, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,678,269.00

Computing systems and services are an essential part of modern society and are
deeply embedded in peopleâ€™s daily lives. However, as practices and technologies
for ensuring security and privacy of computing systems emerge and rapidly
change, the needs of marginalized and vulnerable populations have been under-
addressed, as have the consequences of their exclusion. This Frontiers-scale
project seeks to fundamentally change how security and privacy in computing is
approached, to make centering the needs of marginalized and vulnerable
populations the norm. To do so, the team of researchers will create security and
privacy design principles that mitigate harm and enhance the benefits of both
current and future computing technologies. This work will be informed by direct
collaboration with marginalized and vulnerable communities and by strong
technical foundations and social science theories. This project will build and
sustain a community of researchers to ensure that the needs of marginalized and
vulnerable populations are centered in security and privacy over the long term.
Such work will develop research methodologies and outcomes that inform design,
education, and policy to impact both the scientific community and society at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on examining three major themes:
assessing the security and privacy needs of marginalized and vulnerable
populations, informing and co-creating solutions that intersect with current and
emerging technologies, and systematizing and applying foundational design
principles. The first area involves quantitative and qualitative human-centered
research methods and direct community input to address the unique challenges and
needs of different populations. The second area involves identifying how
technology can be leveraged or reimagined to address these needs through
methodologies that consider security and privacy goals for systems and data. The
final area involves iteratively synthesizing lessons and experiences from the
previous two areas to support integrating security, privacy, and safety needs of
marginalized and vulnerable populations into future technology design and
researcher efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.