* 2206195
* Discovering the Most Enigmatic Transient Phenomena in the Time-Domain
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Gautham Narayan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 07/31/2025
* USD 328,618.00

In astrophysics, observed phenomena with relatively rapid variation and short
duration are known as “transients,” as distinguished from more steady objects
such as stars and galaxies. Transient astrophysical events have been one of the
driving forces behind some of the most interesting discoveries of the past
century: black holes, neutron stars, dark energy, neutrinos, and cosmic rays.
Newly discovered classes of transients have already provided insights into such
topics as gravitational waves, the birth of magnetars, or highly magnetized
neutron stars, and the creation of heavy atomic elements through the r-process.
A research group at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, will undertake
a project to (1) characterize enigmatic transient events with a new, novel wide-
field survey: the Young Supernova Experiment (YSE) (2) detail the progenitors
and explosions of those “exotic” transients, (3) produce new methods for anomaly
detection involving unsupervised and semi-supervised learning with citizen
science, and (4) prepare for time-domain discovery with the Legacy Survey of
Space and Time (LSST) at the Vera C. Rubin Observatory. Citizen-science is
central to this project and the researchers will engage participants through the
Zooniverse platform, thus continuing to build public engagement with
astrophysical transients and the LSST.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given limited
spectroscopic time to follow up transient events, the highest returns will come
from focusing resources on the rarest astrophysical objects. As we discover ever
more transient events from current surveys, identifying exotic events within
their terabytes of data requires novel methods. The research group will use
observations from the Young Supernova Experiment to identify rare and unusual
events with novel anomaly detection techniques. YSE will augment public data
from the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF) by providing additional color
information and better time-sampling, making it an ideal test for the discovery
of exotic transients. The team will deploy their improved anomaly detection
methods on archival data from the Pan-STARRS and DES surveys for validation. The
work will provide a strong foundation for Rubin operations, and the anomaly
detection filter will be deployed on NSF’s NOIRLab ANTARES event broker system,
allowing LSST’s time-domain science collaborations to find more of these
enigmatic sources. At the end of this research project, the team expects to have
characterized individual events as well as the larger population of exotic
transients and their physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.