* 2206110
* WoU-MMA: The Electromagnetic Counterparts of Gravitational Wave Sources
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Edo Berger, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2025
* USD 468,687.00

A research group at Harvard University will carry out a program to rapidly
search for optically-detected counterparts to gravitational wave (GW) events
detected by the LIGO, Virgo and Kagra (LVK) GW experiments. The rapid follow up
utilizes the Dark Energy Camera and the MMT and Magellan 6.5-meter telescopes to
search for optical/near-infrared counterparts. These large-aperture telescopes
enable wide-field and galaxy-targeted sensitive searches from both hemispheres
on Earth, critical for the discovery of electromagnetic (EM) counterparts (with
typical GW localizations of roughly 100 square degrees on the sky and distances
of up to a few hundred magaparsecs). Identified counterparts will be studied
with multi-wavelength imaging and spectroscopy using radio to X-ray facilities.
Students will gain an unparalleled experience in this emerging new field. They
will lead the acquisition, analysis, and publication of data across the EM
spectrum, and jointly with GW data, thereby providing a broad training in
observational astronomy. The project will also integrate this new GW view of the
universe into undergraduate education, and narrow the gap between classroom
learning and hands-on research through the active participation of students in
observing with Harvard-Smithsonian telescopes and through analysis of public GW
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the GW data for binary neutron stars (BNS) and
neutron star-black hole (NS-BH) mergers provide unprecedented insight — the mass
and spin distributions of neutron stars and black holes, the merger rates, and
sensitive tests of general relativity — the joint detection of EM counterparts
will uniquely extend the scientific impact by providing accurate positions,
precise distances, an astrophysical context for the binary systems, a probe of
matter ejection and nucleosynthesis, and the potential to measure cosmological
parameters via the “standard siren” technique. The key optical counterpart for
BNS and NS-BH mergers is emission due to the radioactive decay of r-process
nuclei synthesized in the merger ejecta – a “kilonova”, already observed in
association with the short gamma-ray burst GRB 130603B and with GW170817. The
kilonova optical emission is faint and fades rapidly and so large-aperture
telescopes are essential for effective follow-up at larger distances than
GW170817 (at only 40 Mpc). Advanced LIGO-Virgo (ALV) has demonstrated the
ability to detect BNS and NS- BH mergers, and the detectability of EM
counterparts has been proven; the event rate is expected to be at least a few
per year as ALV and Kagra reach design sensitivity; and the required EM follow-
up programs and computational resources are active. This project advances the
goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.