* 2207546
* PM: Atomic Parity Violation and Multi-Messenger Astronomy with Atomic Clocks
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Andrei Derevianko, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2025
* USD 545,323.00

This project is in fundamental physics, where discoveries are likely to shape
future technologies. This is similar to the early 20th century formulation of
quantum mechanics now forming the foundation of microelectronics and quantum
technologies. There are overwhelming indications that the current state of
physics knowledge is incomplete: in particular, modern physics and cosmology
fail to describe the nature of 85% of matter in the universe. There are internal
consistencies both in the very foundation of modern physics, the Standard Model,
and in formulating viable theories of quantum gravity. The field is ripe for
major discoveries. Here the PI pursues a low-cost strategy that extends the
discovery reach further by analyzing novel high-rate data from the Global
Positioning System (GPS), contributing to the improved diagnostics of this
important national resource. Another practical aspect is the development of
high-accuracy computational tools useful in benchmarking the less-accurate
toolbox of relativistic quantum chemistry of heavy elements. Such developments
are relevant to nuclear energy production and nuclear waste management and, by
extension, to strengthening national energy security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has two major components: (i) Next-generation ab initio relativistic
many-body calculations of atomic parity violation. The goal is to improve the
internal consistency of earlier work and to reduce theoretical uncertainty.
Attaining this goal will result in an improved low-energy test of the
electroweak sector of the Standard Model of elementary particles. (ii) Search
for bursts of low-mass exotic fields emitted by cataclysmic astrophysical
events, such as black hole mergers. This is a novel, exotic physics modality in
multi-messenger astronomy. The search is carried out by analyzing atomic clock
data from GPS satellites. The outcome is either a discovery of the predicted
multi-messenger signature or an improvement of the current constraints on
coupling of atomic clocks to plausibly emitted exotic fields by several orders
of magnitude. The project may yield the first experimental signature of quantum
gravity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.