* 2207661
* Eccentric Black Hole Mergers: Search and Interpretation with Gravitational Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Sergey Klimenko, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The discovery of gravitational waves from two merging black holes opened a new
window on the Universe. Nevertheless, despite ongoing new discoveries, the
physical process that makes black holes merge is still not understood. The
proposed research will probe this question of origin by targeting mergers that
retain eccentric orbits observable through their gravitational wave emission.
The project will develop a targeted algorithm optimized to find eccentric
mergers to be used during LIGO/Virgo/KAGRAâ€™s upcoming observing runs. These
research activities will provide training for graduate students in modeling and
data analysis, skillsets which are in great demand and of great benefit to
society. In addition, members of the group will engage in outreach activities in
order to educate and inspire the public about this new field of physics and
astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first theme of the project is the
enhancement of search sensitivity to eccentric mergers. This will be carried out
using simulated eccentric gravitational waveforms and optimizing search
parameters to detect these waveforms. The second theme of the project will be
the characterization of this sensitivity. The reach of the search needs to be
established for the full range of expected gravitational waveforms in order to
enable the astrophysical interpretation of future detections. With these steps
the project will help maximize the ability of the next LIGO/Virgo/KAGRA
observing runs to elucidate the origin of newly detected black hole
mergers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.