* 2207502
* Physics and Astrophysics of Compact Binaries
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Emanuele Berti, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2025
* USD 432,276.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. This
award supports studies of gravitational wave observations to gain a deeper
understanding of gravity and black holes. Large financial resources have been
invested in advanced detector design on the experimental side, and in a
community effort to build compact binary detection templates on the
theoretical/data analysis side. The first gravitational-wave detections by the
LIGO/Virgo collaboration were a major milestone, but for gravitational-wave
science to make even more groundbreaking contributions we must be able to go
beyond detections, extracting fundamental physics from the strong-gravity
dynamics of the sources. With the expected increase in volume coverage of
LIGO/Virgo in the next observing runs, the operation of KAGRA in Japan, the
completion of the Cosmic Explorer Horizon Study, and the inclusion of the
Einstein Telescope in the 2021 ESFRI Roadmap, this work is timely, geared at
enhancing the science scope of ground-based interferometers. The project will
train students in a highly interdisciplinary field that requires expertise in
general relativity, astrophysics, data analysis and high-energy physics. The
students will benefit from interactions with a large international network of
world-leading experts in gravitational physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
projects supported by this award are strongly intertwined, but for convenience
they can be grouped in two main research areas: (1) "black hole spectroscopy",
i.e. the research program trying to identify merger remnants as the black holes
predicted by general relativity from their oscillation frequencies; and (2)
ameliorating systematic effects in gravitational-wave astronomy. The first set
of projects investigates the detectability of multiple ringdown modes, the
measurability of their frequencies, the construction of better models for the
ringdown mode amplitudes, and instabilities in quasinormal mode spectra. The
second set studies how systematics could affect single-event parameter
estimation within general relativity, lead to false “detections” of effects
beyond general relativity, and limit our ability to test general relativity and
observe gravitational lensing. The PI's group will study the effect of
systematics on parameter estimation, tests of general relativity and detection
of lensing effects, at both the single-event and population levels. The
knowledge gained will be used to devise self-correcting strategies to ameliorate
the effect of systematics as we enter the Big Data regime of third-generation
interferometers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.