* 2207535
* Gravitational Wave Astrophysics with LIGO: The Oregon Experimental Relativity Group
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Raymond Frey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2025
* USD 404,011.00

The initial discovery of gravitational waves in 2015 by LIGO represented a
triumph of experimental science and a momentous breakthrough in fundamental
physics. It confirmed a crucial prediction of General Relativity made by
Einstein a century earlier. Its importance was reflected by the 2017 Nobel Prize
in physics awarded to NSF PIs Weiss, Thorne, and Barish. The gravitational waves
observed by NSF's Laser Interferometric Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) in
2015 resulted from the collision of two black holes, each roughly thirty times
more massive than our sun. Such an amazing event is only observable by
gravitational waves -- the ripples in spacetime which propagate outward across
the cosmos for millions of light-years and may eventually be noticed by the LIGO
observatories. It underscores the potential of LIGO to make unique contributions
to astronomy, astrophysics, and cosmology. Since 2015, LIGO has recorded
approximately 100 such collisions, mostly of pairs of black holes, but also of
black holes with neutron stars, and pairs of neutron stars. Indeed, with this
unique collection in hand, LIGO has been able to make new statements about the
origins of massive stars in the universe, and paired with more conventional
astronomical observations, provided new insights into the origin of heavy
elements which are crucial to our life on Earth. Meanwhile, through hard work
and innovation, the LIGO observatories have become increasingly sensitive to
ever smaller spacetime ripples. This has enabled the potential for new
discoveries -- the observation of gravitational waves from different types of
astrophysical objects, objects which are not pairs of black holes and/or neutron
stars. This award will set up LIGO gravitational wave searches from new sources,
namely collapsing black holes and extremely magnetized neutron stars. The former
are associated with the explosive phenomena known as (long) gamma-ray bursts
(GRBs), while the latter are associated with magnetar x-ray flares and fast
radio bursts. As was the case for the 2015 discovery, it might be expected that
initial discoveries from new sources will be followed by new astrophysical
insight and understanding. This award will largely be used to support graduate
students at University of Oregon (UO), who will develop new methods to carry out
these novel searches. In keeping with the recent history at UO, it is expected
that these students will either continue in the field or will enter the private
sector, where they will carry their expertise in data science and analysis to
other targets. The UO group will continue to present results to the public and
carry out workshops for Oregon high school teachers, so they can, in turn, bring
the latest in research to their students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
combine two emerging areas of astrophysics to probe sources of gravitational
waves from progenitors which are not compact binary mergers. The first area is
multi-messenger astronomy (MMA). The second area is the search for
gravitational-wave signals without waveform templates – the so-called burst
analyses. The searches will fundamentally rely on MMA methods. X-ray, gamma-ray,
or radio transient signals from astrophysically energetic events provide a time
and sky location which also mark an episode of putative gravitational-wave
emission. These provide the so-called triggers for the gravitational-wave data
analysis, which labels the time near the trigger as the “on-source” (or signal)
data segment, and the off-source data as the background. Excess signal power
relative to background is an indicator of a potential gravitational-wave
detection in association with the triggering gamma-ray burst (GRB), magnetar
x-ray flare, or fast radio bursts (FRB), as the case may be. This method does
not rely on any predetermined mathematical form for the gravitational waves.
Alongside the searches, the group will develop methods for determining
astrophysically interesting parameters from a confident detection, or for
constraining such parameters from non-observations, as the case may be. Such
parameters might include, for example, those related to the neutron star
equation of state for the magnetar searches, or accretion disk properties for
the long GRBs. The Oregon group has a strong history of leadership for previous
MMA-GW burst searches and the corresponding methods developments. The ever
improving sensitivity of the LIGO observatories now makes it plausible for such
searches to provide new discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.