* 2207367
* Microscopy of Ultracold Magnetic Quantum Fluids
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Richard Fletcher, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 06/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Long-range interactions mediate many of the most exciting, but poorly
understood, phenomena in nature, driving phenomena as diverse as
superconductivity, the structures inside neutron stars, and the physics of the
early Universe. They determine the arrangement of water molecule networks
coating proteins and the physics of magnetic thin films promising new platforms
for computer memory and logic. Competition between different forces drives
pattern formation in biology, chemical reactions, collider physics, atmospheric,
oceanic, and plasma science. In particular, understanding the consequences of
long-range forces in systems governed by quantum mechanics is simultaneously
theoretically difficult, and essential for designing new materials which exploit
quantum behaviors. In this program, the research team will prepare a gas of
magnetic atoms, cooled down to billionths of a degree above absolute zero, and
confined into a sheet by precisely sculpted laser beams. This forms a flexible
experimental arena to explore and understand the role of long-range magnetic
forces, ranging from self-organization into intricate structures, the mechanisms
underpinning superfluidity, and the dynamics of individual quanta of circulation
inside the fluid. The regime of validity for many existing theories of two-
dimensional magnetic gases is unclear, motivating the development of precisely
controlled experimental platforms. Cutting-edge quantum gas research entails a
combination of optics, quantum physics, computer control, electronics and vacuum
hardware. The apparatus is entirely built and run by undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdocs. This provides an ideal training for the future quantum
workforce, equipping group members to be leaders in both academic and industrial
quantum research and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his
undergraduate and graduate students will employ a gas of highly-magnetic erbium
atoms, confined to an oblate geometry via an optical lattice and imaged using a
high-resolution microscope objective. This will provide a powerful platform for
exploring collective physics mediated by a subtle interplay of short-ranged
interactions, long-range anisotropic magnetic forces, kinetic energy, trapping
potentials, and quantum fluctuations, leading to a plethora of predicted
emergent phases. The research team will investigate the core structure and
collective dynamics of quantum vortices, spontaneous pattern formation and
density ordering, and the influence of long-range interactions on the superfluid
Berezinskii–Kosterlitz–Thouless (BKT) transition. On the one hand, these
experiments will constitute a striking qualitative demonstration of long-
predicted emergent phases in dipolar fluids. On the other, they will provide
essential quantitative benchmarks against which to test our current
understanding of the interplay between long-range forces, quantum fluctuations,
and reduced dimensionality, and the new phases of matter which
emerge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.