* 2207977
* Universal Few-Body Quantum States and Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Chris Greene, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2025
* USD 354,239.00

This project advances scientific progress in a number of ways that relate to our
national interest. The work will develop an understanding of a class of problems
involving more than just two particles where current theory is extremely
limited. Specifically, the group will extract new insights into the interaction
of three or four or even a few more particles, which might be atoms or molecules
or nucleons or even quarks. Those apparently dramatically different systems
often show a universality, meaning that some aspects of one system are very
similar and are even mirrored in other systems. This research advances one of
the most promising theoretical methods for attacking this difficult class, which
is based on the introduction of unusual collective coordinates that describe the
motions of the system. Once the best coordinates have been selected, the project
can implement the quantum mechanical equations on modern computers, and extract
accurate numerical solutions. The project should yield credible predictions of
new phenomena, and also qualitative insights that can suggest new paths that
further advance this field of research. The effort also strengthens the pool of
talent capable of tackling the most challenging theoretical questions in the
microscopic world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research planned for this proposal
builds on progress in understanding currently interesting problems in universal
few-body physics, stressing applications relevant to ultracold quantum systems.
This active theoretical and experimental field has seen highly unusual bound and
resonant states, as in the so-called Efimov effect, and it has also led to the
development of theoretical methods, such as the adiabatic hyperspherical
representation, which are capable of quantitatively describing inelastic
collision and loss phenomena for collisions involving two to four atoms or
molecules. The project will address the full parameter space of complexity of
such ultracold few-body systems, both with and without an external
electromagnetic field that can dress the system and modify its properties. The
efforts will work to overcome the technical challenges associated with treating
more than four atoms, pushing aggressively to treat five atoms in particular.
Note that ultracold quantum gas physics links quantal phenomena across multiple
subfields, notably atomic, molecular, optical, condensed matter, nuclear
physics, and chemical physics. What is learned about the four-fermion system
with ultracold atoms, for instance, can yield (and has yielded) insights into
the nuclear physics problem of four interacting
nucleons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.