* 2207886
* Low-Energy Atomic Processes Including Ones Involving A Positron
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sandra Ward, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2025
* USD 100,000.00

Few-body systems are important in atomic physics and nuclear physics. The
proposed research in theoretical atomic physics involves few-body systems of
charged particles, especially ones that involve the antiparticle of the
electron, which is a positron. One of these systems is the positronium negative
ion, which is comprised of two electrons and a positron. The exotic positronium
atom is similar to the conventional hydrogen atom, but the positive charge in
the atom is a positron rather than a proton. The proposed studies of these few-
body charged systems will support international collaborations with scientists
in the UK and Japan. The PI is a female full professor of physics at the
University of North Texas, which is a Tier One Research University and a
Hispanic Serving Institution. She plans to use the project to include activities
that can benefit these students and will continue mentoring two graduate
students toward their Ph.D. degree. Students will be trained in analytical and
numerical techniques and be encouraged to present their results at professional
conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two main projects are proposed. The first
project is the computation of scattering properties (phase shifts and cross
sections) for electron-positronium scattering and the determination of the
photodetachment cross section of the positronium negative ion. The
photodetachment of the positronium negative ion has been recently observed. The
second project is the determination of phase shifts and cross sections for both
positron and electron scattering from a helium atom, using a model potential
that treats helium as a one-electron atom. The form of the model potential,
which has been previously used for positron-helium scattering, simplifies the
treatment of electron exchange for low-energy elastic electron-helium
scattering. Recent experiments have shown that the total integrated cross
section for positronium scattering for a number of targets, as a function of the
projectile incoming velocity, is similar to that for electron scattering for a
range of velocities. However, at the lower velocities, the total integrated
cross section for positron scattering is in general different from both
positronium and electron scattering. It is planned to use the Kohn and inverse
Kohn variational methods in the scattering calculations. These methods are non-
perturbative and are appropriate to use at low energies where correlations are
important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.