* 2207238
* Enabling Tailored Selectivity of Ion-Selective Membranes with Dual-Driving Force Operation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ngai Yin Yip, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2025
* USD 349,991.00

Technologies that enable the selective separation of different ions in aqueous
mixtures are required for many essential energy, water, and environmental
separations processes. Ion-selective membranes (ISMs) are polymeric films with
charged ionic functional groups that allow the transport of oppositely-charged
species (counterions) through the membrane while retaining like-charged ions
(co-ions). A driving force (electrostatic potential) is applied to transport
ions through the membrane. ISMs have been used in commercial applications such
as fuel cells and electrodialysis desalination, but they exhibit performance
limitations that preclude their application under many industrially-relevant
conditions. First, ISMs suffer from diminished selectivity between counter- and
co-ions at higher electrolyte concentrations. ISMs are also unable to
discriminate between counterions with the same valency. This project will
investigate using a second, simultaneous driving force (hydraulic
pressurization) to alter the relative permeation of different ions. By
coordinating the magnitude and direction of the two driving forces, termed
“dual-driving force” operation, the two shortcomings in ISM selectivity above
may be overcome. The development of more selective ion separation technologies
can unlock opportunities for resource recovery from nontraditional source
waters, including recovering lithium from geothermal brines, nitrogen and
phosphorus from municipal and industrial wastewaters, rare earth elements from
mining waste streams, and uranyl ions from seawater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to achieve enhanced selectivities in ISM
separations by purposeful control of two opposing driving forces for ion
transport, i.e., dual-driving force operation. The specific objectives of the
research are: 1) develop a membrane fabrication platform for composite ion-
selective membranes in dual-driving force operation, 2) demonstrate the rational
control of dual-driving force operation to enhance ISM selectivity for
counterions with different mobilities, and 3) engineer the suppression of co-ion
leakage using dual-driving force operation to improve ISM permselectivity.
Successful execution of the project will enable the ISMs to i) depart from the
affinity-mobility constraint on counterion transport and ii) attain improved
exclusion of co-ions even at elevated solution ionic strengths. The research
will systematically study the underlying factors governing transport and
selectivity in ISMs and provide mechanistic insights into membrane design and
operation strategies. The project will integrate education and research to train
and prepare graduate, undergraduate, and high school students in STEM. The PI
will engage in activities including: (i) developing modules for K-12 education
and public outreach, (ii) enhancing undergraduate and graduate courses by
integrating scientific concepts and technical principles of the research into
class syllabus, and (iii) providing undergraduate research opportunities through
structured programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.