* 2207659
* Topics In General Relativity
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Andrew Strominger, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2025
* USD 403,935.00

The PI's group will push forward at the boundaries of our understanding of both
classical and quantum aspects of Einstein's theory of general relativity. The
overarching goal is to find a way to describe the gravitational force in terms
of quantum mechanics: two fields that have resisted unification for more than a
century. The projects described here build on a recent synthesis of long-
established techniques developed in the study of soft theorems by particle
theorists and in the study by relativists of the asymptotic boundaries of
spacetime. This synthesis has ignited a fertile collaboration between physicists
in disparate fields from twistor theory to LIGO to string theory. It has led to
both new experimental predictions (of novel memory effects) and new concrete
insights into spacetime as a quantum theory on the celestial sphere as
presciently hypothesized long ago by Newman and Penrose and recently
reincarnated as the holographic principle. This enterprise in being driven by an
unusually diverse and young group of theoretical
physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strominger and collaborators will continue
their investigation of the infinitely many nontrivially- acting exact symmetries
implied by the Einstein equations. These arise in the deep infrared, both in
asymptotically flat spacetimes at null infinity – where they are beautifully and
powerfully recast as symmetries of the celestial sphere – and near the horizon
of a black hole. This theoretical research has potential implications for
gravitational scattering, gravitational memory, upcoming observations at the
Event Horizon Telescope (EHT), and the black hole information paradox. They will
further develop the powerful and exact triangular equivalence of three
ubiquitous phenomena: memory, soft theorems, and asymptotic symmetries. Soft
theorems in quantum field theory relate multi-particle scattering process with
and without insertions of “soft” (low-energy) particles, such as gravitons.
Asymptotic symmetries (such as BMS) are diffeomorphisms that act nontrivially on
the physical data at infinity. Soft theorems can be derived as quantum matrix
elements of conservation laws associated to the asymptotic symmetries, and are
the Fourier transform of the formula for the gravitational memory effect. This
research program will develop the many recurring instances of this triangular
equivalence in both gravity and gauge theory. They intend to answer the central
question of how to enumerate all the non- trivial asymptotic symmetries of
general relativity in four asymptotically flat spacetime dimensions. In the past
grant cycle, it was shown that gravitational scattering amplitudes can be recast
as conformal correlators on the celestial sphere at null infinity, where the
powerful tools of two-dimensional conformal field theory can be exploited,
bringing a complete understanding of the nontrivial asymptotic symmetries within
future reach. Very recently it was that physically observable symmetries
organize into the group known as w(1+infinity), a significant step that provides
direct connections to twistor theory. Applied to black holes, the triangular
structure implies that, far from being bald featureless objects, even classical
black holes carry an infinite head of “soft hair.” This insight has led to new
lines of inquiry into the black hole information paradox. Observational
signatures of various Kerr black hole symmetries will be investigated. General
relativity implies that the dynamics of the near-horizon region of extreme Kerr
and light rays near the photon ring of any Kerr black hole both display
conformal scaling symmetries. Advances in precision black hole imaging are
beginning to allow astronomers to observe the regions of spacetime governed by
these symmetries, and the project will explore their potential observational
consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.