* 2207050
* NSF-ANR: Detailed and Mechanistic Characterization of TAD Boundaries Using Complementary Single-Molecule Sequencing and Super-Resolution Imaging Approaches
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Eric Joyce, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 01/31/2025
* USD 325,000.00

Eukaryotic genomes encode genetic information in their linear sequence, but
appropriate expression of genes requires chromosomes to fold into complex and
spatially distinct three-dimensional structures. Despite the remarkable
conservation of these organizational features, there is limited understanding of
how they enable chromosome function. A major leap forward in linking genome
structure to function has been the discovery of Topologically Associating
Domains (TADs), which are regional units of mammalian genomes implicated in gene
regulation as well as DNA replication, repair and recombination. The boundaries
between TADs are thought to prevent the “spreading” of molecular machineries
involved in various processes. This research project aims to clarify the complex
nature of TAD boundaries and better understand how they enable TAD structure and
function. The project will also offer cross-disciplinary training opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate students in complementary experimental and
bioinformatic methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current experimental and in-silico
models for TAD formation include simplified TAD boundaries consisting of
punctuated and stable binding of CTCF protein. In contrast, recent evidence
indicates that the boundaries are extended, dynamic and exhibit cell-to-cell
variability. This project will employ novel single-molecule genomics approaches
coupled with super-resolution imaging to identify and quantify the genetic
elements that insulate neighboring TADs in single cells. The outcomes can help
update models of TAD formation and improve understanding and prediction of how
the boundaries contribute to TAD structure, dynamics and function. This new
knowledge could in turn help identify mechanisms whereby uncharacterized genetic
elements (e.g., identified in GWAS studies) cause subtle changes to gene
regulation, DNA replication, repair and recombination. It may also help explain
how TAD structure can be reorganized upon inherited or acquired changes to the
non-coding genome (e.g., structural variation,
polymorphisms).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/France project is
supported by the US National Science Foundation and the French Agence Nationale
de la Recherche, where NSF funds the US investigator and ANR funds the partners
in France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.