* 2207756
* Greens Functions and the Nuclear Many-Body Problem
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Willem Dickhoff, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The properties of nuclei with extreme neutron to proton ratios are becoming
available for experimental scrutiny at facilities like the Facility for Rare
Isotope Beams (FRIB) starting shortly on the campus of Michigan State
University. Most of the experimental probes to study these exotic nuclei involve
particles that interact strongly themselves making it difficult to extract the
properties of individual protons or neutrons in these exotic systems. The
project aims at overcoming this difficulty by providing a simultaneous
description of positive energy nucleons, the domain of elastic scattering, and
bound nucleons, the domain of nuclear structure, using the framework of the
propagator method of quantum mechanics. This approach will provide critical
insights into the properties of very neutron-rich nuclei, and is therefore
relevant for the physics of neutron stars by clarifying where neutrons are found
with respect to the distribution of protons and how neutrons are captured by
neutron-rich nuclei. The PI will mentor graduate students in this research and
collaborate with experimental colleagues who will perform related
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The propagator method will be utilized with
non-local potentials constrained by experimental data that allow for the
accurate description of ground-state properties of nuclei by the method of
dispersion relations. Simultaneously, this implementation will be able to
describe or predict all relevant experimental data in the continuum including
elastic scattering cross sections. It will therefore be possible to study
various nuclear reactions using the ingredients of this method in analogy to the
successful analysis of electron-induced proton knockout reactions thereby
clarifying the properties of protons and neutrons in exotic nuclei as well as
suggesting relevant new experiments. In particular reactions involving deuterons
will be studied employing potentials that are nonlocal and obey dispersion
relations. Continued interest in the prediction of the neutron distribution for
nuclei with excess neutrons will be maintained. An extension of the method will
be developed to allow a simultaneous description of response functions. The
propagator method will also be employed to calculate the properties of nuclei by
starting from the underlying interactions between nucleons as constrained by the
symmetries of the fundamental theory of quarks and gluons, Quantum Chromo
Dynamics and the available data for the properties of two nucleons. Such
calculations will be applied with a new strategy that allows the ab initio
calculation of scattering properties of heavier nuclei that have not been
studied in this way to date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.