* 2207700
* Collaborative Research: CRCNS Research Proposal: Adaptive Decision Rules in Dynamic Environments
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Zachary Kilpatrick, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 242,421.00

When decisions are made, which can be as simple as where to have lunch or as
complicated as what career to pursue, time is often spent deliberating over
uncertain evidence and possible outcomes. This deliberation process is central
to behavioral and cognitive flexibility but requires overcoming a major
challenge: determining when to stop deliberating and commit to a course of
action. Many models that have been used to study human decision-making and to
implement machine decision-making assume that decision commitment occurs when
the accumulated evidence reaches a fixed value or bound. These “accumulate-to-
bound” models, whose development last century helped formalize and improve
decisions related to codebreaking, manufacturing, and other real-world
applications, have also provided a useful starting point for understanding
decision commitment in the brain. However, fixed bounds are most appropriate
under fixed conditions, which are often used in laboratory experiments but
rarely encountered in the real world. The goal of this study is to move beyond
the “fixed bound” form of decision commitment and instead consider more flexible
ways the brain uses to end deliberating and arrive at a decision. The research
starts with a new, mathematically grounded theory that describes the advantages
of using flexible forms of commitment under changing conditions. The Principal
Investigators (PIs) then use this theory to design and interpret experiments
that will provide a comprehensive new view of how human brains commit to
decisions even when they are based on deliberations that occur during uncertain
and changing conditions. This work will provide interdisciplinary training at
the interface of mathematics, cognitive science, psychology, and neuroscience
for undergraduate and graduate students from diverse backgrounds. The PIs will
use research-related activities to encourage the participation of
underrepresented groups in science. Also, the PIs will develop and disseminate
resources, including novel datasets and analytic tools, that will benefit
research and education in how the brain makes decisions. Finally, the PIs will
increase public awareness of computational neuroscience and address the urgent
need to increase scientific literacy and understanding of how science can
benefit society. This will be accomplished via public lectures, contributions to
the program “Engines of Our Ingenuity” broadcast by National Public Radio
stations nationwide, Brain Awareness Week activities, and contributions to a
website that explains brain research to non-specialists.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Deliberative decisions free the brain from the immediacy of reflexive
processing but pose a critical challenge: how does the brain decide when to stop
deliberating and commit to a course of action? Our understanding of this
commitment process has been dominated by a computational framework that assumes
decisions are terminated once accumulated evidence reaches a predefined level or
bound. These “accumulate-to-bound” models have close ties to normative theory
and can explain a range of behavioral and neural findings. However, they are
optimal only under the highly restrictive conditions used in many decision
studies, in which the informativeness, rate of acquisition, and other features
of the evidence are stable and known in advance. It is not known how the brain
balances decision deliberation and commitment more generally, when temporally
extended decisions must contend with our dynamic and uncertain world. The goal
is to advance our understanding of the decision rules used by the brain under
these conditions. The PIs start with a novel theoretical foundation that
includes flexible decision bounds that are not predefined but instead can be
updated while the decision is being formed to optimize performance even under
changing conditions. They use this framework to guide the design and analysis of
behavioral studies in humans and combine behavioral and neurophysiological
studies in non-human primates, which they use to test their primary hypothesis
that the primate brain uses dynamic, adaptive rules to support rational
decision-making in changing and uncertain
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS) within the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate (MPS), Division of Information and Intelligent Systems (IIS) in the
Directorate of Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE), and
Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences (BCS) within the Directorate for
Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.