* 2207795
* Studying Successful Doctoral Students in Mathematics from Underrepresented Groups
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Michael Young, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 10/31/2023
* USD 961,684.00

Iowa State University (ISU) in partnership with researchers at the Education
Development Center (EDC) and the University of North Carolina Charlotte will
implement an NSF EHR Core Research (ECR) project to study the experiences,
perspectives, and stories of successful doctoral students and recent PhDs from
underrepresented groups in mathematics. The project will develop interview
instruments and conduct in-depth, semi-structured interviews with four cohorts:
newly accepted students, early graduate students (pre-qualifying exams),
advanced graduate students (dissertation level), and recent PhDs (0-5 years
since graduation). The interview instruments could be useful to the field beyond
this project and the use of these four cohorts will add to the current
literature. The research questions in the study are: What are lived experiences
of successful underrepresented students who are pursuing mathematics PhDs? and
What formal and informal structures are perceived by doctoral students as
effective supports? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will build knowledge to
inform decisions about changing mathematics department cultures and practices to
better recruit, retain and graduate mathematicians from underrepresented groups.
The project will result in survey results from 100 graduate students and recent
graduates and twelve composite counterstories illustrating the student
experiences and support systems that result in success for students from
underrepresented groups. The counterstories and other results are expected to
disrupt current perceptions about who can be successful in graduate school, and
how. The project includes plans for strategic dissemination of the research
results to stakeholders and practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.