* 2207998
* RUI: Advancing Gravitational-Wave Optics to Further Explore the Cosmos
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Joshua Smith, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2025
* USD 355,683.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. Albert
Einstein predicted gravitational waves as a consequence of general relativity in
1916. A century later, the NSF-funded Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave
Observatory (LIGO) opened a new window on the universe by observing
gravitational waves from merging black holes. LIGO and its international
partners Virgo and Kagra have since detected gravitational waves from nearly 100
systems. Work is underway to extend the reach of LIGO through the Advanced LIGO+
(A+) upgrades and a potential cryogenic silicon detector, Voyager. A next-
generation US observatory, Cosmic Explorer, is also being developed. These
detectors will use optical technology to peer deeply into the universe’s dark
side and open a wide discovery aperture to the novel and unknown. This project
will engage students and faculty at California State University, Fullerton
(CSUF) in experimental research aimed at advancing optical technology to further
explore the cosmos with gravitational waves. Students and the PI will
characterize and develop techniques to reduce the amount of laser light
scattered by optical coatings. They will measure the optical scattering of
silicon at cryogenic temperatures and estimate its effects on gravitational-wave
detector performance. They will map the laser light loss due to birefringence of
silicon, at the wavelength and temperature planned for Voyager and possible
cryogenic realizations of Cosmic Explorer, for the first time. These studies
will help A+ to double the rate of gravitational-wave observations and Voyager
and Cosmic Explorer to observe black hole and neutron star collisions to the era
of the first stars. This work will additionally contribute to the field of
optics and potentially lead to improvements in commercial optics. Conducting
this research at CSUF will have a disproportionately positive impact on students
from groups traditionally underrepresented in physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will engage students and faculty at California State University,
Fullerton (CSUF) in experimental research aimed at advancing optical technology
to further explore the cosmos with gravitational waves. To achieve their goals,
A+ and Cosmic Explorer require room-temperature optical coatings for 1-micron-
wavelength laser light that have improved thermal noise, with still excellent
optical properties, including optical scatter. Heat treatment (annealing) of
coatings has been shown to decrease both their thermal noise and optical
scatter. Students and the PI will employ an annealing scatterometer and an
angle-resolved scatterometer to characterize and develop techniques to reduce
scattering from the most promising coatings. Voyager technology could extend the
reach of LIGO and Cosmic Explorer by reducing thermal noise and thermal
aberrations using crystalline silicon optics operated at cryogenic temperatures
(123 K, a zero crossing of silicon’s thermal expansion coefficient). The PI and
students will use a cryogenic testbed to measure the surface, bulk, and coated
optical scattering for high-purity crystalline silicon at cryogenic temperatures
and estimate its effects on gravitational-wave detector performance. Optical
losses due to birefringence in these transparent crystalline silicon optics
could also decrease the astrophysical reach of future detectors. The PI and
students will map the birefringence of crystalline silicon at 2-micron-
wavelength and 123 K for the first time, using an optical cavity. These studies
will help A+ to double the rate of gravitational-wave observations and Voyager
and possible cryogenic realizations of Cosmic Explorer to observe black hole and
neutron star collisions to the era of the first stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.