* 2207162
* Electron and Nuclear Spin Interactions with Periodic Optical Pumping
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Vanessa Sih, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2025
* USD 470,652.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The basic building block of matter is the
atom which is made of electrons and the nucleus. Electrons have charges which
can be made to flow, creating electric currents used in information processing
and storage in electronics. Electrons and nuclei possess another fundamental
property called “spin”, which can be utilized for quantum computing and offers a
pathway for the more efficient integration of electronics with magnetic data
storage. This project uses short light pulses to study the spins of electrons
and the nuclei of semiconductor materials. The goal is to gain understanding of
how periodic optical pumping can be used to control the nuclear spins.
Understanding how electron and nuclear spins behave and interact contributes to
the development of new technologies that could lead to faster and more efficient
information processing, more robust platforms for quantum information processing
and communication, and improved magnetic resonance imaging. The research also
provides valuable training to students in semiconductor physics, state-of-the-
art optical measurements, data acquisition and analysis, and numerical modeling.
Graduates are prepared to pursue careers in the semiconductor and photonics
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The project
investigates the effect of periodic electron spin pumping on dynamic nuclear
polarization in semiconductors with the goal of improving understanding of the
coupled electron-nuclear spin system and how it is affected by material
parameters, applied magnetic field, and light. Controlling the interactions
between electron and nuclear spins is of great interest for spin-based quantum
information processing, quantum communication, and magnetic resonance imaging.
The nuclear spin depolarization time typically exceeds the electron spin
lifetime by several orders of magnitude, providing a way to store information
over longer time scales. In addition, nuclear spin fluctuations can limit the
electron spin coherence time for localized electrons, so developing methods to
reduce the effects of nuclear spin fluctuations can enhance the electron spin
coherence time. The research utilizes optical pump-probe measurement techniques
and numerical modeling to study dynamic nuclear spin polarization phenomena,
including nuclear-induced frequency focusing, and aims to enable ways to more
precisely control the nuclear spin system using designed localized pulse
sequences to generate and rotate electron spin polarization. The project
provides exciting opportunities for student training in semiconductor physics,
optical spectroscopy, and numerical modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.