* 2207349
* Exploring Strong-Field Gravity through Gravitational-Wave and Multimessenger Observations
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Kento Yagi, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2023
* USD 59,977.00

The overarching goal of this project is to reveal how well one can ultimately
probe the nature of strong, dynamical, and nonlinear gravity through
gravitational-wave observations of black holes and multimessenger observations
of neutron stars. Currently, one of the biggest challenges in testing General
Relativity with gravitational waves from binary black hole coalescences is the
lack of complete gravitational waveforms from theories beyond General Relativity
that are valid throughout the inspiral, merger, and ringdown of the binary
evolution. Moreover, for binary neutron stars, certain tests of General
Relativity are limited by uncertainties in nuclear matter properties. The PI
will tackle these problems by (I) constructing, for the first time,
gravitational waveforms in theories beyond General Relativity that are valid in
all of the inspiral-merger-ringdown phases, and (II) performing a comprehensive
study of multimessenger tests of General Relativity with neutron star
observations by avoiding uncertainties in nuclear physics. The gravitational
waveform models to be developed will be ready to use and can be widely adopted
by the gravitational wave community and beyond. Multimessenger tests of General
Relativity with neutron star observations are extremely timely, and the outcome
of both projects will impact various communities in physics and beyond,
including gravitational physics, particle physics, nuclear physics, and
astrophysics. The long-term educational goal of the project is to connect,
globally, potential next-generation scientists and convey the beauty and
excitement of physics, in particular General Relativity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the construction of the complete gravitational
waveforms, the PI will work in a specific gravitational theory motivated by
string theory, in which some simulations are already available. The PI and
collaborators will produce more simulation data for the merger-ringdown and will
stitch them against analytic waveforms during the inspiral. These complete
waveforms allow one to probe more precisely theories beyond General Relativity
with the existing gravitational wave events and will assist in searches for new
physics with future observations. For multi-messenger tests, the PI will employ
universal relations among certain neutron star observables that do not depend
sensitively on the unknown internal structure of neutron stars. The PI will
study such relations in a few theories beyond General Relativity that either
introduce additional scalar/vector fields or introduce modifications in the high
curvature regime. The PI will then study how well one can probe these theories
through current and future multimessenger observations. To achieve the
educational goal, the PI's team will develop an online game on General
Relativity and gravitational waves to reach out to young players across the
world. In the game instructions, the PI will provide a brief description of
General Relativity, black holes, and gravitational waves, conveying the
excitement and key aspects of recent Nobel-prize winning physics. Some students
will be involved in the game development, integrating the research and
educational activities. The PI will make the source codes publicly available so
that anyone can develop their own games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.