* 2207295
* Collaborative Research: Regulatory Pragmatism and Building Codes for Hazard-Resilient Housing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Abbie Liel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 276,671.00

Few aspects of life are more important to people than their homes. Building
codes are a major form of regulation and one of the primary mechanisms by which
states and societies try to make their homes safe in the face of hazards like
hurricanes and earthquakes. This project advances the science needed to
understand and improve compliance with key hazard-resistant practices in the
design and construction of housing. It approaches this challenge using the
concept of regulatory pragmatism, which argues that improving housing stock
resilience and reducing disaster impacts for housing may necessitate
prioritizing those aspects of the building code that allow builders to most
cheaply and effectively reach these goals. Through engineering assessment,
combined with interviews and surveys of builders and residents, this project is
collecting the data necessary to design useful interventions to increase code
compliance with key hazard-resistant building practices and, in so doing,
protect human life and the built environment from the effects of a disaster.
Despite the fact that building codes touch the lives of many, there is little
research studying how regulatory strategies and sound engineering can together
reduce disaster risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project work aims to examine
compliance with key hazard-resistant building practices among builders and
households, and explore the factors that influence compliance, including
household and builder attitudes and experiences, local regulations, perceived
and real costs, and local building practices. Crucially, in parallel, the
project will use performance-based engineering methods to quantify the benefits
and risks associated with complying with hazard-resistant building practices in
terms of housing safety and post-event housing occupancy. These findings will be
used to identify and prioritize key building practices based on their
effectiveness in reducing disaster risk and their achievability (e.g., in terms
of cost and compatibility with local building practices). Building on initial
findings, the project will then consider the design and assessment of a
pragmatic, compliance-fostering intervention. The project is conducted in two
multi-hazard U.S. contexts, Alaska and Puerto Rico, providing a most-different
comparison to explore how building practices, compliance, and intervention
outcomes differ based on community characteristics. It will also involve
interdisciplinary training of students supporting the development of a workforce
trained to address regulatory and engineering challenges associated with
disaster resilient housing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.