* 2207048
* RUI New Generation of AI-Augmented Quantum Monte Carlo Libraries to Guide the Search for Exotic Superfluid Phases in Cold Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ettore Vitali, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2025
* USD 150,000.00

This project will interface well-established state-of-the-art numerical
techniques with innovative artificial intelligence tools to compute equilibrium
and dynamical properties of strongly correlated Fermi superfluids. In the very
active field of ultracold atoms, the results of this project will guide
experimental searches for exotic superfluid phases, such as non-trivial
superfluid states of matter that rely on unconventional pairing mechanisms or
the existence of fascinating topological superfluids. The new insights that will
come from this project may have a deep impact in physics, even beyond the field
of cold atoms, and may pave the way for a deeper understanding of superfluid
states in unconventional superconductors and in nuclear matter. Novel data
analysis tools and visualization techniques will be developed to capture the
most important physical mechanisms. The PI plans to dedicate substantial effort
to make the methods and topics accessible to as many people as possible, and to
address novel ways to teach quantum mechanics. Students will be able to run
virtual experiments and to explore new phases of matter and will have a unique
opportunity to learn how to become the scientists of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new generation of auxiliary-field quantum Monte
Carlo techniques will be proposed: artificial intelligence tools will guide a
self-consistent procedure to minimize the bias due to the approximations
underlying the technique. This will be achieved through the optimization of the
trial wave function within a feedback process which learns from the quantum
Monte Carlo data. This project is expected to generate accurate non-perturbative
data for Fermi superfluids. The study will address both equilibrium properties,
like pairing, density and spin correlations, and dynamical properties, like
spectral functions and dynamical structure factors, which give access to the
low-energy excitations of the systems. The accurate numerical data will provide
guidance to the experiments in the major challenge of detecting new exotic
phases in cold atoms, with particular focus on complex intertwined orders in
spin-polarized systems when spin-orbit coupling is present. Substantial advances
in the fundamental understanding of the physical mechanisms underlying such
superfluid phases are also expected. The formation of Cooper pairs with finite
momentum in spin-polarized systems will be addressed, the interplay with density
and spin order will be studied and the role of spin-orbit coupling will be
investigated, in connection with the possibility of observing non-trivial
topological properties. The study of the manifold of excited states of a system
through the calculation of dynamical correlations will allow the PI to directly
compare the predictions with spectroscopy and scattering experiments and to
compute the dispersion of collective modes, which is crucial for the
experimental detection of exotic phases. In addition to guiding experimental
searches, the results will also serve as valuable benchmarks for many-body
theories and computational methods for strongly correlated systems, where simple
perturbative approaches are doomed to fail. Finally, the efforts that the PI
plans to dedicate to the development of novel visualization tools to capture the
key physical mechanisms are expected to create the best environment to train the
next generation of students, teachers and researchers in quantum mechanics,
starting from their undergraduate studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.