* 2207518
* Simulating Quantum Spin Models with Laser-Cooled Molecules in Optical Tweezer Arrays
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Lawrence Cheuk, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 06/30/2025
* USD 355,982.00

Quantum mechanics plays a central role in many questions in physics ranging from
how blackholes behave to why magnets exist. Although the quantum mechanics of
isolated single particles is well-understood and has led to a wide variety of
modern-day technologies such as lasers and atomic clocks, systems of interacting
quantum particles are not nearly as well-understood. Such systems offer
interesting possibilities such as exhibiting superconductivity or forming the
basis of quantum computers, but the properties of interacting quantum systems
are difficult to predict and in many cases are beyond the capabilities of the
most powerful computers. To address this challenge, the research team will build
a novel “quantum simulator” based on molecules at ultracold temperatures held by
focused laser beams. The platform will harness quantum interactions inherent to
molecules to explore a variety of interacting quantum models. These explorations
could not only improve our understanding of complex quantum systems, but
potentially provide new insight for practical applications such as novel quantum
materials and quantum-enhanced sensors. In addition, the research has direct
societal impact through the training of graduate and undergraduate students.
With the ever-growing societal focus on quantum science and its promises, the
research effort will contribute to building a quantum-literate workforce in
industry, national labs and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models of
interacting quantum spins have deep connections to many diverse areas of
physics. Various spin models can capture the magnetic behavior of real-life
materials or even mimic properties of blackholes. A key challenge in studying
large-scale spin systems is predicting their resulting quantum dynamics, which
is often beyond the reach of state-of-the-art theory. While some spin models can
be experimentally explored using existing quantum platforms based on neutral
atoms and ions, the variety of accessible models is limited. To address this
limitation, the research team will develop a novel quantum simulator leveraging
two nascent technologies, laser-cooled molecules and programmable arrays of
optical tweezer traps. By mapping quantum spins to the quantum rotations of
molecules, and using the inherent electric dipolar interactions between
molecules, the molecule-based quantum simulator could provide access to a
variety of long-ranged interacting spin models in intermediate-sized arrays.
Specifically, the team will 1) develop the necessary building blocks of the new
molecule-based quantum simulator, which include developing methods to initialize
and detect large arrays of molecules; and 2) create and verify effective long-
range spin-spin interactions in 1D molecular arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.