* 2207109
* The Origin and Expansion of Silica Biomineralization and Its Influence on the Global Silica Cycle
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Elizabeth Trower, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 471,604.00

Some marine organisms construct their skeletons from opaline silica. In modern
oceans, this process—silica biomineralization—plays an important role in the
regulation of Earth’s climate and major elemental cycles. Observations from the
rock record offer conflicting views on how long ago the first silica
biomineralizers evolved and whether they played as important a role in
regulating the oceans as their modern relatives. This project will investigate
these questions by measuring the stable isotope composition of silicon in the
oldest fossils of sponges and radiolarians, focusing on samples from the western
US ranging in age from 520-440 million years. This project will include research
training for graduate, undergraduate, and high school students; science
engagement experiences for &gt;200 elementary school girls; and the development
of a museum exhibit on the first silica biomineralizers.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The evolution and expansion of silica biomineralization at the
beginning of the Paleozoic Era initiated the transformation of the silica cycle
from a system governed by strictly abiotic reactions to the biologically-
dominated cycle that characterizes modern oceans. Our current understanding of
this transition is limited by conflicting data on the timing of the evolution
and expansion of the first silica biomineralizers and untested hypotheses about
their influence on the silica cycle. This project will bridge this knowledge gap
by address two primary research objectives: (1) document the preservational
modes of fossil sponge spicules and radiolarians to evaluate their influence on
preservation of primary Si isotope values; and (2) build an improved Cambrian-
Ordovician record of Si isotope values in fossil sponge spicules and
radiolarians. This work will include Si and O isotope ratio analyses of
siliceous fossils in situ via secondary ion mass spectrometry, combined with
additional microanalytical characterization via micro X-ray fluorescence, Raman
microspectroscopy, and wavelength-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, and a suite of
models describing the marine silica cycle. These data will provide a novel
approach to resolving long-standing questions surrounding the early Paleozoic
biological transformation of the global silica cycle, including how the marine
system responded to major perturbations in silicate weathering fluxes driven by
climate and tectonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.