* 2207209
* RUI: Atomic Physics with A Twist
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Allison Harris, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2025
* USD 170,895.00

The ability to image and control electron dynamics at the atomic scale has led
to a deeper understanding of atomic structures and interactions, which in turn
has inspired technological advances in areas such as microscopy, quantum
computing, and quantum communication. Many of these advances use ultrashort
light pulses or electron beams to control and observe energy and momentum
properties of atomic electrons on their natural attosecond timescale (a
billionth of a billionth of a second). Recently, so-called twisted attosecond
laser pulses and electron beams have become available. These beams carry orbital
angular momentum, which opens the door to controlling not just the energy and
momentum properties of atomic electrons, but also their rotational properties.
This research will develop and apply theoretical models for using ultrashort
twisted laser pulses and twisted electron beams to image and control the
rotational properties of atomic electrons. It will promote the progress of
attosecond physics by developing new techniques for studying twisted electron
creation, characterizing the temporal dynamics of previously inaccessible atomic
states, and establishing the efficiency of the creation of atomic states used
quantum computing applications. These projects will provide the theoretical
underpinning for future experiments and technological developments, demonstrate
the advantages of twisted light and electrons in controlling atomic-level
rotational motion, and enhance the U.S. influence in attosecond physics. In
addition, the research will train the next generation of the science and
technology workforce by providing cutting-edge research opportunities to
undergraduate students who will gain necessary career skills through hands-on
participation in model development, implementation, and analysis. Students will
present their results at regional and national conferences, giving them a more
diverse view of scientific research and enhancing their access to science and
technology careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use computational
modeling to (1) develop the new techniques of twisted attosecond energy and
angular streaking using Laguerre-Gauss optical vortex pulses and (2) determine
if twisted optical and electron wave packets can improve the efficiency of
circular Rydberg atom production for use in quantum computing applications. In
the first project, the research will combine optical vortex wave packets with
attosecond streaking techniques to study the effects of angular momentum on the
creation of twisted photoelectrons, the ionization time delay between magnetic
sublevels, and the tunneling barriers of different angular momentum states.
Calculations will be performed using the time-dependent Schroedinger equation
and semi-classical models to provide both quantitative and qualitative insight.
This research will result in theoretical models that outline new twisted
attosecond streaking techniques and will have far-reaching implications for
fundamental quantum mechanics and applications in fields such as chemical
reaction control and charge migration in solid state physics. In the second
project, the efficiency with which twisted photons and electrons can be used to
create circular Rydberg states will be determined. The research will result in a
comprehensive dataset detailing which Rydberg states are most accessible through
twisted wave packet excitation and provide much-needed information for future
applications that have the potential to transform fields such as quantum
computing and quantum simulation. Both projects will enhance the Illinois STEM
workforce by providing cutting-edge training opportunities to a diverse group of
undergraduate students from the freshman to senior
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.