* 2207999
* Support for LIGO Data Analysis and Instrumentation Research at the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Teviet Creighton, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2025
* USD 220,000.00

Since detecting gravitational waves (GW) for the first time in 2015, efforts
have shifted towards making NSF's Laser Interferometric Gravitational-Wave
Observatory (LGO) a part of multi-messenger astronomy observations that are
changing our understanding of astrophysics and cosmology. In order to look
farther and more precisely at the universe with gravitational wave
observatories, advances in detector instrumentation and calibration must be
pursued. The scientific payoff from such improvements will be enormous but
extending the scientific reach of LIGO also becomes more challenging with every
generation of GW detectors. This award supports research to improve the accuracy
of the length response from the advanced LIGO detectors, so as to improve the
wide-band response calibration of the detectors for incoming gravitational
waves. At the same time, studies are supported to investigate and mitigate the
effects of Newtonian Noise that are created through turbulent airflow or
movement of masses in the vicinity of the detectors. In addition to its impact
on our fundamental understanding of the Universe, the funded research is also a
great opportunity to train graduate students in UTRGVs new Physics PhD program
in GW research and strengthen the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
upcoming O4 run of the LIGO detectors, the detection of other types of sources
and even unknown ones is becoming more likely. With the goal of significantly
increasing the science reach of the advanced detectors, the team will work on
projects in the following major areas. Instrumentation: improvements in the area
of the Photon Calibrators to determine the exact length response for the aLIGO
interferometer configuration, in essence the calibration of the measured
gravitational wave amplitude, by improving the Photon Calibrator (PCal) response
through enhancements of the absolute power measurement and calibration of the
PCal system and through improvements of the theoretical model of the
gravitational wave calibration. Noise characterization: the development of a
numerical model to generate realistic finely sampled temperature fields and run
a full hydrodynamic simulation, to determine the frequency distribution of
turbulent vortices, and to see how turbulent airflow acts back on the detector
sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.