* 2207374
* Louis Stokes New STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: USM LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Janet Rutledge, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,802,147.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high-quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based recruitment and
retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in support of
populations underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic
Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native
Pacific Islanders. These strategies facilitate the production of well-prepared
students highly qualified and motivated to pursue graduate education or careers
in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United States (U.S.) to remain globally
competitive, it must tap into all its citizens' talent and provide exceptional
educational preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based
economy. The University System of Maryland LSAMP (USM LSAMP) program was
established in 1995 in response to the need for a more diverse and skilled
technical workforce. That need still exists and is particularly acute in the
State of Maryland. The four universities- University of Maryland, Baltimore
County, the University of Maryland, College Park, the University of Maryland,
Eastern Shore, and Towson University, plus five community college collaborators-
Prince George's Community College, Anne Arundel Community College, Community
College of Baltimore County, Montgomery College, and Wor-Wic Community College
make up the Alliance. The goal of the Alliance is to increase the number of
undergraduates from underrepresented racial and ethnic backgrounds and make them
academically competitive, graduate school-ready, and transition well to graduate
programs. Students will gain a solid scientific identity and the necessary
knowledge, skills, competencies, and dispositions for educational and
professional success in STEM fields in the 21st century. USM LSAMP will
accomplish this goal by fortifying STEM pathways, facilitating activities
focused on improving academic performance, increasing access to undergraduate
research experiences, building a sense of community, contributing to the global
knowledge base for broadening participation in STEM, and fostering an inclusive
institutional culture shift across Alliance institutions. This goal and
strategies support the National Science Foundation's strategic plan to
"cultivate a world-class, broadly inclusive science and engineering workforce,
and expand the scientific literacy of all citizens."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
alliances' broadening participation research will contribute to the knowledge
base in different ways: The theory-driven study that simultaneously tests the
mediating roles of self-efficacy, research excitement, racial climate, science
identity, commitment to a STEM career, and sense of belonging in the pathways to
STEM persistence and success. The state-of-the-art statistical methods (i.e.,
propensity score matching, mediation analysis) used in this study allow more
robust causal inference and thus provide more rigorous evidence regarding the
theory-based model. This study tests whether the mediated effects of the USM
LSAMP program vary by gender, ethnicity, and transfer status. Potential findings
from this study will inform how to broaden participation in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics. Results of the research study will be disseminated
through publications, academic and professional conferences, websites, and on-
campus workshops to reach researchers, educators, administrators, and students
to inform future research, teaching, student success, and the development of
effective academic intervention programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.