* 2207935
* PHY: Accelerated Always-On Fully-Coherent Network Analysis for Gravitational Wave Searches
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Soumya Mohanty, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2025
* USD 120,000.00

The direct detection of Gravitational Waves (GWs) by the LIGO detectors in 2015
marks the dawn of a new era in astronomy. Now, a completely new way of observing
the Universe, especially extreme phenomena such as the merger of black holes, is
available to scientists that will bring revolutionary insights in astrophysics
and fundamental Physics. The detection of gravitational waves is enabled by
advances in instrumentation as well as the computer algorithms used to analyze
the copious amounts of data produced by them. The degree to which a data
analysis method can dig into the highly noisy data to reliably extract an
astrophysical signal -- its sensitivity -- underlines the science that can be
done with GW detectors. One of the most challenging data analysis problem at
present is the implementation of the optimal method, namely, fully-coherent all-
sky (FCAS) search, for analyzing data from the worldwide network of GW
detectors. While statistical theory suggests that this method has the highest
sensitivity, its high computational cost limits it at present to a sporadic
rather than always-on mode of use. Under this project, a fast FCAS search will
be implemented that will overcome this computational barrier. This will allow
data from a detector network to be analyzed in its entirety with the highest
achievable sensitivity. Implementing this project in a frontier area of science
at the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV), a minority serving
institution, will have far-reaching broader impacts in terms of attracting
students from under-represented groups to STEM. Through this project, students
will acquire advanced data analysis and computing skills that are transferable
across a wide variety of careers and relevant to national
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two main ingredients involved in the
acceleration of the FCAS search: a nature-inspired optimization algorithm called
Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), and a massively parallel implementation using
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs). For the latter, the PI will use a GPU cluster
under acquisition that is partially supported by an NSF-MRI grant. PSO is
modeled on the behavior of a bird flock trying to find the best source of food.
Here, it is being used to find the best-fit GW signal to the data. PSO by itself
leads to a 10-fold reduction in the computational cost of an FCAS search while
GPU acceleration provides an additional similar factor in speedup. A key aspect
of the project will be the development of novel vetoes for rejecting
instrumental non-GW signals ("glitches") that dominate the background rate of
false alarms. These vetoes are enabled by coherent network data analysis and the
exploration of unphysical sectors of signal parameter space by PSO. In addition,
novel data conditioning approaches will be used and tested in the search, such
as an adaptive spline fit based glitch estimation and subtraction algorithm. The
combination of an intrinsically more sensitive method and better vetoes could
potentially uncover new signals in open GW data and confirm marginal events.
This will create a more complete sample of the CBC source population that will
help astrophysicists achieve a better understanding of the formation channels
for the unusual binary systems that are being discovered. New sectors of signal
parameter space, such as binaries with sub-solar mass components, can be
efficiently explored with the accelerated code and tighter rate constraints will
be set in the absence of detections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.