* 2207011
* EAGER: Exploring Links between Iron and Phosphorus Nutrition of Antarctic Marine Phytoplankton
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Senjie Lin, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 12/31/2023
* USD 185,342.00

Phytoplankton are microscopic single-celled plants that grow at the sun-lit
surface of the ocean. In the Southern Ocean around Antarctica, phytoplankton
live in sub-optimal conditions because the amount of iron in seawater is
insufficient for growth. Moreover, the chemical composition of Southern Ocean
phytoplankton is distinct from that in other ocean regions, with a higher
proportion of phosphorus relative to other elements, a characteristic that
ultimately influences the distribution of nutrients ocean-wide. The researchers
hypothesize that the high phosphorus composition of phytoplankton in the
Southern Ocean is caused by their low iron content. Specifically, they postulate
that a phosphorus-rich molecule, phytic acid, is synthesized by phytoplankton in
order to assist in the storage of iron in designated cellular compartments, such
as vacuoles. Recent observations show that some phytoplankton can absorb phytic
acid, suggesting that it may be produced by certain species. Phytic acid is
pervasive in soils, wherein it aids absorption of iron via plant roots and could
similarly help phytoplankton in the Southern Ocean acquire iron via the cell
membranes. This project benefits the National Science Foundation's goals of
improving understanding of interactions between the Southern Ocean and the
global ocean, of expanding fundamental knowledge of Antarctic biota and
associated processes by focusing on phytoplankton species unique to the
Antarctic. As part of this project, the Department of Marine Sciences from the
College of Liberal Arts and Sciences at the University of Connecticut will
sponsor the recruitment, relocation and mentorship of a graduate student under-
represented in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to determine
whether the unusual elemental composition of phytoplankton at the Southern Ocean
is a result of anemia. The work will query whether inositol hexakisphosphate
(phytic acid) aids Antarctic phytoplankton acquire and store iron, resulting in
an elevated fraction of cellular phosphorus relative to other elements. The
researchers, including a graduate student, will conduct laboratory culture
experiments with phytoplankton strains isolated from the Southern Ocean. They
will grow cells in iron- deficient versus iron-replete media to see if their
phosphorus content is higher in iron-deficient conditions. They will test
whether cells grown with sufficient phosphorus acquire more iron, allowing them
to grow better in iron-deficient conditions than cells deriving from phosphorus-
poor conditions. They will also query whether cells grown in iron-deficient
conditions achieve faster growth rates in the presence of phytic acid. Results
will inform the design of CRISPR mutants with which to investigate phosphorus
and iron co-metabolism in Antarctic marine
phytoplankton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.