* 2207965
* Nanostructuring to enhance phase stability of austenitic steels during irradiation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Haiming Wen, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2025
* USD 390,063.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At an atomic level, nearly all
structural metals have a highly ordered arrangement of atoms. These arrangements
of atoms are known as “crystal structures” and they have a large impact on
material properties. In addition to structure, crystal size in metals (often
referred to as grain size) also plays a significant role in how metals behave
under loading or when exposed to various environments. Steels are one of the
most important and widely used structural metal today. Austenitic steels are a
particular type of steel having a face-centered cubic crystal structure and they
are used in many critical applications such as nuclear reactors. When exposed to
radiation, the crystal structure of these steels can change from face-centered
cubic to body-centered cubic which can degrade its properties and performance.
This project explores how and why the crystal structure of austenitic steels
change during irradiation, and seeks to develop ways to reduce this instability
by reducing the grain size to the nanometer scale. This research seeks to
produce nanostructured steels with significantly enhanced stability and
durability when exposed to radiation environments. Research collaborations
include partnerships among universities, national laboratories and industry
while educational and outreach activities are conducted with high-school,
undergraduate and graduate students of different backgrounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase
instability of metastable austenitic steels in service environments involving
intense irradiation and high temperature has been a long-standing problem,
posing significant impact to properties and performance. The central hypothesis
of this research is that nanostructuring of these metals will enhance their
phase stability during irradiation. The research objectives are to: (i) separate
irradiation and thermal effects caused by microstructural changes during
elevated-temperature irradiation; (ii) understand the mechanisms for
irradiation-induced polymorphic transformations and the resulting grain size
effect; and (iii) develop a strategy to stabilize small grains during
irradiation. This project involves in-situ and ex-situ ion-irradiation and
thermal annealing experiments combined with cutting-edge microstructural
characterization techniques to study irradiation-induced defects, solution
redistribution and phase instability in austenitic 304L stainless steel across a
range of grain sizes. This research explores phase instability during
irradiation as well as a novel strategy to utilize the nanostructuring approach
for designing austenitic steels with robust phase stability during irradiation.
The objectives of the educational and outreach components are to: (i) promote
interest in STEM disciplines among high school students; and (ii) improve
education, training and diversity of undergraduate and graduate students in
physical metallurgy and materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.