* 2207879
* Designing and Understanding High-performance Titin Polymers Using Synthetic Biology
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Fuzhong Zhang, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2025
* USD 458,490.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic biology offers a new route of
material production from renewable feedstock (such as biomass-derived sugars)
through environmentally-friendly processes. Furthermore, synthetic biology
enables more precise control over material properties. This project will use
synthetic biology to produce, characterize, and understand a new type of
protein-based fiber material, called titin polymers, that will be produced from
renewable feedstock using engineered bacteria. This project will provide
currently unknown details about sequence-property relationships in titin
polymers that can guide design of future high-performance biomaterials. This
project will also create multiple novel polymers from diverse protein and
organism sources that may have outstanding mechanical properties. Additionally,
this project will serve as a critical proof-of-concept for using synthetic
biology to not only produce biomaterials but also understand the molecular
mechanisms of biomaterials. The proposed synthetic biology strategy can be used
to study many other types of materials. This project will also benefit society
by creating new high-performance biomaterials that can potentially replace
synthetic fibers made from petroleum feedstock, thus reducing CO2 emission and
protecting the environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to use this synthetic biology
strategy to design, synthesize, characterize, and analyze a new type of ultra-
high molecular weight (UHMW) titin polymers to understand the relationship
between protein sequences and material mechanical properties. This project will
use synthetic biology approaches to synthesize a series of UHMW titin polymers
with different but precisely controlled monomer (i.e., immunoglobulin (Ig)
domain) compositions and orders and with mutations on either the surface or core
residues of the Ig domains. These different UHMW titin polymers will be spun
into fibers, and fiber mechanical properties will be characterized. By analyzing
the mechanical properties of fibers made from different titin polymers, this
project will uncover the sequence-property relationships that give rise to the
high tensile strength, toughness, and damping energy of the titin fibers.
Specific aims include (1) understanding the effect of Ig-Ig interactions on
fiber strength and toughness, (2) understanding the effect of Ig folding energy
on fiber damping energy, and (3) exploring diverse Ig domains from genome
database for novel polymers. Knowledge learned from this project will translate
into design rules to guide future engineering of microbially-produced high-
performance titin fibers with predictable properties for a broad range of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.