* 2207631
* RUI: Topological Excitations in Spin-1 and Spin-2 Bose-Einstein Condensates
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* David Hall, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 06/30/2025
* USD 426,117.00

Symmetry is one of the central organizing principles in the natural world. It
applies to the most energetic system we can contemplate - the early universe -
as well as to some of the least energetic, such as a dilute gas cooled to only
tens of billionths of a degree above absolute zero. This tabletop experimental
project uses the theme of symmetry to focus on the highly-controllable, low-
energy environment of an ultracold gas where direct experimental investigation
is possible. Although we often think of symmetry in terms of spatial patterns,
such as the regular structure of a crystal, symmetries can also be internal and
hidden from view. Their influence in such cases manifests itself in the type and
behavior of the particle-like (or "quasi-particle") excitations that can exist
within the medium. Examples of quasi-particles that can be observed in an
ultracold gas include monopoles, knots, skyrmions, and vortices, each of which
has an (as-yet unobserved) analogue in the cosmos. The project will study the
creation and time evolution of such quasi-particles in a medium with a broader
range of internal symmetries than in previous experiments. The resulting quasi-
particle behavior is expected to be more exotic: an ordinary collision between
two vortices, for instance, can become one in which connecting filaments develop
in the region between them, leaving behind a permanent physical record of the
encounter. The program provides opportunities for cutting-edge scientific and
technological training for undergraduate students, thereby contributing to the
education of the next generation of citizen-
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This experimental research program
explores the creation and time evolution of topological excitations in optically
trapped rubidium-87 Bose-Einstein condensates. The spin degree of freedom in
these superfluids leads to a variety of magnetic phases with different internal
symmetries. Each phase can host specific topological excitations. The Rb-87
condensate is especially interesting because it has both spin-1 and spin-2
ground state hyperfine manifolds. The spin-1 system is relatively simple, with
only two magnetic phases. It provides a convenient springboard from which to
understand the spin-2 system, which has five magnetic phases, two of which have
entirely discrete symmetries: cyclic-tetrahedral, and biaxial nematic. The
spin-2 Rb-87 system is not fully characterized, and immediate experimental goals
include (i) determining the ground state magnetic phase, and (ii) understanding
the baseline time-evolution of each magnetic phase. Topological excitations in
the biaxial nematic and cyclic-tetrahedral phases are of considerable interest
as the discrete symmetries permit vortices with fractional circulation.
Moreover, collisions between vortices in these phases are expected to yield
"rung vortices," which are permanent filaments that bridge the departing
vortices. Beyond vortices, the experiments will examine the creation and time
evolution of monopoles in the uniaxial nematic phase, which are expected to
decay into vortex rings, as well as of exotic skyrmions in the discrete-symmetry
magnetic phases. The different excitations will be generated by exposing the
condensate to carefully tailored time-dependent magnetic and optical fields, and
will be characterized using established imaging techniques. The results,
obtained by the PI and his undergraduate collaborators, are expected to
contribute directly to our scientific understanding of topological excitations
across many branches of physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.