* 2207577
* Injectable Nanoparticles for Soft Tissue Recovery and Strength Enhancement
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Joseph Freeman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2025
* USD 375,000.00

In the U.S., there are over 32 million traumatic and repetitive motion injuries
to ligaments and tendons each year, costing $30 billion. Sprains (ligament
injuries) and strains (tendon and muscle injuries) account for 5.7 million
visits to emergency rooms. In 2002, approximately 200,000 Americans required
ligament reconstructive surgery costing over $5 billion. Joint dislocations are
more frequent for those with connective tissue disorders like Ehlers-Danlos
Syndrome (EDS), a group of genetic connective tissue disorders that cause
defective collagen production. Patients with EDS frequently experience joint
dislocations from unstable joints that can be painful and debilitating. As a
solution to sprains, strains, and joint dislocations, this project proposes an
injectable therapy to return the tissue to its normal length and strengthen it
using a natural, bond-forming agent to prevent reinjury/future injury. This
project will also create research opportunities for underrepresented and first-
generation undergraduate students during the summers and throughout the school
year. It will also create opportunities for underrepresented students in
underserved elementary schools to learn about biomedical engineering through
presentations and hands-on experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to investigate the combination of a thermosensitive polymer and
crosslinking agent to quickly stabilize joints by restoring strength and
original length to damaged tendons and ligaments. This will be accomplished by
studying the contraction of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (pNIPAm) and the
effectiveness of epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) crosslinking in vivo. The
research approach is divided into three areas. First, collagen-binding
contractile nanoparticles will be created and evaluated. This step will alter
nanoparticle composition and pNIPAm concentration to maximize contraction and
bind to collagen fibers. Second, the EGCG release and its effect on cell
behavior and tissue strength will be evaluated. The concentrations of EGCG that
create maximum collagen crosslinking, while remaining nontoxic to surrounding
cells will be discovered. Third, the contractile and tissue strengthening
ability of the nanoparticles in vivo will be evaluated. Nanoparticles with
compositions based on the earlier two tasks will be injected into a damaged
tendon model. After injection, they will be evaluated for their effect on gait,
length after injection, and strength. If successful, this innovative, therapy
would benefit millions of people by increasing strength, improving wound
healing, and quickly stabilizing damaged joints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.