* 2207584
* Theoretical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Edward Witten, Institute For Advanced Study
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,200,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Edward Witten and a group
of postdoctoral researchers at the Institute for Advanced Study in
Princeton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is devoted to the study of
elementary particle physics, including its connections to other areas of study
ranging from astrophysics and cosmology to condensed-matter physics and
geometry. Current and planned work of the researchers supported by this grant
covers a very wide range of topics, including the connections between gauge
theory (the modern language of the physics governing the elementary particles),
string theory (a speculative proposal for unifying the fundamental forces of
nature), and geometry. These researchers will also study the possibilities for
new models of particle physics that might be relevant at current and future
particle-physics experiments; new methods of computing and studying the ways in
which elementary particles scatter off each other; new experimental hints of the
cosmic dark matter which makes up most of the matter in the universe; and more.
Research in these areas thus advances the national interest by promoting the
progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and
understanding of new physical laws. This project will also have significant
broader impacts. The postdoctoral fellows supported by this project will also
gain experience working at a high level on these exciting scientific problems,
which have all attracted great interest nationally and
internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Witten's
recent and ongoing work has involved operator algebras that give a new
perspective on black-hole entropy and on the nature of de Sitter space in
quantum theory. The postdoctoral fellows supported by this project have a wide
range of interests and work with each other on frontier topics in theoretical
high-energy physics as well as with Professor Witten and other local
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.