* 2207858
* RUI: Light Scattering Metrology for Gravitational Wave Optics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Antonios Kontos, Bard College
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2025
* USD 140,000.00

The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory(LIGO) project has given
scientists the ability to observe the universe in a completely new way. Unlike
conventional telescopes, which use the light emitted by stars and galaxies to
learn their properties and their place in the universe, GW detectors use
gravitational waves (GW), which are similarly emitted by many astrophysical
objects. Gravitational waves are ripples in spacetime that travel to Earth and
cause the detectors to essentially change in size. To observe this change The
LIGO detectors require state-of-the-art mirrors, which are used to sense the
stretching and contraction of space and time. Improvements in mirror design will
allow observers to look further into space and detect more of these GW signals.
The proposed project will aid in pushing the mirror technology by utilizing
light scattering as a tool to study mirror coatings. Specifically, an important
aspect of the quality of a mirror is the presence of defects which scatter light
and inhibit the operation of the LIGO detectors. In addition, defects may
sometimes develop on the mirror surface with time, but the process is not always
understood. This research project is designed to study defects on mirrors so
that it will be possible to ultimately improve LIGOâ€™s sensitivity. The work will
be carried out with the engagement of undergraduate and high school students,
which will provide invaluable experience as they pursue their career in
technology and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coating thermal noise and
scattering phase noise are sources of noise responsible for limiting LIGO's
sensitivity at low to moderately low frequencies and arise from the optical
properties of the mirror coatings. Mitigation of coating thermal noise requires
the development of a coating with low mechanical loss, while at the same time
satisfying the stringent requirements for scattering and absorption set by GW
detectors. In addition, it is necessary to understand the development of defects
on the mirrors that degrade its scattering and absorption characteristics. This
work will address such questions in a systematic way by studying the scattering
properties of samples of novel coatings as well as samples already used in GW
detectors. The PI will utilize light scattering in a way that is not being
utilized currently, studying in detail the radiation patterns of individual
defects. Specifically, the PI will use light scattering measurements from
mirrors to study various aspects of new and existing mirror coatings. Studies
include i) scattering properties from newly designed coatings, ii) scattering
properties of defects and surfaces, iii) formation of defects on mirrors through
contamination or aging, and iv) scattering from mirrors as a function of
annealing temperature and coating thickness. The project also includes a
feasibility study for a novel beam tracking method for GW detectors using
scattering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.