* 2207515
* EAGER: Principles of Motor Skills (re)Learning When Using Powered Exoskeletons
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Divya Srinivasan, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,926.00

Exoskeletons have great potential to augment physical power while preserving
human skill in dynamic industrial environments. However, many industrial tasks
involving tools are complex, and require high dexterous control. Workers also
have different levels of experience and possess different physical and cognitive
skill-sets. Hence, exoskeleton acceptability and appropriate training are key
factors that will determine future industrial applications. This EArly-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will promote the progress of
science and advance the national health, prosperity and welfare by identifying
basic principles of human motor skill learning when using multi-joint arm
exoskeletons to perform complex tasks. By introducing exoskeletons to users with
varying levels of task-relevant skills at baseline, and by modeling learning
using a comprehensive set of neuromotor measures, the project promises to
discover fundamental principles that will guide the design of adaptable
exoskeleton control algorithms and personalized training protocols that can
produce true collaboration between exoskeletons and individuals with diverse
skills. Broader impacts of the work include workshops focused on increasing
workers awareness of exoskeletons and their potential applications in the
workplace, as well as opportunities for worker-skills training using
exoskeletons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will advance knowledge of the
complex learning dynamics that arise in human-exoskeleton systems through
systematic manipulation of critical mind-motor-machine factors influencing the
collaboration between man and machine. Our novel contribution will be to expand
the generalizability of a two-stage multi-rate model of motor adaptation by
studying short- and long-term adaptations with exoskeleton use by a broad range
of users with varying skill and tasks of varying complexity. The concept of
persistent excitation will be leveraged to perturb the dynamical conditions
under which the human accomplishes the task, to maximize human learning from the
machine, while an extremum seeking control approach will be implemented for the
machine to learn from the human response. The two concepts will be combined in a
novel exoskeleton control algorithm for adaptively tuning exoskeleton parameters
(such as torque amplification) as the human’s use of the exoskeleton
evolves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.