* 2207036
* Adaptive Management of Water Supply Infrastructure for Persistent Anomalies versus Climate Trends
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Sarah Fletcher, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 04/30/2026
* USD 498,012.00

This project addresses climate challenges faced by critical infrastructure
sectors by establishing a new adaptive management approach to water supply
infrastructure planning that incorporate the impacts of multi-year climate
oscillations on water availability. Large scale infrastructure investments in
the water sector will be needed to maintain reliable water supply globally in a
changing climate. To enable resilience at lower cost, adaptive management
approaches have been developed to monitor gradual changes in precipitation
patterns to guide adaptations. However, existing adaptive management approaches
are confounded by the presence of multi-year climate oscillations, which make it
difficult to infer long-term trends from near-term observations. This grant
supports research that seeks to address this gap by integrating climate science
on multi-year oscillations with decision-support modeling for water resources
management. The outcome of this research is expected to help water planners
identify low-cost, adaptive approaches to maintain water supply reliability. The
research team will partner with water planners to make sure the research is
useful for decision-making. Additionally, the grant will support new interactive
educational materials in water resources management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project designs new adaptive management strategies for water supply planning
that can address uncertainty in climate trends, multi-year large-scale climate
oscillations, and annual variability. It will develop an approach for
decomposing precipitation uncertainty into these three timescales and
quantifying future opportunities to reduce uncertainty in each timescale. This
uncertainty characterization will be integrated into stochastic dynamic
optimization models of water resource systems. This approach will be used to
assess the potential for different combinations of adaptive strategies including
flexibility in the timing, sizing, modularity, and operations of water supply
infrastructure to address the different timescales of uncertainty in future
precipitation. By applying this approach to river basins in sub-Saharan Africa
with contrasting patterns of precipitation variability, the project will build
theory on how different temporal patterns of precipitation variability affect
adaptive approaches to water infrastructure planning, design, and operations.
This new knowledge can help water planners target water supply infrastructure
investment to support low-cost water supply
reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.