* 2207328
* Data-driven statistical dynamical modeling: Shortage of training data and high- dimensionality
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* John Harlim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Today, machine learning is a prominent scientific computing tool with many
practical applications. Notable successes are the classification problems of
identifying pictures and the Artificial Intelligence (AI) Go-player that beats
the best human player in the world. While these successes are important
milestones, there are emerging needs to replicate these successes in the
statistical modeling of time-evolving complex systems, with examples ranging
from predicting climate to nanomaterials under external disturbances. The goal
of this project is to develop the next-generation mathematical and algorithmic
tools to overcome two important issues in extending machine learning to such
problems, namely a shortage of informative data for effective learning and the
expensive computational costs. This objective will be addressed by a theoretical
and algorithmic development in computational mathematics, leveraging the
fundamental knowledge from the basic sciences, including geometry, dynamical
systems, data sciences, and statistics. This project will contribute to the NSF
mission of advancing STEM through the training of graduate students and
curricular development through the design of courses in the mathematical theory
of machine learning. In particular, this project will support one graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to overcome the
shortage of training data and exploit the manifold assumption to avoid the curse
of dimension in the statistical modeling of dynamical systems. Beyond
uncertainty quantification (UQ) applications, a statistical closure model will
be developed to enhance the training of ML-based prediction models when the
observed time series is too short for accurate estimation. Specifically, the
proposed projects are: 1) To develop a systematic reduced-order statistical
closure model. This project extends the recently developed ML-based non-
Markovian closure framework for accurate predictions of statistical responses
subjected to unseen external forcings, which is important for UQ. 2) To develop
a dimensionality reduction technique that respects the geometry of the data
under a manifold assumption on the dynamical variables. The approach includes an
accurate Radial Basis Function approximation to the Bochner Laplacian from the
embedded data. Subsequently, the estimated eigen-vector-fields will be used as a
frame to represent the vector fields corresponding to the unresolved dynamics.
This model reduction framework provides a computationally cheaper alternative to
deep learning. 3) To study the theoretical convergence property of a recently
developed algorithm, Bayesian Machine Learning (BML), which uses solutions of a
statistically consistent model to enhance the training of the neural network
(NN) model in learning non-Markovian dynamics with a short observational time
series. This study is motivated by a recent empirical finding that the NN model
obtained from the BML training algorithm improves the accuracy of the El Niño
prediction by at least two months compared to the same NN architecture trained
using the standard stochastic gradient descent algorithm. The ultimate goal of
this study is to evaluate and develop a theoretical understanding of the
effectiveness of the statistical closure model from Task 1) to enhance Bayesian
Machine Learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.