* 2207398
* Louis Stokes Renewal STEM Pathways and Research Alliance:Western Alliance to Expand Student Opportunities Advancing Institutionalization for STEM Leadership Expansion (WAESO-AISLE)
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2027
* Jean Andino, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 10/31/2027
* USD 2,000,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high-quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based recruitment and
retention strategies and relevant educational experiences in support of
populations underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic
Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native
Pacific Islanders. These strategies facilitate the production of well-prepared
students highly qualified and motivated to pursue graduate education or careers
in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United States (U.S.) to remain globally
competitive, it must tap into all its citizens' talent and provide exceptional
educational preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based
economy. The Western Alliance to Expand Student Opportunities (WAESO): Advancing
Institutionalization for STEM Leadership Expansion (AISLE) Louis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program was established in 1991 in response
to the need for a more diverse and skilled technical workforce. That need still
exists and is particularly acute in the States of Arizona, Colorado, and Utah.
The seven universities-Arizona State University, Brigham Young University, Grand
Canyon University, Regis University, University of Arizona, University of Utah,
Utah Valley University, and six community college collaborators- Chandler
Gilbert Community College, Estrella Mountain Community College, Gateway
Community College, Glendale Community College, Phoenix Community College, and
South Mountain Community College make up the Alliance. The goal of the Alliance
is to establish new partnerships and modes of engagement that can be replicated
nationally to further increase the participation, retention, and graduation of
underrepresented STEM populations and promote connections and collaboration in
research through the activation of social science research broadens
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alliances' knowledge-generating research
project will promote research, development of scientific skills, and
communication while activating the power of the social science construct of
Multicontext Theory and further promoting diversity in STEM and longer-term
success for each student and faculty participant. This framework will enable
expanded collaborative opportunities for students, faculty, and partner
universities while aiding the WAESO AISLE project in further institutionalizing
the proposed efforts in a way that could be replicated in other regions of the
U.S. with other LSAMP programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.