* 2207517
* NanoFlorida 2022
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2022,09/30/2023
* Gregory Hudalla, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2023
* USD 18,660.00

The proposed NanoFlorida Conference addresses important needs that existing
international, national, and regional conferences on related topics do not
address. Specifically, there is a need for a conference to meaningfully engage
and support the intellectual and professional advancement of students involved
in nanoscale research from diverse fields and diverse backgrounds. Given the
breadth of the science, engineering, and applications of nanotechnology, there
are many global international, national, and regional conferences that support
the dissemination of research advances and the engagement and technical exchange
between leading researchers and companies active in these fields. These
conferences are typically quite large, intimidating, costly, and in some cases
quite difficult to get student work accepted for presentation. These significant
barriers can greatly limit the participation of students, particularly those
involved in less well funded labs and at the early stages of their academic
career. The NanoFlorida conference sets itself apart from the larger
international, national, and regional conferences for nanoscale research by
engaging students at an unprecedented level and not only involving them as
technical contributors and presenters but also as conference organizers.
NanoFlorida is intentionally sized to be small enough and low cost enough that
students can present their research themselves and so that a broader range of
students and faculty can build and strengthen a nanotechnology community of
scholars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this conference proposal is to support the expanded and inclusive engagement of
more students from more background in the NanoFlorida 2022 Conference.
Specifically, NSF funding will be used to support the involvement of more
students in this enriching event, advance their understanding of cutting-edge
nanotechnology research, facilitate their professional development, and greatly
lower the student cost to register for the meeting and for in-state travel. The
proposed objective will be achieved by offering the reimbursement of student
registration costs and in some cases partial to full in-state travel support. By
providing financial support for the NanoFlorida 2022 Conference, the NSF will
advance the understanding of state-of-the-art research in nanoscale science,
engineering, and technology by a larger and more inclusive student population
that previous years. In addition, the student attending will have opportunities
to improve key professional skills and expand their technical network.The
success of the NanoFlorida 2022 Conference will be evaluated by using a pre-
conference and a post-conference survey. The pre-conference survey will include
questions about their pre-conference knowledge of / experience with nanoscale
research concepts and their expectations for the conference. The post-conference
survey will include questions about their improved understanding of nanoscale
research concepts and the selection of keynote speakers, quality of
presentations, conference amenities and services, usefulness of professional-
development and networking activities for students, and the impact of the
conference on their interest in nanotechnology, academic major, and future
career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;NanoFlorida conferences
expose students to the latest nanotechnology research and its applications. A
conference like NanoFlorida is an ideal venue for graduate and undergraduate
students to hone their science-communication skills. The audiences are big
enough so that the presentation is meaningful to the student but not too large
and formal so that they are nervous to present. Students will meet researchers
from other schools and from industry. These professional relationships will
provide long-term benefits to student careers in science, technology,
engineering, and math fields. Learning about nanotechnology, developing
communication skills, and networking with researchers from academia and industry
are important steps that prepare students to join the nanotechnological
workforce upon their graduation. Using NSF funds to eliminate the financial
barrier, which may have prevented the participation of some students from
underrepresented groups, underrepresented Florida institutions, and less well
funded research groups in the past, could enable more diverse students to
attend, present their research, and benefit from the conference's intellectual,
professional, and career development activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.