* 2207991
* Neural Mechanisms of Acoustic Communication Gordon Research Conference
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2023
* Michael Long, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 02/28/2023
* USD 49,300.00

This award will provide support to students, post-doctoral fellows and junior
scientists to attend the 2022 Gordon Research Conference on the Neural Basis of
Acoustic Communication (NMAC). Different species often feature distinct
communication strategies for the production and perception of acoustic social
signals, and a comparative approach to the study of the neural mechanisms
underlying acoustic communication can lend insight into general mechanisms of
neural function. A major challenge in the study of acoustic communication is the
segregation of information between human and nonhuman research as well as the
isolated communities that focus on individual model systems. The NMAC is a new
scientific meeting created to bring together a highly interdisciplinary group of
researchers to better understand how the brain encodes and produces acoustic
signals. This meeting will bring together outstanding senior and junior
scientists for discussions of the recent advances in the field. The NMAC
conference will help to reveal new principles concerning acoustic communication.
Topics of this inaugural program include vocal development and learning, vocal
interactions, auditory specializations, genomics, predictive coding, and
cortical mechanisms of vocal production. The comparative approach that is at the
heart of neuroethology, will facilitate the identification of common principles
of brain organization and function that underlie acoustic communication. The
results presented at the meeting will have the potential to guide future
developments in multiple areas, including neural inspired design of engineered
systems that will have considerable societal benefits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
value of this meeting derives from its small size, which promotes interactions
between participants, and the assembly of many top scientists whose research
spans neurobiology, animal behavior and human clinical disorders. It spans a
wide variety of experimental systems and focuses on areas of exceptional
activity or promise. This combination leads to fruitful comparative analyses,
raises new questions about underlying mechanisms and often leads to new
collaborations. By maximizing both formal discussion and informal interactions,
the NMAC will highlight exciting new developments in study of the communication
processes that are essential for animal behavior and also lie at the heart of
disorders. With respect to broader impacts, this meeting will benefit the larger
community in multiple ways. First, it will help train and inspire the next
generation of scientists, by exposing students and postdoctoral fellows to
exciting science and scientists. Second, mentoring sessions, both formal and
informal, as well as professional development sessions for junior researchers,
will be organized for the benefit of junior researchers to help them make
informed choices about scientific careers in academia and beyond. Finally, a
concerted effort will be made to recruit scientists from under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.