* 2207677
* Coordination of Plant Growth and Defense Through Key Regulators in Salicylic Acid and Brassinosteroid Pathways
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Zhengqing Fu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2025
* USD 382,964.00

In their natural environments, plants can be infected by many pathogens
including fungi, bacteria, oomycetes, viruses, and nematodes. Therefore, a
robust immune system is a prerequisite for the survival of plants.
Unfortunately, when plants allocate energy for defense instead of growth, there
is a fitness cost, which will compromise plant growth, resulting crop yield
loss. The plant defense hormone salicylic acid (SA) plays an essential role in
plant defense against many pathogens. In contrast, the endogenous hormones
called brassinosteroids (BRs) regulate multiple physiological processes required
for normal plant growth and development. Plants have developed sophisticated
strategies to coordinate growth and immunity, but our understanding of the
underlying mechanisms remains limited. This project aims to unravel fundamental
mechanisms of plant growth and defense coordination through interactions between
key regulators in BR and SA pathways. These studies will greatly increase the
understanding of how plants achieve balanced growth and defense at the molecular
level and will ultimately contribute to the development of effective and novel
strategies to control crop diseases without significant yield loss. Funding from
this project will be used to train middle and high students and teachers on
detecting citrus greening disease at early stages before the citrus trees show
any obvious symptoms. By connecting molecular technology with urgent real-life
problems, our program will showcase the importance of plant science and inspire
students to become the next generation of leading plant scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants deploy a two-tiered surveillance system, which
includes pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP)-triggered immunity (PTI)
and effector-triggered immunity (ETI), to recognize invading pathogens. After a
local infection by a pathogen, plants can activate stronger and faster defense
responses in the entire plant against later infections by a broad spectrum of
pathogens. This phenomenon is termed systemic acquired resistance (SAR). Early
studies have demonstrated that EDS1 and NPR1 function as two central hubs in SA-
mediated plant defense, while BZR1 and BES1 act as two key transcription factors
in the plant growth hormone BR signaling. This project focuses on investigating
how plants optimize growth and defense through the crosstalk between BR and SA.
The preliminary data have shown that both EDS1 and NPR1 interact with BES1,
while EDS1 is also physically associated with BZR1. The published data
demonstrated that SA, NPR1, and EDS1 inhibit hypocotyl elongation, while BZR1
regulates ETI. The first objective of this project is to study whether and how
BZR1 and BES1 influence PTI through interacting with EDS1 and NPR1. The second
objective is to determine if and how BZR1 and BES1 impact ETI and systemic plant
immunity by affecting the functions of EDS1 and NPR1. The final objective is to
elucidate the roles of EDS1 and NPR1 in SA-mediated plant growth inhibition
through their physical associations with key regulators in the BR
pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.