* 2207895
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Network models of cortical and subcortical interactions for dynamical control of decision making
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Rishidev Chaudhuri, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 347,673.00

Decisions in the brain are collectively made by a network of interacting brain
regions that each play different roles in the decision-making process. These
distributed networks are flexible, able to respond effectively to changing
circumstances, while also highly robust, and able to preserve functionality even
when partially disrupted or damaged. This project seeks to understand how these
brain regions interact with each other during decision making and how these
interactions confer their remarkable flexibility and robustness. To do this, the
research team will combine cutting edge technologies for recording and modifying
the activity of neurons while rats make decisions, with machine learning
techniques for modeling the data generated. The project will improve
understanding of brain systems that support decision making and cognition more
generally, while also providing critical insight for the next generation of
brain-inspired artificial intelligence systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal combines large-scale multi-region recordings in awake, behaving rats
and data-driven recurrent neural network modeling to investigate the role of
association cortex during decision-making through its impact on interacting
subcortical areas. The first part of the project will use Neuropixels recordings
along with multi-area recurrent neural network modeling to identify whether and
how association cortex plays a role in controlling interconnected subcortical
dynamics during decision making. The recordings will be targeted to two areas of
association cortex and two subcortical regions while rats perform decision tasks
that require flexible integration of noisy sensory information over time. The
network modeling will be used to disambiguate competing hypotheses for the
specific roles of each brain region in shaping neural dynamics during decision
formation. The second part of the project will combine similar network modeling
with experimental perturbation of brain activity through optogenetics to
identify mechanisms that underlie the robustness of neural decision making. The
investigators will identify mechanisms of structural robustness, which arise
from the architecture of the distributed network itself, and mechanisms of
dynamic robustness, which involve active compensation for perturbation. In this
manner, the project will synergize recent exciting advances in both machine
learning and tools for systems neuroscience to create a tight experiment-theory
loop to address questions with broad interdisciplinary importance, with
implications at the core of developing principled treatments for cognitive
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.