* 2207835
* Collaborative Research: IIS: HCC: Small: The New Gatekeepers: Content Moderation and Information Threats in Local Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kelley Cotter, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2025
* USD 187,289.00

This project maps how volunteer moderators are functioning as gatekeepers of
local civic information and first responders to information threats within
online local community groups. This is a crucial first step toward building
effective tools (social, technological, and policy) that can support moderators
of online community groups in their efforts to respond to the threats caused by
information pollution. Residents of American communities increasingly rely on
geographically focused online groups to access local information. These local
groups have the potential to enhance the quality of life in American communities
by helping residents learn about their communities, connect with neighbors and
local organizations, and identify important local issues. However, these groups
face significant threats to information quality, including mis/disinformation
campaigns, incivility, and trolling. Moderators of online community groups are
typically untrained volunteers who serve as a first line of defense. However,
they are provided only a limited set of tools and practices for threat
mitigation. As a result, moderators are in a tenuous position to respond to
information threats while simultaneously navigating change in the workings of
platforms themselves, rapidly evolving user practices, and the increasing
politicization of local issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three
goals: (1) assessing how well platform companies prepare local group moderators
to face information threats; (2) understanding how local group moderators manage
information threats in their everyday practices; (3) understanding how moderator
practices respond to challenges during periods of increased information quality
threat. The results of this research will expand our knowledge of how to better
support volunteer moderators on digital platforms as they are asked to function
as a new kind of gatekeeper in increasingly complex local information
infrastructures. The project does this through (1) an analysis of the tools and
trainings provided to moderators by three platform companies: Facebook,
Nextdoor, and Reddit; (2) an eight-week asynchronous remote community study with
moderators of local groups; and (3) a follow-up interview study examining
moderator practices during conditions of high-levels of information threat. This
involves grappling with platform design and affordances, as well as social
practices, behaviors, and competencies, so as to inform human-computer
interaction, information science, and public policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.