* 2207514
* Quantum Field Theory and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Richard Woodard, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2025
* USD 60,000.00

During the earliest moments of its existence the Universe underwent such rapid,
and accelerated, expansion that quantum fluctuations were ripped out of empty
space to produce a vast, and ever-growing ensemble of gravitational radiation.
This radiation provided a sort of medium which affected long range forces and
also how things propagate, the same way that water changes electric forces and
the propagation of light. Because ever-more radiation was produced, its effects
grew with time, and sometimes also with space. It is possible that remnants of
these effects became strong enough to survive to the current day, and that they
provide explanations for some of the puzzles which arise when one tries to
understand the large scale Universe in terms of ordinary matter with Einstein’s
theory of gravitation. The goal of this project is to develop reliable
techniques for calculating these effects when they become strong, and modeling
the results as changes in Einstein’s theory of gravitation. The project involves
extensive international collaborations with physicists in the Czech Republic,
France, Greece, Netherlands and Taiwan. The project provides summer support for
two graduate students per year, whose education enhances the pool of STEM talent
available to the United States. It should also be noted that, although the PI
selects students on the basis of merit, over half of his past graduate students
have been female or Hispanic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the fall of 2021 the
PI and collaborators showed that the large logarithms induced by nonlinear sigma
models (whose derivative interactions mimic those of gravity) on de Sitter
background can be summed up by combining variants of Starobinsky's stochastic
formalism and the renormalization group. They also demonstrated that that the
exchange potential of a massless, minimally coupled scalar (MMCS) provides the
simplest venue for purging gauge dependence by including quantum gravitational
correlations from the source and observer. The recent breakthrough on
resummation, coupled with steady progress on approximating effective potentials
in realistic geometries, has also provided important insights for expressing
graviton loop corrections in terms of simple, nonlocal modifications of gravity.
Finally, the effective potential results suggest a dramatic simplification for
computations of reheating from longitudinal vectors. To exploit this recent
progress the PI and his graduate students will continue their collaborations
with Dr. Drazen Glavan (CEICO, Czech Republic), Prof. Cedric Deffayet (IAP,
France), Prof. Shun-Pei Miao (NCKU, Taiwan), Prof. Tomislav Prokopec (U.
Utrecht, Netherlands) and Prof. Nikolaos Tsamis (U. Crete, Greece) on four main
projects: Generalize the new resummation technique to quantum gravity;
demonstrate that source and observer correlations eliminate gauge dependence in
the MMCS exchange potential on de Sitter background; develop and explore
nonlocal modifications of gravity; and show how reheating can be analyzed using
cosmological Coleman-Weinberg potentials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.