* 2207423
* Quantum Optics with Atomic Ensembles and Arrays
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Paul Berman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2025
* USD 359,243.00

Most everyone is familiar with telecommunication networks, networks that link
our computers and mobile devices. What might be less known to the general public
is that networks that make use of quantum features can offer tremendous
advantages over their classical counterparts. Quantum networks, based on
principles of quantum mechanics, allow for increased speed and security. Such
networks, consisting of nodes and interconnecting channels, could revolutionize
communication and computation, as well as provide a new means for modeling
complex systems in physics and biology. The network’s fixed nodes (quantum
memory elements) can be implemented using matter in the form of trapped atoms
that are able to store complex, quantum encoded messages for many seconds. Light
can be used to connect the nodes, carrying quantum communication signals along
optical fibers. The fundamental building block of a quantum telecommunication
network is an interface between the fixed nodes (material quanta) and light
(photons). To exploit the quantum properties of the network, it is necessary to
couple the nodes in a uniquely quantum manner, referred to as quantum
entanglement. This project will focus on demonstrating new capabilities for
generation of such remote entanglement, to be used as a resource for distributed
quantum information processing. A major goal of the project is to develop
photonic interconnects for arrays and ensembles of trapped neutral atoms.
Information will be processed and stored in the atoms and mapped onto
propagating light fields coupled into optical fibers. Graduate and undergraduate
student training and participation are primary educational goals of this
project, providing opportunities for students at different career stages to
collaborate with one another and faculty mentors, while learning techniques of
experimental physics, optics, electronics, and computer-based data acquisition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will investigate quantum
information processing using single photon states of light and trapped ultracold
atoms. Strong interactions between highly excited states of the atoms (so-called
Rydberg states) will serve as the basis for creating quantum gates between
atomic qubits, while atom – single photon entanglement will be achieved using
scattering of laser fields. This should allow for scalable generation and
manipulation of complex entangled states involving both atomic qubits and single
photons. Realization of this program will also lead to efficient distribution of
entangled many-particle quantum states over long distances using optical fibers.
The activity will contribute to the future implementations of long-distance
quantum repeaters and distributed quantum computing. Efficient production of
multi-qubit entangled states will impact fundamental physics investigations and
advance quantum-enhanced measurement techniques. In doing so, this research will
have a significant impact on advancing the progress of emerging technological
applications of quantum computation and communication, quantum sensors for
navigation and magnetometry, and atomic clocks. The research will involve both
experimental and theoretical modeling components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.