* 2207388
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways Implementation-Only Alliance: PUI-SATX-Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Jason Pierce, St Mary's University San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 12/31/2027
* USD 773,950.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on
transforming undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based
recruitment and retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in
support of racial and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies
facilitate the production of well-prepared students, highly-qualified and
motivated to pursue graduate education or careers in STEM. The need for
cultivating STEM talent has been well established. For the United States (U.S.)
to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent of all
its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM areas
that underpin the knowledge-based economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;St. Maryâ€™s
University, Our Lady of the Lake University, Trinity University, and the
University of the Incarnate Word, all Primarily Undergraduate Universities
(PUIs) in San Antonio, have formed the PUI-SATX Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation, a new STEM Pathways Implementation-Only (SPIO) alliance.
This alliance of institutions will target students in low socioeconomic zip
codes primarily in Central Texas for participation in STEM interventions leading
to the STEM baccalaureate degree and preparation for entry into STEM graduate
degree programs. Activities will include stipend support, participation in
experiential research, peer mentoring, mentoring circles and other STEM
professional development activities. Activities will incorporate family members
in recruitment and retention activities such as La Familia orientations. The
PUI-SATX LSAMP project will disseminate its project findings broadly via its
website and through STEM professional communities and publications such as the
Journal of STEM Education and Journal of Research in STEM
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.