* 2207215
* Designer Photonic Lattices and Multilayer Structures that support Bound Optical Modes and Electrically-driven Excitation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* George Schatz, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 07/31/2025
* USD 599,046.00

Nontechnical description&lt;br/&gt;Metal nanostructures can confine light into
very small spaces near their surfaces and enable a diverse range of
applications, from the color of stained glass in the Middle Ages to new classes
of nanoscale-sized lasers. Understanding the optical properties of assemblies of
metal nanoparticles is important to advance current light-based technologies.
This project aims to design and fabricate new architectures based on multilayer
nanoparticle arrays that can be optically excited and to realize nanoparticle-
based devices that can be integrated with electrical circuits. The project will
train a diverse research team of graduate and undergraduate students in optical
device system design, fabrication, and characterization techniques in state-of-
the-art facilities coupled with advanced theoretical modelling and science
communication. The principal investigators actively recruit students from
different backgrounds, which fosters inclusion, retention, and advancement of
underrepresented and marginalized students. The research team hosts multiple
educational outreach events on the Northwestern University campus to make light-
based research accessible to younger students and to encourage them to consider
careers in STEM-related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;Many-body phenomena such as superconductivity or light-
induced ferromagnetism are a couple examples of the unique properties displayed
by vertically stacked 2D materials that are absent in their monolayer form.
Inspired by the exotic properties of 2D stacked electronic materials, this
project aims to develop stacked and twisted plasmonic nanoparticle structures to
explore: (1) how bound states in the continuum can enable macroscale, long-range
light manipulation; (2) how stacked lattices couple out-of-plane and how their
properties depend on relative twist angle; and (3) how electrical excitation of
plasmonic lattices can be combined with 2D electronic materials to enable chip-
based plasmonic systems. The design of sophisticated plasmonic lattice
architectures is fundamental to understanding short- and long-range coupling of
nanoparticle unit cells and can facilitate novel applications in functional
photonic devices, such as mechanical manipulation and electrical pumping. The
realization of electrical excitation of plasmons is of particular technological
interest in order to bridge the gap between nanophotonic and microelectronic
devices. Broader impacts of this project will build on knowledge gained for
applications related to coherent emission, long-range energy transfer, and
quantum coherence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.