* 2207623
* RUI: PM: Optical Molecular Clocks for New Physics Searches
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* David Hanneke, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2025
* USD 561,095.00

Some atoms and molecules possess quantum states with properties that are
particularly well-suited to use in timekeeping, quantum information, or tests of
physical laws. This award focuses on molecular vibrations – where the atomic
nuclei stretch and compress the chemical bond. The project will demonstrate the
tools needed to use molecular vibrations as precise frequency references (that
is as good clocks) and is a stepping stone on the way towards searching for
changes in the basic physical parameters of nature (such as how many times
heavier the proton is than the electron). Such changes are predicted by some
models of quantum gravity or dark matter, but none have yet been observed in the
lab. This research takes place at a liberal arts college, and undergraduate
students are involved in all aspects of the work. The project will advance the
career of a postdoctoral scholar. In addition to training the next generation of
scientists, this work develops skills in experimental physics that are
transferable to a wide array of future endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award enables investigation of laser-driven vibrational transitions in molecular
ions. The particular transition here – from the ground vibrational state to a
vibrationally excited state in the diatomic oxygen molecular cation – has a
narrow natural linewidth, high sensitivity to changing fundamental constants,
and long-term prospects as an optical molecular clock. The nonpolar nature of
the molecule suppresses systematic shifts related to electric fields, such as AC
Stark shifts and blackbody radiation. Molecular vibrations hold great promise
for next-generation searches for drifts or oscillations in the proton-to-
electron mass ratio. This project builds on the PI’s experience with trapped
charged particles as well as existing infrastructure for producing quantum-
state-selected molecular ions. These ions will be loaded into a trap and
sympathetically cooled with co-trapped atomic ions. The trapping enables long
probe times, which will be needed to precisely determine the transition
frequency and to demonstrate a proof-of-principle search for variation in the
proton-to-electron mass ratio. Such a search is a probe of additional
dimensions, new scalar fields, and ultralight dark
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.