* 2207408
* Educating Generative Designers in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Zhenghui Sha, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,019,533.00

With support from NSF's Accelerating Discovery program, this project aims to re-
envision undergraduate engineering education to include generative design.
Generative design is a transformative design technology that uses open-ended
artificial intelligence algorithms to arrive at solutions for engineering
problems. Generative design software can be freed from preconceived ideas or
past solutions. As a result, it allows exploration of a wider variety of
potential solutions, with the goal of arriving at an optimal solution in
partnership with the human engineer. The proposed project will support the
development of open-source educational tools for teaching and learning
generative design. These tools will be based on existing computer-assisted
design and engineering software, and will include a set of project modules to
guide students through authentic design problems. The software and associated
design problems will be pilot tested by students at thirteen institutions,
including community colleges, Historically Black Colleges and Universities,
liberal arts colleges, and public universities. Information from these pilots
will be used iteratively to refine the software and teaching approach. This
project represents a novel application of artificial intelligence to engineering
that could augment the creativity and productivity of the engineering workforce
of the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
facilitate the teaching and learning of generative design at the undergraduate
level. To accomplish this goal, the University of Arkansas, the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Oregon State University, and the Concord
Consortium will collaborate to define, implement, and disseminate generative
design tools and projects for use in undergraduate courses. Research questions
from three perspectives will drive the project: 1) Theoretical perspective: What
are the essential elements of generative design thinking that students must
acquire so they can work effectively at the human-technology frontier in
engineering? 2) Practical perspective: To what extent and in what ways can the
curriculum and materials support the learning of generative design as indicated
by students' gains in generative design thinking? and 3) Affective perspective:
To what extent and in what ways can artificial intelligence affect the
professional formation of engineers as indicated by the changes of students'
interest and self-efficacy in engineering? To answer these questions,
interdisciplinary research that integrates the perspectives and knowledge in
engineering design, computer science, learning science, and workforce
development will be conducted. The project will involve more than 1,000 students
at 13 institutions around the country. The research will include data from
demographic surveys, questionnaires, self-efficacy measures, design reports,
screencast videos, classroom observations, and participant interviews. The
materials developed by the project will be open source, including an open-source
tool for teaching and learning generative design and a set of project-based
learning modules that guide use of the tool to solve authentic design problems
in architectural engineering and energy engineering. The products of this
project are expected to equip students with essential skills and mindsets needed
to master using artificial intelligence approaches in contemporary engineering
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.