* 2207028
* Conference: Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases 2022: Pandemics, Social Justice and Science Communication
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Jacobus de Roode, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2023
* USD 43,495.00

The 2022 Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases meeting will be held at
Emory University, 6-9 June 2022. The meeting will be held in hybrid format (in-
person and online) and will provide a workshop for graduate students and early-
career postdocs on Pandemic Scenario Modeling and Science Communication. In this
workshop, participants will learn the latest applications of models to study
outbreak scenarios, and further incorporate economics and host behavior into
these models to determine the impacts of social aspects on infectious disease
transmission. Moreover, trainees will obtain training in effective science
communication. Conference sessions will include these same themes, and
additionally address the importance of Social Justice and Infectious Disease. A
final session will focus on Infectious Diseases Across Scales, with a focus on
understanding how interactions between biological, spatial
and&lt;br/&gt;temporal scales affect transmission of pathogens and parasites of
a wide diversity of hosts, including wildlife, livestock and humans. The meeting
will bring together scientists from around the world to discuss the latest
research on pressing issues, including the role of climate change in driving
infectious disease, and the importance of racial and other social disparities in
causing inequity and preventing effective control of disease. The explicit focus
on social justice and infectious disease will showcase the crucial integration
of biomedical science, social science, public health and
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.