* 2207269
* Collaborative Research: Metal-Organic Nanotubes as Tunable Porous Fibers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Nathan Gianneschi, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2025
* USD 100,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, professors
David Jenkins (U. Tennessee) and Nathan Gianneschi (Northwestern U.) are
studying metal organic nanotubes (MONTs), the 1D analogues of metal organic
frameworks (MOFs). Metal organic nanotubes are straws on the nanometer scale
that are built from chemical bonds between metals and organic components
(ligands). Changing the design of the ligands changes the size of pores within
the structures, which is achieved with synthetic organic chemistry from the
Jenkins group. Changing and tuning the pore size is important for applications
such as gas separations. For MONTs to achieve their goal as new nanomaterials
capable of drawing up fluids and gases and transporting them, it is critical to
control their structure and understand them at the nanometer length scale.
Therefore, the Gianneschi group studies their formation processes with electron
microscopy. Finally, mixing ligands together allows for copolymerized MONTs in a
manner structurally reminiscent of copolymerization in plastics. Blending these
ligands together offers opportunities to tune the surfaces of these materials.
The project also encompasses research opportunities for students. Moreover, the
professors make their research accessible to the general public by showcasing
research on MONTs through digital methods such as YouTube and
Wikipedia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With the support of
the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, professors David Jenkins (U. Tennessee) and Nathan Gianneschi
(Northwestern U.) are studying metal organic nanotubes (MONTs), the 1D analogues
of metal organic frameworks (MOFs). Because the dimensionality of any material
dictates its properties, functionality and application scope, MONTs are a
critical new tunable porous material that are complementary to MOFs. The
fundamental aspiration of this project is to develop a method to control the
pore size, tube packing, particle size, and composition of MONTs systematically.
The pore size is controlled through isoreticular synthesis of organic ligands
that form 2-pillared MONTs. Ligand design is also employed to tune the non-
covalent interactions, which leads to tube packing, between the MONT tubes. The
particle size is controlled through biphasic reaction mixtures such as
emulsions. Finally, the composition is controlled through blending ligand pairs
yielding copolymerization of these materials. Macroscopic MONTs are studied
using measurements such as single-crystal X-ray diffraction, powder X-ray
diffraction, and solid-state NMR. Nano bundles of MONTs and dynamic processes
during synthesis are investigated with electron microscopy techniques including
liquid phase TEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.