* 2207012
* Role of posttranslational modifications in controlling the specificity of response regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Sona Pandey, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 06/30/2025
* USD 458,478.00

The information encoded in the genes of an organism is ultimately decoded as
proteins, which by acting as key enzymes, building blocks of a cell,
transporters, or receptors, perform almost all cellular functions. Proteins are
made of a permutation of 20 distinct amino acids, the sequence of which is
determined by the nucleotide sequence of genes. Most of these amino acids can be
covalently modified after their translation, resulting in multiple, unique
proteoforms of a single protein with distinct function. The post-translational
modifications (PTMs) are thus nature’s way of amplifying the information encoded
in the genome to provide dynamic, flexible and potentially reversible mechanisms
for regulating an organism’s development, physiology and survival. For multi-
functional proteins, specific PTMs may associate with explicit protein function.
Therefore, comprehensive interpretation of the ‘PTM code’ of an organism is
critical to understand the gene to function link. Successful completion of this
research will not only fill major gaps in our knowledge of how context-specific
PTMs dictate the roles of a protein in regulation of distinct responses, but
will also add significantly to elucidation of plant signaling mechanisms, which
affect key agronomical traits. Therefore, in addition to advancing our
fundamental understanding of a complex biological concept, this research will
also apply broadly to the problems that plague our world today: generating
higher yield with limited resources and unfavorable environments. The work will
also involve the training of a technician, a postdoctoral scientist in a
multidisciplinary field and mentoring of undergraduate students. The research
will help promote an understanding of plant science to the high school students
and general public via a series of hands on experiments and interactive
presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to determine the
existence of multiple, context-dependent proteoforms of a single protein, the
Arabidopsis heterotrimeric Gα protein (GPA1) critical to G-protein signaling,
and connect them to specific GPA1-regulated functions. Comprehensive
interpretation of the post-translational modification-dependent ‘protein code’
of an organism is critical to understand the genotype to phenotype link. This
research addresses some of the most fundamental questions related to the roles
of PTMs such as (i) how specific PTMs affect the core properties of a protein,
(ii) what are the organism-level, context-specific effects of PTMs of a protein,
and (iii) how this specificity is achieved. Successful completion of this
research will not only fill major gaps in our knowledge of regulatory roles of
protein PTMs, but will also generate a knowledge base suitable for other plants
(and metazoans), where similar analyses are not possible due to complexity of
the system. It will also help fine-tune the plant G-protein signaling mechanisms
of agricultural relevance because naturally occurring or engineered changes in
G-proteins have profound effects on plant architecture, stress responses and
yield.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.