* 2207688
* NSF/MCB-BSF: Revealing the steps and modulators of coronavirus fusion using single-molecule tools
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Nicholas Abbott, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2025
* USD 900,000.00

Infection by many viruses commences with a membrane fusion event between the
viral envelope and host cell membrane, which leads to the transfer of the viral
genome into the host cell. Typically, this process is mediated by viral fusion
proteins. In this project, the coronavirus spike protein is examined. Within
spike, the fusion peptide initiates membrane fusion when it inserts into the
host membrane. To study this process, single molecular tools and techniques will
be developed and used to study the interaction between the fusion peptide with
membrane surfaces that mimic different kinds of host cells. The goal is to
understand the relationship between fusion peptide sequence and target membranes
using complementary techniques that enable examination of this process across
scales, from the fusion peptide to the whole virus. With a better understanding
of the science behind the chemical features that modulate this critical
interaction, new predictions for virus adaptation to new hosts can be made and
exploited to block the process. The Broader Impacts of this project include the
intrinsic merit of the work as useful information will be gained that can be
leveraged for the design of novel antiviral drugs, and to identify chemical
rules that inform predictions of host susceptibility to viral entry. Given that
major fusion players are highly conserved across the CoV family, these studies
will be directly applicable to all CoVs, including those yet to emerge. In
addition, training opportunities for graduate students will be provided, along
with outreach activities for high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
coronavirus, entry into a host cell is mediated by a single glycoprotein
protruding from its membrane envelope, called spike (S). A key determinant of
the ability of coronavirus to spread is the interaction of S with its target
host membrane. Within S, the region that directly interacts with the membrane is
called the fusion peptide, FP. It is the physico-chemical interactions of the FP
with the host membrane that anchors it, consequently enabling the necessary
deformations of the membrane that leads to membrane fusion and the delivery of
the viral genome into the cell. Thus, understanding chemical coupling of the FP
with the host cell at the nanoscale will facilitate the development of
strategies to limit those interactions to stop infection, but also to enable
predicting the characteristics of emerging strains and the susceptible hosts.
The objective of this project is to identify and measure the specific
intermolecular interactions responsible for insertion of FP into membranes.
Single molecule tools and techniques will be developed, expanded, and used to
understand the fundamental chemical code between the host membrane and FP that
modulate interactions that control the fusion process. The intellectual merit of
this project is discovering the relationship between the host membrane chemistry
and amino acid sequence of the FP that drive the molecular scale interactions
between virus and host. This project is co-funded by the Cellular Dynamics and
Function together with the Molecular Biophyics programs, both in the Division
for Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.