* 2207972
* NSF BSF: Nonlinear Photon Interactions in Cooperative Quantum Optical Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Susanne Yelin, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

One of the basic building blocks of quantum mechanics and quantum information
science is the photon, the smallest possible amount of light. Unfortunately,
photons can be made to interact (i.e., "talk to each other") only through
matter. The implementation of such single-photon interactions is thus the topic
of much fundamental and applied research efforts. Classically, interacting
("nonlinear") single photons constitute the fundamental limit of low-power
optical switches, transistors, modulators, etc. On the quantum level, they
provide the building blocks for quantum-enhanced technology and the so-called
"third quantum revolution." The proposed work suggests 2D ordered arrays of
atoms in traps. If these atoms are close enough to each other, they provide
excellent effective photon interactions and are highly
controllable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project introduces a novel interaction
platform that takes advantage of intrinsically nonlinear quantum media that can
enhance single-photon nonlinearities such as cooperative and subradiant systems.
Furthermore, adding an impurity to a cooperative 2D array allows light to couple
to the medium, introducing a “quantum antenna.” Photons coupling to several such
impurities can in this setup interact through the medium even stronger. Further
enhancement can be reached through integration of Rydberg levels of the atoms or
by additionally modifying the response of the material to display, e.g., a zero
index of refraction. The questions that will be answered in this work are: (i)
How can nonlinear material help create and harvest nonlinear interactions
between photons? (ii) How, conversely, can photons be used to control
cooperative materials? (iii) How can one implement these concepts experimentally
and what applications are possible? Possible applications include quantum
information processing, metrology, and quantum metamaterials, i.e., a class of
materials exhibiting inherent quantum material response to
light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.