* 2207819
* PM: Doped Inert Single Crystals for Probing Beyond the Standard Model
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Brian Odom, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2025
* USD 645,309.00

The Standard Model of particle physics has been successful at passing all
laboratory tests. Despite this fact, it is also known to be incomplete. For
instance, it cannot explain the matter-antimatter asymmetry of the universe—a
fact which is essential for our very existence. A promising and cost-effective
avenue for discovering hints of a better underlying theory is to perform table-
top precision measurements on trapped atoms and molecules, searching for tiny
deviations from the Standard Model predictions. In this work, the researchers
will develop techniques for precision measurements on atoms and molecules
trapped within inert cryogenic crystals. This work could also have great
significance for the development of quantum sensors and quantum simulators.
Students and postdocs doing this work will develop skillsets in laboratory
research, scientific communication, and general project planning and
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will produce the first
doped cryocrystals suitable for searches for physics beyond the Standard Model.
Trapping molecules in an inert crystal allows for both extremely high densities
and sufficient isolation to potentially surpass the reach of traditional
precision techniques by orders of magnitude. This huge potential advantage can
only be realized if the dopants retain their critical quantum properties. Key
features have been demonstrated, but with performance limited by the
polycrystalline structure of the host matrices—because different local
configurations lead to different dopant quantum properties. Since undoped inert
single crystals have previously been grown up to centimeter-sized volumes, large
doped single crystals should also be achievable. The researchers will
demonstrate the first growth of large inert single crystals by vapor-deposition,
a technique consistent with introducing dopants. They will characterize these
large doped single crystals using X-rays. Finally, the researchers will make the
first demonstration of good quantum properties of high-density dopants filling
large volumes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.