* 2207198
* The role of hybridization in generating biodiversity: insights from genomics of Madagascars true lemurs (Eulemur)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* David Weisrock, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 07/31/2025
* USD 677,791.00

A fundamental goal in biological research is to understand how new species form,
as this process has ultimately given rise to the incredible diversity of life on
earth. Studies of species formation often focus on understanding how differences
accumulate and interbreeding ceases. However, recent research has shown that
hybridization – the sharing of genes and traits between different species – is
common across the Tree of Life. Could hybridization play an important and
overlooked role in the process of species formation? To help answer this
question, this project will focus on a group of primates from Madagascar called
the true lemurs, which have a high level of species diversity and a documented
history of hybridization. The researchers will use genetic information from
these lemurs to investigate the role of hybridization at multiple levels: how it
shapes the genome, how it shapes the formation of new species, and how it shapes
evolutionary history over longer timescales. This project will afford
opportunities to integrate Malagasy students, U.S. students from
underrepresented groups, and conservation practitioners, leading to synergistic
relationships and helping to conserve Madagascar’s unique and threatened
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of this project are to
understand how new species form in the face of hybridization and gene flow, and
to expose the genomic signatures of these processes across a diversifying
radiation. First, patterns of gene flow, selection, and genome architecture will
be examined across a hybrid zone within the true lemurs (Eulemur) where the
speciation process can be observed in action. Second, the researchers will
explore how hybridization and introgression have shaped the deeper evolutionary
history of all Eulemur and will ask whether the observed patterns are repeated
and predictable across the clade. Finally, they will bring together data on
geographic range, diet, and social behavior to construct a model aimed at
understanding the extrinsic factors that facilitate hybridization. This project
will yield insights into the origins of species in a hyperdiverse region of the
world and will provide useful information to systematists contending with
signatures of gene flow in their analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.