* 2207942
* Opening the Gravitational-Wave Band Below 30 Hz for LIGO and Cosmic Explorer
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Lisa Barsotti, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2025
* USD 419,999.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
Advanced LIGO detectors will continue to make discoveries in the upcoming years
with the “A+” upgrade. The next two observing runs, O4 and O5, will culminate
with the A+ detectors operating at an unprecedented sensitivity. The LIGO
Scientific Collaboration is now exploring technologies that can be deployed
after O5 (circa 2028) to ensure the next sensitivity leap forward. This award
funds work that will improve the sensitivity of current and future
gravitational-wave detectors at low frequencies. This work will enable the
detection of more and higher-fidelity astrophysical events, and increase access
to high-mass black-hole collisions at cosmological distances. The work supported
by this award will involve mechanical engineers and physicists, with
opportunities for graduate students as well as undergraduate students (via the
MIT UROP program) in both of these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ambitious
goal can be reached by improving the detector's test mass suspension system to
lower its vertical resonance frequency. This approach, coupled with heavier
optic mass, can lead to a reduction of seismic, thermal and quantum radiation
pressure noises. Several improvements will be considered, including: increasing
the suspension length and the stress of the fibers that hold the test mass, and
employing lower-noise sensors. These techniques can lead to an improved LIGO
suspension system (in current facilities), and will also be applied in the next-
generation gravitational-wave detector Cosmic Explorer. The proposed work will
couple these two synergistic efforts by developing, together with the LIGO
Laboratory, the Cosmic Explorer Project, and the LIGO Scientific Collaboration,
a conceptual design for an improved suspension system for LIGO and an early
design concept for the Cosmic Explorer suspension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.