* 2207052
* Collaborative Research: RI: Small: Advancing Theory and Practice of Trustworthy Machine Learning via Bi-Level Optimization
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Sijia Liu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Deep learning (DL) has achieved remarkable success owing to its superior
prediction ability, with a wide range of applications in computer vision and
natural language processing. Yet, one of its critical shortcomings is the lack
of trustworthiness. That is, they are often overcooked during training such that
(1) the learned model is highly vulnerable to small input perturbations at the
testing time (namely, lack of robustness); And (2) biased artifacts embedded in
the training data can be memorized and then passed on to the decision making
process (namely, lack of fairness). To address these issues, this project
attempts to develop a new family of trustworthy learning algorithms with
algorithmic generality, theoretical soundness, and scalability to large-scale
datasets and models. The outcome of this project could create a new optimization
foundation of trustworthy DL that can not only unit robustness and fairness into
one coherent learning paradigm but also expand the applicability of DL to a
series of high-stakes applications such as autonomous driving and cybersecurity.
Interdisciplinary training in computer science, applied mathematics, and
engineering will be provided to all-level students, especially for students from
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main technical aim of this
project is to advance the theoretical understanding and practical
implementations of trustworthy DL through the lens of bi-level optimization
(BLO), namely, hierarchical learning involving two nested optimization tasks.
The research plan consists of three thrusts. The first thrust develops a new
BLO-oriented robust learning framework including defenses against adversarial
instances and distribution shifts. The developed technique is also applied to
building a full-stack (from train time to test time) robustness evaluation
pipeline. The second thrust expands the first one and develops BLO algorithms to
co-improve robustness and fairness in two practical scenarios, learning without
sensitive attribute annotation, and learning with scarce training data and model
information. The third thrust focuses on developing scalable and theoretically-
grounded computational methods for BLO so as to achieve a high-accuracy, high-
resilience, and high-throughput trustworthy learning paradigm. The project will
result in the dissemination of shared toolbox and benchmarks to the broader
optimization and machine learning communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.