* 2207912
* Dark Matter Primordial Black Holes Under the Scrutiny of LIGO's Observations
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* ILIAS CHOLIS, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2025
* USD 39,428.00

The nature of dark matter remains to date one of the most fundamental questions
of physics. This project will make gravitational-wave observations by the Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory and future Laser Interferometer
Space Antenna, a part of our toolset in searching for the nature of dark matter
and in understanding the early universe. The PI will develop software to analyze
GW data in order to gain insight on the creation of black holes at the beginning
of the Universe (primordial black holes or PBH). These BHs are a potential
important component of some models for dark matter, a critical component of our
Universe that has yet to be identified. A graduate student and three
undergraduate students will be mentored in gravitational-wave research and data
analysis. This will allow them to pursue future careers in academia or industry
at an era when data science is of great significance to the future prosperity
and security of the US. The PI will give public talks and organize amateur
astronomy events accessible to the local community, making the field of
astronomy and astrophysics a more inclusive one.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop new probes to search for signals of primordial black hole
(PBH) dark matter at gravitational-wave observations. It will directly test the
predictions of PBH dark matter using new and upcoming data from the
LIGO/Virgo/KAGRA collaborations. It will also develop the means to use future
observations from next-generation gravitational-wave observatories, to test the
wide variety of features expected from the PBH dark matter model. This project
will use the full information available, including the masses, spins, orbital
eccentricity and redshift distribution of the merging black holes, and will
address a wide variety of future gravitational-wave observatories. This project
will employ and develop analytical and semi-numerical modeling to study the
dynamical formation of compact object pairs, via multiple pathways that occur at
the cores of globular clusters, dense stellar environments and dense dark matter
halos. This will allow the comparison of the potential dark matter signals in
gravitational waves and their closest more conventional astrophysical stellar
mass black hole backgrounds next to each other. The project will directly probe
the primordial black holes mass spectrum up to hundreds of solar masses and
significantly improve our understanding for the primordial perturbations in the
early Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.