* 2207222
* CSHL Synthetic Biology Course (2022-2024)
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2025
* USD 515,458.00

The Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Synthetic Biology summer course is a two-week
long immersion course designed to introduce scientists to the field of synthetic
biology. It provides intensive instruction in synthetic biology methods by
combining practical lectures, open-ended research projects, and seminars from
leaders in the field. The course attracts early career scientists working at
academic institutions, national labs and in industry. It serves scientists that
are looking to transition into synthetic biology research and disseminate
synthetic biology ideas and skillsets at their home institutions. In the first
week of the course, students participate in practical training modules, which
combine lectures and hands-on experiments. In the second week, students
participate in cutting-edge research projects that are brought by the course
instructors from their own labs. Throughout both weeks of the course, leading
experts in synthetic biology are brought in to talk about their research and
provide their perspective on the field in a seminar series. This year, the
course includes modules on cell-free transcription-translation systems, modern
cloning techniques, computational modeling of biological processes, and CRISPR-
based genome editing and gene regulation. Through practical lectures, research
projects, and seminars, participants will be exposed to cutting-edge synthetic
biology methods to provide them with a solid understanding of the challenges and
opportunities available in the field of synthetic
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
summer course on Synthetic Biology is the only program in the world that offers
an immersive lecture plus experimental wet lab experience for teams of advanced
trainees (post undergraduate and beyond) to collaboratively learn new methods
and approaches in synthetic biology. The highly interactive course format allows
an unprecedented level of direct integration of research with training, as
students work on innovative research projects while interacting with field
leaders in an informal setting. Each year, the course instructors bring novel
research projects and training modules to expose students to the latest
breakthroughs and challenges in synthetic biology. This yearâ€™s research and
training modules include: (1) Enabling synthetic biology technologies that
accelerate the design and construction of genetic circuits. Students will learn
about complementary techniques including in vitro cell-free transcription-
translation (TX-TL) methods and computational methods for predicting synthetic
circuit function. (2) Experiencing the design-test-build cycle through the five-
primer challenge. (3) Harnessing CRISPR-based tools for advanced genome editing
approaches in bacteria. In summary, the course provides an intensive two-week
immersion into cutting-edge synthetic biology methods, helping prepare the next
generation of synthetic biologists to work at the interface of biological,
computational, and physical sciences. The Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Synthetic Biology course trains an emerging generation of scientists and
engineers on scientific topics that are at the leading edge of synthetic
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.