* 2207588
* Quantum State Engineering with Bose-Einstein Condensates: Dressed-State and Hydrodynamic Approaches
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Peter Engels, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2025
* USD 440,109.00

This project employs ultracold atomic gases to model complex quantum mechanical
phenomena. Using laser cooling and related techniques, a cloud of atoms is
cooled down to temperatures near absolute zero. Under appropriate conditions the
atoms coalesce into a Bose-Einstein condensate, a macroscopic matter wave
displaying quantum mechanical behavior. The large size of these objects, which
can extend over hundreds of microns, implies that they are readily observable
using custom imaging optics, and a rich toolset based on atomic physics is
available for their manipulation. This, together with their quantum mechanical
nature, makes them an ideal platform to study complex quantum mechanical
phenomena. With the recent and ongoing development of novel experimental tools
and theoretical approaches, such quantum analog modeling has become a major
thrust of research in Atomic, Molecular and Optical (AMO) physics. Ultracold
atom platforms can be applied to study phenomena from condensed matter physics,
nonlinear science, hydrodynamics, quantum optics, and more, demonstrating their
importance as highly versatile testbeds in modern physics. The experiments
conducted in this project investigate several approaches to probe the emergence
of periodic structures with crystal-like properties from the macroscopic matter
wave of a Bose-Einstein condensate. The dynamical properties of such crystalline
structures pose many theoretical challenges, and the experiments provide
essential benchmark data for the development of a theoretical understanding.
Going beyond the realm of ultracold atoms, the insight gained through this line
of research is of high relevance for condensed matter physics and nonlinear
science as well. The experiments are conducted with complex setups that utilize
a large range of modern experimental techniques, including lasers and optics,
ultrahigh vacuum technology, automation programming, and advanced electronics.
This makes them ideal platforms to train students in a multitude of areas
relevant for modern quantum technologies which use quantum mechanical effects in
sensor applications e.g. to detect magnetic, electric or gravitational fields,
for fundamentally secure communication, or to establish new paradigms for
efficient computing. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program
advocates the use of ultracold atomic gases as a highly flexible platform for
the study of quantum phases and dynamics. Along the lines of quantum analog
simulation, several innovative approaches to investigate emerging band
structures and associated phenomena in dilute-gas Bose-Einstein condensates
(BECs) are employed. The starting point is a BEC in which spin and motional
degrees of freedom are coupled by a set of Raman laser beams. This spin-orbit
coupling is then supplemented with a radiofrequency dressing or microwave
dressing to generate effective lattice structures with unusual properties. In
the first case, an effective Zeeman lattice emerges even though neither the
spin-orbit coupling nor the radiofrequency alone produce a periodic band
structure. The second case leads to a new method to generate a supersolid-like
state with large spatial periodicity, overcoming the limitations of previous
approaches. As a third, complementary approach coming from a quantum
hydrodynamics perspective, the experimental realization of densely packed
interacting soliton trains provides a very different and unexplored access to
the study of crystalline properties that arise in a superfluid system without
imposing a periodic external potential. The quantum analog simulation of
condensed matter, hydrodynamic or nonlinear phenomena using the versatile
toolbox of atomic physics is a highly active area in quantum gas research, and
the experiments provide important benchmark data motivating the concurrent
development of theoretical approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.