* 2207665
* Molecular Quantum Control and Spectroscopy Using Light-Dressed States
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Ergin Ahmed, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2025
* USD 557,686.00

The internal degrees of freedom, such as vibrations and rotations, of molecules
and the variety of interactions between their quantum states give rise to a rich
energy level structure. Diatomic molecules (those with two atoms) are ideal for
experiments which are not possible with atoms but avoid the overwhelming
complexity of polyatomic molecules. This project utilizes the interaction of
laser radiation with diatomic molecules to study the strength of transitions
between energy states, investigate the electronic structure of diatomic
molecules composed of atoms of dysprosium or its relatives, and create molecular
orientation. The two main ways by which chemical bonds are formed between atoms
involve sharing of valence electrons (covalent) or a transfer of valence
electrons from one atom to another (ionic). In many instances the nature of the
chemical bond is a mixture of ionic and covalent character. Furthermore,
theoretical predictions indicate that the character of a chemical bond can
gradually change as a function of various parameters including the internuclear
distance. The planned transition dipole moment measurements probe the strength
of the interaction of an atom or a molecule with light. Such measurements
provide a sensitive way to explore the changes in molecular electronic structure
between covalent and ionic bonding. The research team will also study diatomic
molecules formed from atoms with large magnetic moments such as dysprosium and
erbium with unconventional magnetic properties and strong anisotropic
interactions. The electronic structure of such dimer molecules is completely
unknown experimentally. These studies will provide the missing critical data
needed for the understanding of highly anisotropic interactions at short
internuclear distance range and the realization of quantum gases of molecules
with large magnetic moments. The control of molecular orientation experiments of
the project will be of importance for the study of reactions of molecules with
other molecules and atoms. The principal investigators will continue to strive
engaging a diverse set of Physics students in research both at the graduate and
undergraduate levels. The Optics and the Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics
courses taught by the principal investigators also serve interested chemistry
and biophysics students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a
unique combination of multiple resonance high resolution spectroscopy and
quantum optics techniques of dressed molecular quantum states with light for the
purposes of quantum control. The SolsTiS laser system funded by the NSF MRI
grant 2018443 provides a critical enhancement of laser power, tuning range, and
frequency stability for the coupling laser in the proposed experiments. The
dressed-states approach with an enhanced Rabi frequency will make it possible to
control molecular alignment and orientation to study the effects of collisions
on the rotational angular momentum of diatomic molecules. The ability to
manipulate the rotational angular momentum of molecules makes it possible to
obtain molecular frame information as well as allow control of physical and
chemical processes whose rates are dependent on the orientation of the molecular
axis. In addition, it will be possible to probe the transition dipole moment
behavior in regions of avoided crossings between covalent diabatic potential
energy functions and the ion-pair potential. The interaction of these potentials
leads to large changes in the transition dipole moment and interesting long
range potential energy wells with dense energy level structure with unusual
radiative properties. The planned high resolution spectroscopic investigation of
the lanthanide dimers will extend the atomic systems quantum magnetism studies
to molecular systems with even larger magnetic moments than the atoms. These
experiments will provide critical data for recent theoretical ab initio studies
of the electronic structure of these important magnetic
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.