* 2207728
* Gravitational-Wave Astronomy with the LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA Network
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Patrick Brady, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
three observing runs of the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory
(LIGO) have provided multiple firsts: the first observation of gravitational
waves, of binary black holes, and of black-hole neutron-star binaries, as well
as the beginning of the era of multimessenger astronomy with gravitational
waves. The fourth observing run of the Advanced LIGO detectors will soon take
place. In coordination with the European Virgo detector and the Japanese KAGRA
detector, this network of gravitational-wave observatories will survey the
universe with unprecedented sensitivity. A trove of new discoveries is at hand.
This project supports the research activities of the University of
Wisconsin–Milwaukee (UWM) LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC) group. The
overarching theme is gravitational-wave astronomy with an emphasis on activities
that are on the critical path for the scientific success of LIGO and its full
participation in multimessenger transient astronomy. This project brings highly-
engaged faculty with a proven track record in gravitational physics,
astrophysics, data analysis, education and outreach together with
undergraduates, graduate students and postdocs in a close collaborative
environment to deliver science at the dawn of multimessenger gravitational-wave
astronomy. It supports the creation of critical components of a system that will
allow the rapid transmittal of gravitational-wave observations to the entire
community of astronomers and facilitates the integration of gravitational-wave
science into the broader field of astrophysics. The excitement of gravitational-
wave astronomy will be communicated to the community through programs at the UWM
Planetarium and the student-led Coffeeshop Astrophysics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UWM LSC group will deliver several critical elements
to a low-latency, streaming search for transient gravitational waves including
those produced during the coalescence of binary neutron stars and/or black
holes. Among the data analysis elements the group will help develop and operate
are the online search for signals from compact binary coalescence, a near real-
time source classification system, and a rapid parameter estimation utility. A
system to rapidly identify signals is an essential element of gravitational-wave
science in the era of multimessenger astronomy in which observations of several
kinds (gravitational waves; electromagnetic waves; high energy particles) are
synthesized to obtain a detailed understanding of the sources of the most
cataclysmic events in the universe. Gravitational-wave astronomy offers a new
window into the realm of transient astronomy that complements other astronomical
facilities, provides a means to measure the population of black holes and
determine the channel by which massive black holes are grown, and enables us to
probe the fundamental nature of matter above nuclear densities. We must be ready
to handle the increasing rate of detections in order to address these scientific
challenges. To this end, this project supports work, identified as critical path
in the LIGO/Virgo/KAGRA Observational Science and Operations White Papers and
the LSC Program, that will result in gravitational-wave detections of binary
coalescence, provide rapid sky localization and parameter estimation to
facilitate electromagnetic follow-up efforts, yield fast turn-around targeted
searches prompted by triggers generated by other observational facilities, give
insight into the population of coalescing compact binaries, and obtain the
nuclear equation of state by measuring the tidal interactions of binary neutron
stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.