* 2207352
* Louis Stokes New STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: State University of New York (SUNY)
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Carol Kim, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 12/31/2027
* USD 499,983.00

The Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: State University of New
York (SUNY LSAMP) will be led by the University at Albany, with partner
institutions Binghamton University, University at Buffalo, Stony Brook
University, Buffalo State College, College at New Paltz, College at Old
Westbury, Hudson Valley Community College, Rockland Community College, and SUNY
System Administration. SUNY LSAMP will implement comprehensive, evidence-based,
and sustained approaches to broadening the participation of African
American/Black, Hispanic/Latinx American, American Indian/Native American,
Alaska Native, Native Hawaiian, and other Pacific Islander (historically
underrepresented minority or URM) students in STEM. SUNY LSAMP aims to: (1)
increase individual student engagement, retention, and progression to
baccalaureate degrees through new student seminars, comprehensive academic year
support services, and partnerships that increase capacity and
institutionalization; (2) increase the rate of successful transfer of students
from two-year to four-year institutions through the SUNY Seamless Transfer
initiative, through partnerships with community colleges across NY State (NYS)
and beyond, and include activities that prepare students for transfer from
community colleges to four-year institutions, and comprehensive support
services; (3) increase access to high quality STEM mentoring and undergraduate
and graduate research experiences through an Alliance-wide undergraduate summer
research program, industry partnerships that support academic and industry
research opportunities, and comprehensive resources to assist participants to
apply and secure research experiences; (4) increase seamless transition of
students into STEM graduate programs and degree completion though junior level
graduate school preparation workshops, comprehensive resources to assist
participants to apply, secure admission to, and fund graduate education,
integration of the SUNYâ€™s Promoting Recruitment, Opportunity, Diversity,
Inclusion, Growth (PRODiG) Program, and partnerships with graduate schools, and
the SUNY Graduate Diversity Fellowship Program and Graduate Opportunity Program;
and (5) stimulate new research and learning on broadening participation in STEM
disciplines through the Fostering (STEM) Identity through Transition (FIT)
study, collaboration with faculty, staff and industry partners to develop
culturally responsive mentoring and build more inclusive learning and working
environments focused on equity-mindedness in STEM, leveraging the NYS Education
Department funded Science Technology Entry Program to provide K-12 outreach and
identify best practices in URM STEM undergraduate enrollment, and integration of
an evaluation and dissemination plan that highlights research findings, common
successes of the Alliance and the individual contributions of our Alliance
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the changing demographics in the U.S. and
STEM workforce needs, advancing our knowledge of best practices to recruit,
retain, and graduate URM STEM students will benefit society by preparing a more
diverse scientific workforce. Engaging current and future SUNY LSAMP
participants will create a pool of diverse engaged collaborative scholars who
will ultimately become and lead our future STEM workforce and research. SUNY
LSAMP participant outcomes and research will be publicized to encourage more
student engagement, findings from the Fostering (STEM) Identity through the
Transition (FIT) research study will be disseminated to the scientific
community, and replication and institutionalization of best practices will be
encouraged across SUNY and NYS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.