* 2207389
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Structure and Seismicity Within the Southern M9.2 1964 Great Alaska Earthquake Rupture Area Using a Dense Node Array
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Lindsay Worthington, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 188,294.00

A subduction zone is a region where an oceanic plate slips below a continental
plate, along a shallowly inclined fault. One example is the Alaska-Aleutian
subduction zone, which is responsible for more Magnitude 8 or greater
earthquakes than any other subduction zone in the world, among them the 1964
Magnitude 9.2 Great Alaska Earthquake. Kodiak Island lies just above part of the
Alaska-Aleutian subduction zone fault that was responsible for the 1964
earthquake, and in 2019, 400 seismic instruments were deployed there for 25 days
as part of the Alaska Amphibious Community Seismic Experiment (AACSE). Using
machine learning and other techniques, Worthington and her team will re-analyze
data collected by these instruments to identify numerous very small earthquakes,
and pinpoint their locations. This will provide an unprecedented snapshot of how
earthquakes are distributed along the subduction zone fault and its vicinity.
Recordings of these and other earthquakes will be used together to generate
images of the subsurface, including the subduction zone fault itself, and to
estimate physical properties of the fault and its
surroundings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detailed characterization of seismicity and
structure within shallow subduction forearc regions offers insight into plate
interface properties along the seismogenic megathrust, and the distribution,
location and kinematics of active and past deformation. This project
characterizes seismicity and structure beneath Qikertaq (Kodiak Island) using
existing data from a densely-spaced seismic node array deployed along a ~50 km
transect as part of the Alaska Amphibious Community Seismic Experiment (AACSE)
in May, 2019. The Kodiak node array is located within the southern asperity of
the largest historical US earthquake, the Mw9.2 1964 Great Alaska event, which
ruptured a 600-800 km section of the Alaskan subduction zone. The main goals of
the project are to determine: 1) The distribution of upper plate vs lower plate
vs interface seismicity during the interseismic cycle through increased
microseismicity (&lt;M1.0) detection and relocation; 2) The nature of the plate
interface in the shallow forearc of the southern 1964 earthquake rupture
asperity, properties of which control earthquake rupture, propagation and
initiation; 3) Upper plate velocity structure within the Kodiak region,
providing constraints on material strength and elastic properties of the seaward
portion of the forearc. Using both machine-learning and coalescence-based
automatic detection algorithms, this project will produce an enhanced seismicity
catalog for the duration of the 25-day deployment. The locations of existing and
new detections will be refined to provide a snapshot of the distribution of
seismicity during the interseismic interval following great megathrust
earthquakes. Travel-times from active-source marine shots and local earthquakes
(including newly detected events) will be used for raytracing and inversion to
develop a high-resolution velocity model of the shallow forearc above the plate
interface. This velocity model will, in turn, be used to further refine event
locations. Energy from local earthquakes will be used for imaging the crust and
plate interface below the node array using scattered waves and reflected phases
for vertical reflection profiling and coda auto-
correlation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.