* 2207945
* Gravitational-Wave Data Analysis and Population Inference
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Zoheyr Doctor, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2025
* USD 628,695.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
Gravitational waves, ripples in space-time predicted by Albert Einstein, have
been a major boon to the field of astrophysics since they were first directly
detected in 2015 by NSF's Laser Interferometric Gravitational-Wave Observatory
(LIGO). These gravitational waves travel billions of light years across the
universe to Earth and carry clues about how they were originally produced. The
violent collisions of black holes and neutron stars have been responsible for
the nearly 100 gravitational waves detected so far and provide an excellent
testbed for the nature of black holes, nuclear physics, astrophysics of stars,
and the expansion of the universe. Under this award, the team at Northwestern
University will analyze data collected in the fourth observing run of the
advanced interferometer era to characterize gravitational waves and ultimately
understand the story of how black holes and neutron stars come into contact with
each other in the universe. Their findings will be disseminated to both the
astrophysics community as well as the broader public through open-source code
bases, eye-catching visualizations, public lectures and hands-on workshops, and
a program offering astrophysics research experiences for K-12
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large number of detections expected in the
fourth observing run of the LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA interferometer network will present
new computational and organizational challenges for gravitational-wave
astrophysicists. At the same time, larger samples of detected gravitational
waves will bring to light new questions and in some cases firm answers regarding
the formation and evolution of black-hole and neutron-star binaries. The
Northwestern University group will develop a concrete framework to analyze the
population of binary merger sources, expand abilities for interpretation of the
observed population properties, and help plan future observing runs. In
parallel, they will identify exceptional gravitational-wave events among the new
discoveries and investigate how they may challenge our best understanding and
push the frontiers of black-hole and neutron-star astrophysics. Specifically,
the team will target a number of problems: the assessment of the significance of
event triggers, population inferences from the ensemble of detections, and
comparisons with simple models that answer targeted questions about how pairs of
black holes and neutron stars come to be and eventually collide with one
another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.