* 2207737
* Precision Measurements Using Nonlinear Thomson Scattering
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Michael Ware, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2025
* USD 449,079.00

High intensity lasers have a wide range of uses in basic science, industry, and
national defense applications. To achieve the highest intensities, a laser must
be focused to the smallest spot size possible. To achieve a small focus, the
structure of the electromagnetic fields within a laser focus must be measured
and optimized. In this project, the researchers place electrons within a very
high intensity laser focus, and then study the light these electrons emit
(nonlinear Thomson scattering) to understand the field structure within the
focus. The patterns in the spatial structure and polarization of this nonlinear
Thomson scattering contain information about the structure of the fields in a
laser focus that is hard to measure in other ways. The researchers will study
light emission patterns while varying focal properties of the laser and the
distribution of electrons within the focus, with a goal of learning how to
measure, understand, and improve the laser focus. These are very challenging
measurements to make, and most previous work has been restricted to theoretical
and computational predictions. The research project will involve and train
approximately a dozen undergraduate students and three graduate students in the
challenging blend of high-intensity laser methods used to drive the electrons
and the single-photon detection methods used to measure the scattered light. The
researchers will incorporate results from this project into a free online optics
textbook that is widely used at the university level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project studies nonlinear Thomson scattering from very diffuse (near-vacuum
density) free electrons in a laser focus and enables the study of this
fundamental relativistic phenomenon without the confounding influence of plasma
dynamics. These measurements will be carried out for several lower-order
harmonics in a reference frame that allows the angular structure of the
photoemission to be measured. The researchers will: (1) characterize for the
first time the polarization-resolved angular emission patterns of individual
harmonic orders over virtually the entire emission sphere, (2) investigate the
signature of the ponderomotive ejection of electrons from the focus in the
angular photoemission patterns and how this is influenced by focal parameters
and pulse duration, and (3) study how coherence between electrons emitted from
the same atom modifies nonlinear Thomson scattering, both the angular pattern
and the strength. Each of these effects has the potential to contributes
measurable amounts to the overall nonlinear Thomson scattering signal.
Simulations of relativistic electron trajectories within a tight laser focus
show that electron trajectories are sensitive to the details of the field
vectors. An overarching goal is to be able to better correlate the vector fields
of the laser focus with observed nonlinear Thomson
scattering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.