* 2207158
* EAGER: Scaling Up Plant Demographic Rates with Imagery from Unoccupied Aerial Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Trevor Caughlin, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 01/31/2024
* USD 200,367.00

This award is funded in whole under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wildfires pose a growing threat to ecosystems
in the American West, as climate change and invasive species promote larger and
more frequent fires. Understanding how fast, if ever, native plant populations
can recover from wildfire, and where recruitment of prior dominants is not
occurring will aid efforts to restore degraded ecosystems. Plant population
recovery is most often studied by marking and measuring individual plants in
field plots or along 50 to 100 m transects. Logistical considerations limit the
spatial coverage of these types of field measurements, resulting in a mismatch
between multi-kilometer-scale wildfires and plot level responses. The research
proposed here will use drones to develop new methods to measure plant population
recovery over large areas. These methods will include computer algorithms to
detect and distinguish individual plants in aerial imagery, and statistical
models to quantify drone-detected plants' growth, survival, and reproduction.
This quantitative framework will enable the research team to study how an
ecologically important dominant plant species across the inter-mountain west is
responding to wide spread fire and to large-scale environmental variation within
the vast burned areas. The research will be applied to forecast population
recovery of big sagebrush plants, a species with critical ecological importance.
The results will aid land management across this vast region by advancing drone
technology to monitor post-fire recovery.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Novel remote
sensing data from unoccupied aerial systems (UAS) could aid spatial models for
plant demography by providing imagery with fine enough resolution to detect
individual plants across large spatial extents. This project will develop a
framework to infer plant demographic rates from UAS imagery by coupling computer
vision techniques with hierarchical Bayesian models. The research will focus on
spatial population dynamics of big sagebrush, Artemisia tridentata, a species
with high conservation value in the American West. As wildfires decimate
sagebrush habitat, landscape recovery depends on whether big sagebrush can
recolonize disturbed areas. However, like most low-statured plants, our
understanding of big sagebrush demography is almost entirely derived from meter-
scale field plots, limiting extrapolation to large spatial scales. The research
will develop a reproducible workflow to identify individual plants in UAS
imagery, quantify demographic rates of plants while accounting for imperfect
detection in aerial imagery, and determine the impacts of spatial covariates on
sagebrush demography. This research will advance quantitative modeling
approaches for spatial plant demography with immediate application to an
imperiled ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.