* 2207077
* CPS: DFG Joint: Medium: Collaborative Research: Data-Driven Secure Holonic control and Optimization for the Networked CPS (aDaptioN)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Anurag Srivastava, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2023
* USD 466,919.00

The proposed decentralized/distributed control and optimization for the critical
cyber-physical networked infrastructures (CPNI) will improve the robustness,
security and resiliency of the electric distribution grid, which directly
impacts the life of citizens and national economy. The proposed control and
optimization architectures are flexible, adapt to changing operating scenarios,
respond quickly and accurately, provide better scalability and robustness, and
safely operate the system even when pushed towards the edges by leveraging
massive sensor data, distributed computation, and edge computing. The algorithms
and platform will be released open source and royalty-free and the project team
will work with industry members and researchers for wider usage of the developed
algorithms for other CPNI. Developed artifacts as part of the proposed work will
be integrated in existing undergraduate and graduate related courses.
Undergraduate students will be engaged in research through supplements and
underrepresented and pre-engineering students will be engaged through existing
outreach activities at home institutions including Imagine U program and 4-H
Teens summer camp programs and the Pacific Northwest Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participations. Additionally, project team plans to organize a workshop
in the third year to demonstrate the fundamental concepts and applications of
the proposed control and optimization architecture to advance CPNI. Developed
solutions can be extended for range of applications in multiple CPNIs beyond use
cases discussed in the proposed work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the proposed
control architecture with edge computing offer great potential; coordinating
decentralized control and optimization is extremely challenging due to variable
network and computational delays, several interleavings of message arrivals,
disparate failure modes of components, and cyber security threats leading to
several fundamental theoretical problems. Proposed work offers number of novel
solutions including (a) adaptive and delay-aware control algorithms, (b)
Predictive control and distributed optimization with realistic cyber-physical
constraints, (c) threat sharing, data-driven detection and mitigation for cyber
security, (d) coordination and management of computing nodes, (e) knowledge
learning and sharing. Proposed solutions will be a step towards advancing
fundamentals in CPNI and in engineering next generation CPNI. The proposed work
also aims to use high fidelity testbed to evaluate developed algorithms and
tools for specific CPNI: electric distribution grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.