* 2207583
* NSF-BSF: New Data Analysis Techniques for a New Era in GW Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Matias Zaldarriaga, Institute For Advanced Study
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2025
* USD 120,000.00

Since the first detection of gravitational waves by NSF's LIGO observatory,
gravitational wave Astrophysics has become one of the most dynamic fields of
physics and astronomy. In the next few years the LIGO/Virgo/KAGRA (LVK)
collaboration will continue to improve the sensitivity of their observations,
discover new black hole and neutron star merger events and make their data
public. This award aims to improve the techniques used to analyze gravitational
wave data and make astrophysical inferences using it. The improved analysis
pipelines will be applied to upcoming data in order to learn about the
astrophysical processes that created these sources of gravitational waves and
study the gravitational dynamics in a very extreme regime. Although we can see
these mergers occurring across our universe we still do not understand how these
binary systems formed and questions remain about many properties of the black
holes and neutron stars in them. The research produced under this award will be
disseminated widely across the scientific community and efforts will be made to
make it accessible to non-scientists through public lectures and other outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award aims to improve the techniques used
to analyze Gravitational Wave data from the LVK collaboration and make
astrophysical inferences using it. The improved analysis pipelines will be
applied to upcoming data in order to learn about the astrophysical processes
that created the Gravitational Wave sources and study the gravitational dynamics
in a very extreme regime. In particular, this award will provide an independent
analysis and astrophysical interpretation of the LVK data: 1. The team will use
the parameter estimation code cogwheel which is extremely efficient due to the
implementation of a new set of coordinates as well as the relative binning
algorithm extended for higher modes to do a variety of novel studies that its
efficiency enables. 2. They will combine the results of their parameter study,
including from events found by their independent pipeline to set constraints on
the properties of the population of GW sources. 3. They will make several
improvements to their independent search pipeline ranging from technical ones
related to their treatment of the noise and of so-called glitches to adding the
capability of including higher modes and precession as part of the search. 4.
They will work on improving h(t) at low frequency by using information from the
so-called auxiliary channels. LIGO recently released the auxiliary channels
around GW170814 and they intend to investigate different techniques to improve
the low frequency “control noise”. 5. They will augment their current efforts,
which are mainly centered around data analysis, with some more theoretical work
related to tidal dissipation around black holes as well as efforts to improve
existing waveforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.