* 2207361
* Louis Stokes New STEM Pathways Implementation-Only Alliance: Mountains to Sea North Carolina LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Malcolm Schug, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2027
* USD 1,339,490.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high-quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based recruitment and
retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in support of
populations underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic
Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native
Pacific Islanders. These strategies facilitate the production of well-prepared
students who are highly qualified and motivated to pursue graduate education or
careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United States to remain globally
competitive, it is vital to tap into its citizens' talent and provide
exceptional educational preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-
based economy. The Mountain to Sea North Carolina Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (M2S NCLSAMP) program has formed a new alliance in
response to the need for a more diverse and skilled technical workforce. That
need still exists and is particularly acute in the State of North Carolina. The
five public comprehensive universities that make up the Alliance are Appalachian
State University, East Carolina University, University of North Carolina
Greensboro (lead), University of North Carolina Wilmington, and Western Carolina
University. The goals of the Alliance are to 1) Build strong personal,
professional, and disciplinary relationships across Alliance institutions; 2)
Provide targeted, inclusive programming focused on supporting student
transitions at critical moments in the student success pathway at Alliance
institutions; and 3) Employ Alliance resources to provide more and better STEM
socialization and professional development opportunities for students than they
can receive on their home campuses alone. The parallel activities are projected
to raise participant retention and graduation rates by 20% compared to matched
non-participant students and indirectly affect many more through LSAMP student
support programs available to all STEM students. In addition, assessment is
designed to contribute new knowledge about how mid-sized public universities can
work together to identify, address, and improve weaknesses in student support,
especially at the key transition points at which the target student population
disproportionally struggles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.