* 2207957
* RUI: Trapped Ion Phononics: Thermal Rectification and Controlled Heat Flow in 1D Ion Chains
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Charlie Doret, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2025
* USD 241,195.00

Energy flow in the natural world takes many forms: electrical currents, water
cascading over a cataract, light arriving from distant stars, or heat leaking
into a cooler to ruin one's picnic lunch. Of these, the mechanisms of greatest
practical importance for our daily lives are thermal and electrical conduction.
A century of technological advances, such as the development of electrical
diodes and transistors, have given humanity exquisite control over electrical
currents and driven today's information revolution. In contrast, our command of
thermal currents - which govern 90% of energy production in the United States -
remains in its infancy, yet mastering control over thermal currents could enable
applications ranging from thermal logic gates to improved efficiency from
photovoltaic power generation. This project focuses on developing a proof-of-
principle example of a thermal diode, one of the basic building blocks for
controlling thermal currents, using laser-cooled ion chains. Such chains will
also enable the study of mesoscopic thermal conductivity at the crossover
between quantum and classical regimes, relevant for understanding thermal
currents in microscopic devices. The work will take place at an undergraduate
institution; students will be involved in all aspects of the experiments and
their presentation in journal articles and at scientific conferences, all of
which will provide superb training for future careers in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this work will be
to demonstrate a two-ion thermal rectifier formed from co-trapped calcium and
strontium ions. By coupling the two ions to thermal reservoirs at different
effective temperatures formed by laser cooling, a thermal current will flow from
the `hot' to the `cold' ions. The thermal current can then be extracted from the
ions via laser-based fast thermometry techniques utilizing the ions' dark
resonances. The sign of rectification will be an asymmetry in the thermal
current under exchange of the reservoirs. Longer dual-species chains with
controllably introduced disorder will also enable the study of the onset of
thermal gradients across the chain using similar techniques. All of this work
will provide research training to a large number of undergraduate students at
all stages of their education, with a special emphasis on engaging a diverse
group of students early in their undergraduate years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.