* 2207757
* Technology Demonstration for Mid-Frequency Gravitational-Wave Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Ho Jung Paik, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

This award supports the construction and demonstration of sensors that will be
able to measure extremely small variations in the local gravitational field. The
main motivation is to make it possible to build a new type of gravitational wave
detector that will be able to detect gravitational-wave signals in a so-far
little-explored frequency range, lower than what NSF's LIGO (and all other
ground-based detectors) can sense, but higher than what the future space-based
detector LISA will cover, thus enabling a new window to further explore physics
and astrophysics with gravitational waves. Detecting signals in that middle
range is supremely challenging, requiring extremely low-noise sensors and
readout electronics that are virtually immune from vibrations. Superconducting
materials and quantum-interference-device amplifiers should be able to meet
those challenges if used in a configuration that compares multiple "test masses"
whose tiny motions are compared directly using super-cooled circuits. This
project is to construct an assembly with two test masses and confirm that it has
the expected stability and sensitivity in the target frequency range. As an
added benefit, it is anticipated that this sensor technique could also be
adapted to rapidly sense the subtle gravitational changes from shifting faults
deep underground, enabling faster early warning of earthquakes before the
seismic waves reach the surface and thereby potentially saving lives and
reducing damage to infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sensor design for
this project builds on the Maryland Gravitation Experiment group's experience
with levitating superconducting test masses and sensing differential
displacements using cryogenic circuits at liquid helium temperature (4 K).
Direct differential sensing of displacements relative to a common rigid frame
measures gravity gradients. A tetrahedral arrangement of test masses is
sufficient to sense all tensor components of variations of the local
gravitational field; this design is called Mini-SOGRO. This project will
construct an assembly with two test masses, using a design that is expected to
achieve Q factors greater than 10^6 in the differential sensing mode at
frequencies below 0.1 Hz using capacitive sensing with superconducting
capacitance bridges, SQUID amplifiers and lock-in amplifier readout. A key
feature of the new design is the use of multiple curved ridges on the test mass
surface, strategically aligned with coils, to produce a "negative spring" that
will mitigate the intrinsic nonlinearity of the levitation (and sensing) fields
on the test masses and thereby make it possible to achieve very low resonant
frequency. The Q will be measured and the common-mode rejection, i.e. robustness
to vibrations of the housing, assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.