* 2207937
* WoU-MMA: Deep Multimessenger Search for Joint Sources of Gravitational-Waves and High-Energy Neutrinos
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Szabolcs Marka, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2025
* USD 120,000.00

As a result of novel enabling technologies, gravitational waves and high-energy
neutrinos are detectable far beyond our galactic neighborhood. Their intertwined
signature from a common cosmic source may reach our corner of the Universe at
any instant. The insight gained even from a single joint elusive cosmic source
is expected to be profound. Additionally, multimessenger science -- through its
complexity -- provides a remarkable synergy with frontier technologies built to
uncover previously elusive cosmic messengers and to learn about statistical
concepts that are useful for everyone in everyday life but often elude the
education system. The PI's group will train students in STEM disciplines, as
well as reach out to general audiences through public
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For every discovery of a loud gravitational-
wave signal, there are numerous weak fingerprints called subthreshold
candidates, not sufficiently loud to claim a detection, and they are intertwined
with a complex plethora of detector noise transients. The Columbia Experimental
Gravity Group will conduct in-depth analyses using these subthreshold candidates
in the multimessenger context, will facilitate the electromagnetic follow-up
observations of joint gravitational-wave â€“ neutrino candidates by providing
confined localization, and advance astrophysics in general by uncovering or
establishing a limit on their population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.