* 2207275
* Chemically defined, plant-derived biomaterial platform for human cell culture
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Padma Gopalan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 08/31/2025
* USD 564,893.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Stem cells are cells within our bodies that
unlike most cells, have the potential to differentiate into many different types
of cells. Stem cells have been an area of focused study in basic sciences due to
their therapeutic potential in treating human disease. However, precise control
over stem cell differentiation into useful therapeutic cells remains
challenging, and better regulation of stem cell behaviors such as adhesion,
proliferation, differentiation, and tissue formation could expedite biomedical
applications of human stem cells. Natural and synthetic biomaterials can serve
as a “scaffold” that controls the cell’s environment, often by mimicking the
native environment in which the cells grow. Plants have developed unique and
diverse material properties over more than 700 million years of evolution, and
plant properties are ideally suited to support stem cell growth. The scalable,
sustainable nature of plant leaf production, along with enhanced oxygen
diffusion, wide diversity of morphology and length scales, and their
biocompatibility, all make a strong case for their development as a broadly
useful biomaterial for human stem cell manufacturing. However, plant-derived
materials provide no intrinsic mechanism for proper attachment and function of
human cells. The synthetic polymer coatings developed through this work will
control cell-biomaterial attachment and present signals to stem cells that
control their fate. The plant-derived biomaterials developed through this work
can be delivered to cell biologists and bioengineers, who can use them to probe
key biological questions or manufacture specific cells of interest. This
research program will serve to educate and inspire rural high school students
and teachers by the development of an interdisciplinary learning module. The
award will enhance, retain, and promote engagement with underrepresented groups,
through the Women in Science &amp; Engineering Leadership Institute, and
research experience for undergraduates at UW-Madison.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Biomaterials based on
decellularized plant materials provide intricate interconnected vasculature for
transport of biomolecules, as well as wide diversity in morphology and length
scales for cell alignment and pattern registration. The research proposed here
aims to develop a decellularized plant leaf-based biomaterial as a broadly
useful and adaptable biomaterial for human cell culture. The research will test
the hypothesis that plant-derived materials conformally coated with chemically-
defined polymer films will support cell adhesion, viability and alignment, and
also enhance stem cell differentiation toward functional tenocytes and myocytes.
The work focuses on developing methodology to fully characterize plant-derived
biomaterials and on developing coating chemistry to modify leaf surfaces to make
them conducive for human cell culture. This understanding will allow systematic
interrogation of the effect of surface topography and the customizable surface
chemistry on the cellular alignment and differentiation. The expected outcomes
of the proposed research are 1) the development of the decellularization
process, and comprehensive characterization of chemical composition,
cytotoxicity, morphology, enzymatic degradability, mass transport, and
mechanical properties of the leaf material, 2) development of novel copolymer
coating chemistry to minimize non-specific adsorption of biomolecules, enable
the nanometer-scale co-localization of adhesion peptides, and quantitatively
present a combination of muscle and tendon extra-cellular matrix derived
peptides, and 3) correlating the leaf microtopography and surface chemistry with
cell alignment during myogenic and tenogenic differentiation using second
harmonic generation microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.