* 2207119
* Controls on ground surface deformation in thrust and reverse fault earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* John Shaw, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2025
* USD 238,111.00

Ground surface rupture during large earthquakes poses significant hazards to
urban environments, critical information and energy transmission infrastructure,
transportation systems, as well as other sensitive facilities in the United
States and other parts of the world. This research will develop a robust
physical understanding of the factors that control the style, distribution, and
intensity of ground surface ruptures during thrust and reverse faults
earthquakes. This will provide a basis for better forecasting the patterns of
ground surface deformation during future earthquakes, with the goal of helping
to reduce the loss of life and property. The research will also support the
training of undergraduate and graduate students, and research results will be
incorporated in new college classes, K-12 education programs, and public
outreach through the Harvard Museum of Natural History.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study will employ the discrete element method (DEM) to generate a large suite of
2-dimensional models (~6,000) that will identify the role of various properties
(e.g., fault dip, sediment strength, sediment thickness) in controlling the
patterns of ground surface deformation. In addition, the study will develop
3-dimensional models that address inherent variability in surface deformation
patterns along strike. The DEM method is well suited to this purpose as it
effectively reproduces both the geologic processes of faulting and folding at
depth, as well as the granular mechanics of soil and sediment deformation in the
shallow subsurface. DEM enables the development of emergent features, such as
fractures/fissures, secondary faults, flexural slip surfaces, and folds that
comprise ground surface deformation patterns during large earthquakes. By
systematically varying fault and sediment parameters in their models, the
researchers will develop a mechanics-based understanding of controls on ground
surface rupture patterns that can help to assess site-specific hazards. Through
large suites of models, they will statistically assess the patterns of ground
surface deformation to inform and enhance Probabilistic Fault Displacement
Hazard Analysis (PFDHA) methods. PFDHA is established as the standard for hazard
forecasting related to ground surface rupture, but is particularly challenged by
thrust and reverse fault earthquakes due to the complexity of these ruptures and
the paucity of historic events to use for calibration. Their results will
provide a robust database to assess how slip at depth is manifest in both direct
fault displacements and distributed ground surface deformation. This will help
to calibrate PFDHA methods used in forecasting rupture locations, displacements,
and other characteristics that pose risks to critical
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.