* 2207794
* Compact Optomechanical Seismic Sensors for LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Felipe Guzman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2025
* USD 330,000.00

This award supports further development of novel compact optomechanical seismic
sensing technologies that strive to provide highly sensitive measurements of
seismic phenomena. Seismic activity and slow vibrations impact suspended
platforms that operate in environments of low pressure (vacuum) and low
temperatures (cryogenics). This project will develop a prototype optomechanical
seismic sensor that will allow the team to investigate its performance under
laboratory conditions. Understanding the instrument parameters of sensitivity
and bandwidth, and its functionality on a suspended platform in vacuum, will
help determine their expected behavior in future gravitational wave
observatories, such as LIGO Voyager, which is the target application of this
research. However, this type of device will likely benefit other areas in
science and industrial applications such as seismology, geodesy, precision
measurements of vibrations, generally inertial sensing and inertial navigation,
where high sensitivity compact instruments are impactful. Furthermore, this
award will support the participation and contributions of this research group to
the international LIGO Scientific Collaboration and the gravitational wave
community at large; allowing the training of our students in STEM areas and
helping to educate the local community in topics related to gravitational
waves.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project targets the development of compact and
highly sensitive optomechanical seismic sensors for the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO). The proposed sensors will be readily
compatible with vacuum environments and aim at high-quality measurements below
100 mHz. It is also planned to test first prototypes on relevant platforms
within the LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC). In addition, the team will
investigate the fabrication of these sensors with materials compatible with
cryogenic environments. This project introduces novel technologies involving
inertial sensing and high precision displacement measurements via laser
interferometry within the context of ground-based gravitational wave astronomy.
Furthermore, this research will pave the way for the development of cryogenic-
compatible devices that could be installed in future generation gravitational
wave observatories. Advancing novel technologies to levels where they become
portable and can be deployed offers a wide variety of relevant interdisciplinary
aspects within STEM areas for the training of future experimental physicists and
engineering professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.