* 2207372
* Conference: Workshop on Steroid Hormones and Brain Function
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2023
* Toni Pak, Loyola University Stritch School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 02/28/2023
* USD 10,000.00

The Workshop on Steroid Hormones and Brain Function is a conference dedicated to
bringing together leading researchers from diverse scientific fields, such as
neuroscience, endocrinology, immunology, and molecular biology to enhance
collaborations and enrich our collective understanding of these complex systems.
Steroid hormones are a class of chemical compounds that are naturally produced
in all vertebrate animals that affect every cell type and physiological system
from embryonic development through advanced age. The brain is the preeminent
coordinator of these chemical signals to regulate everything from molecular
processes within the cell to behavioral outcomes. As an example, brain-dependent
elevation of the steroid hormone cortisol increases blood glucose levels to
support the cellular energy needed to increase heart rate and muscle function
when an individual needs to escape from immediate danger. The conference is
strongly committed to inclusion and diversity in science and will encourage
participation from scientists and trainees from all genders, ethnicities,
cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference
originated in 1993 and has provided an important forum for established
scientists and their trainees with the common goal to further understanding of
the neuroendocrine processes regulating physiology and behavior. The limited
attendance of approximately 100 researches facilitates deeper interactions among
the participants compared to other scientific conferences. This year sessions
will span topics that include the emerging fields of neuroimmune signaling,
neural circuits, environmental influences on brain and behavior, hormone effects
on the aging brain, genetics of sex differences, and Hypothalamic-Pituitary-
Adrenal axis regulation and stress-related behaviors. The meeting will host a
dedicated Young Investigator Symposium where talented early career researchers
will showcase their work and receive valuable scientific input from established
researchers. The meeting will also host a technical workshop with industry
partners to highlight relevant state-of-the art technology, and a grantsmanship
workshop for trainees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.