* 2207863
* Central Valley Region Interdisciplinary Science Education Research Symposium
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Erik Menke, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 49,198.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this conference seeks to serve the national interest
by bringing together researchers, educators, students, and leaders throughout
California’s Central Valley to offer an opportunity for significant
interdisciplinary and cross-campus collaborations that will meet the needs of
the undergraduate student population. Within this region there are more than 25
institutions of higher education, from community colleges to research
universities, ranging in size from under 3,000 to more than 25,000 undergraduate
students. All these institutions serve a student population that is highly
diverse, historically underserved, and representative of America’s current and
future demographics. The development of this symposium will be a cooperative
effort between five of these Central Valley institutions (Fresno City College,
Merced College, California State University (CSU) Stanislaus, CSU Fresno, and
University of California (UC) Merced). Three of these institutions (CSU
Stanislaus, CSU Fresno, and UC Merced) have received NSF Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions (IUSE-HSI) Track 3 grants.
Unfortunately, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, researchers from these grants have
had few opportunities to share the important work that they have accomplished on
these projects. Therefore, the goals of the symposium are to: (1) disseminate
education research findings from the Central Valley community, investigate
trends in education research, and identify future directions for education
research and practice; (2) encourage and facilitate networking and new
interdisciplinary research collaborations among faculty, staff, and students
from Central Valley two-year and four-year institutions that results in rigorous
research that addresses some of our nation’s most pressing education needs; and
(3) provide a space for undergraduate and graduate students to discover and
better understand the field of educational research and potential career
pathways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given our desire for this symposium to become an
annual event, it will be important to assess how well the symposium meets both
the outcomes listed above and meets the needs and expectations of the
participants. To assess the effectiveness of the symposium, we plan to collect
participant demographics, pre- and post-surveys of participants’ expectations,
and track long- term impact metrics and dissemination records. The HSI Program
aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and
build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and
context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity at HSIs are supported by this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.