* 2207970
* Bayesian Signal Reconstruction and Advanced Noise Modeling
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Neil Cornish, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2025
* USD 365,233.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
LIGO and Virgo instruments have recorded almost 100 gravitational wave signals
during the first three observing campaigns of the advanced detector era. This
treasure trove of signals is providing unique insights into the astrophysical
processes that lead to the formation of black hole and neutron star binaries.
When the detectors resume operations in late 2022 or early 2023, new detections
are expected be made on an almost daily basis. In addition to increasing the
rate at which binary mergers are detected, the increased sensitivity of the
instruments will improve the chances of detecting more exotic signals. The
enhanced low frequency sensitivity will also mean that signals will be
detectable for longer, which increases the chances that noise transients and
fluctuations in the noise level will impact the signals. The goals of this
project are threefold: significantly improve the processing speed to keep up
with the deluge of events; develop new tools to detect and explore exotic
signals; and develop new tools to account for noise transients and varying noise
levels. The research projects described offer tremendous opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students: the blend of creative activities associated
with the development of sophisticated and innovative data analysis techniques,
combined with hands on exposure to running existing search pipelines and working
with production level computer code will provide excellent training for the next
generation of gravitational wave astronomers. These skills are transferable and
highly sought after in other fields and in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
most recent LIGO and Virgo observation campaign has emphasized the need for
faster signal processing and more robust noise modeling. As the number of
detections increases, we are starting to see more extreme systems that push the
limits of the signal models used in the analyses. We are also seeing an ever
increasing number of signals that were impacted by instrument noise transients
(glitches). As the low frequency sensitivity of the detectors improves, the time
that the signals are detectable will increase, which further increases the
chances that noise transients and drifts in the noise floor will impact the
analyses. The proposed research will develop new signal reconstruction
techniques that can be used to detect and characterize exotic, un-modeled or
poorly understood signals. This technique is especially well suited for
detecting deviations from general relativity, and for extracting the post-merger
signal from neutron star mergers. The post-merger signal can be used to reveal
the interior composition of the merger remnant, and provide important insights
into the behavior of matter at super-nuclear densities. Additionally, advanced
noise modeling techniques will be deployed that can robustly model non-
stationary and non-Gaussian noise. These advances will be combined with fast
signal processing techniques that dramatically speed up the analyses, allowing
for joint inference of gravitational wave signals, noise transients and non-
stationary drifts in the noise floor in minutes, as opposed to the O3 analyses
which took days or weeks for each event. Finally, a new algorithm for low
latency glitch removal will be implemented that can safely clean the LIGO-Virgo
data of noise transients. Real-time glitch removal will be especially important
for longer duration signals, such as binary neutron star mergers, as the odds of
encountering a glitch grow with the duration of the
signal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.