* 2207343
* Biotic and abiotic drivers of pathogen transmission in marine system under the influence of climate change
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Leah Shaw, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2027
* USD 2,996,986.00

The emergence of pathogens in marine systems affects us all by damaging
fisheries and their supporting ecological communities. Indeed, two regional
icons, blue crabs and oysters, have seen major declines due to disease. The goal
of this study is to understand how climate change and other human impacts alter
disease transmission in marine systems. The transmission of a pathogen,
Hematodinium perezi, to the American blue crab, Callinectes sapidus will be
examined in relation to filter feeding, cannibalism, fishing pressure, and
climate change. Filter feeding is widespread in marine systems and may act to
reduce transmission of pathogens. Cannibalism may reduce susceptible juvenile
crabs and, thus, lower transmission. Because fishing pressure removes adults,
countering cannibalism, commercial fishing may enhance susceptible juveniles and
increase transmission in crab populations. These biotic factors are common to
many marine systems; yet, they have received little attention in terms of their
effects on disease transmission. Climate change magnifies these dynamics through
direct and indirect effects on both the host and pathogen dynamics. This project
builds on its research activities by engaging teachers and students in important
concepts in marine biology, disease ecology, and climate change. Science
teachers will engage in internships, workshops, and field courses to leverage
the project’s research findings for delivery in the classroom. The educational
component will build the capabilities of teachers, graduate students,
undergraduate summer interns, and undergraduates at William &amp; Mary and VIMS
through training in advanced techniques in several disciplines. An online model
will simulate the effects of disease on marine systems, making the research
findings even more accessible to scientists, educators, and students. Outreach
programs at each institution will further inform thousands of people about the
project’s research. Collectively, these activities will enhance the visibility
of this research to the broader scientific community, educational community, and
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disease processes can be very different
between marine and terrestrial ecosystems. In marine systems, biotic factors
such as top-down control of phytoplankton through filter feeding, density-
dependent cannibalism in predator populations, and industrialized fishing
operate on grand scales that alter the dynamics of host populations; however,
their influence on disease ecology has received little attention. An
investigation into the blue crab – Hematodinium perezi system allows insights
into the interactions among these factors. Hematodinium perezi is a pathogen of
blue crabs that is hyper-endemic in the coastal bays of the eastern USA. The
pathogen has a predilection for juvenile crabs. Cannibalism removes large
numbers of juveniles, potentially suppressing outbreaks. In contrast, fishing
pressure removes large numbers of adults, potentially enhancing the susceptible
juvenile population. In addition, filter feeding by oysters may reduce
transmission of H. perezi, and when combined with high abundance such as in
oyster reefs, may negatively influence disease transmission to blue crabs.
Overlying these factors is the ecosystem-level disruption caused by climate
change, which includes additional enhancements to pathogen transmission through
increased proliferation and dispersal. These factors can be modeled to provide
insight into their influence over host – pathogen dynamics. This study has five
objectives: (I) integrate disease and seasonality into a population model of the
blue crab; (II) examine the interactions between filter feeders in the ecosystem
and pathogen transmission; (III) explore how natural mortality (predation,
cannibalism) and fishing pressure affect transmission and incidence of the
pathogen; (IV) examine the influence of climate change on disease transmission
and dispersal; and (V) analyze nonlinear mechanisms for broader application to
wildlife disease dynamics. Although this study focuses on the transmission
dynamics in the blue crab – Hematodinium perezi system, it is applicable to
other marine systems impacted by similar stressors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.