* 2207241
* Louis Stokes B2B Alliance: Harris County Community College Alliance (HCCCA)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Sharon Sledge, San Jacinto College District
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,478,965.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts to significantly increase
the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority populations
(African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska Natives,
Native Hawaiians, or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete high-
quality degree programs in STEM. The Harris County Community College Alliance of
LSAMP continues its partnership between two public, associate-degree granting,
Hispanic Serving two-year institutions (San Jacinto College District and Houston
Community College). This program supports underrepresented minority students at
a critical point in their academic pathway when they need to acquire a
scientific mindset, see themselves as members of the scientific community, and
gain the research skills required to succeed at two- and four-year institutions.
This program will address the following: transform community college students’
educational research experiences through an innovative series of modules that
build research abilities and a scientific mindset, provide an understanding of
the research process and develop a range of transferable skills; and cultivate a
science identity in underrepresented minority students through scholarly
communities, environments, and exploration of STEM careers and occupations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Harris County Community College Alliance model
promotes a science self-identity and mindset that encourages underrepresented
minority students to explore new academic pursuits and career options leading to
upper division baccalaureate degree programs. This alliance model will be
accomplished in the following ways. Recruitment—reach at least 3,000 students
through a series of public presentations, events, and targeted emails to
underrepresented minority students; these events are designed to increase the
number of students who understand the importance of scientific knowledge,
research, and careers. Engagement—provide opportunities to at least 450 scholars
to gain research skills transferable to current course work and future research
opportunities. Students will participate in research exploration, investigation,
and experiences by completing STEM Research Abilities and Proficiencies modules.
These modules introduce research theory and practice that cover concepts and
skills for a broad spectrum of disciplines. Persistence—offer first-year Scholar
mentoring, faculty mentoring, peer-to-peer mentoring, and learning communities
to counteract the low persistence rate of underrepresented/underserved scholars
in their academic pathways. These scholarly, creative, and inclusive
environments will increase persistence by at least 75%; persistence includes
continuing their studies at the community college, transferring to a four-year
institution, and graduating. Transferability—transition and transfer an
additional 1,083 STEM students to four-year institutions through course mapping,
guided pathways, transfer advising, transfer-promoting events, financial
literacy guidance, and utilization of LSAMP alumni at four-year universities as
a transfer pipeline. These strategies will allow the Harris County Community
College Alliance of LSAMP program to expand the number of underrepresented and
underserved students pursuing and participating in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics research, diversifying the pool of students with
the potential to address societal and technological
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.