* 2207880
* Black Hole Archaeology
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Jeremy Sakstein, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2025
* USD 148,812.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
science of gravitational wave astronomy has opened a new window on the universe.
Through it, we can observe the light-speed collisions of black holes, some of
the most enigmatic objects in the universe. These objects are the remnants of
very massive stars (30-100 times heavier than the Sun) that collapsed under
their own gravity millions of light-years across the Universe. Similar to how
archeology uses the remnants of ancient civilizations to understand how they
lived their lives, this project, Black Hole Archaeology, will use these black
hole remnants to understand the processes governing the lives of massive stars.
Black Hole Archaeology will advance our understanding of the structure and
evolution of stars, test Einstein’s theory of General Relativity, and shed new
light on the nature of dark matter. The sensational themes of the project —
exploding stars, general relativity, and ripples in spacetime — will become the
foundation of a new and exciting outreach project that will see volunteer
researchers engage students at the K-12 level in schools across the island of
O’ahu in an effort to remove barriers responsible for the under-representation
of Native Hawaiians in STEM disciplines, and to mitigate inequities in the
exposure of K-12 students to STEM engagement across the island.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop novel competitive probes of stellar
structure theory, dark matter, dark energy, and gravity using black hole
population statistics. The mass function of astrophysical black holes offers
unique insights into the processes governing their progenitors: massive stars.
The shape of the mass function as well as the location of features such as the
black hole mass gap are sensitive to stellar process such as nuclear reactions,
as well as potential new physics such as novel energy losses due to dark matter
and dark energy, and modifications of general relativity. The goals of this
project are: 1. develop numerical codes capable of theoretically predicting the
astrophysical black hole mass spectrum (including the location of the mass gap)
in competing dark matter, dark energy, and gravity theories, and when the rates
of nuclear reactions effecting massive stars are varied; 2. develop a novel
theoretical astrophysical black hole mass function whose free parameters
correspond directly with important astrophysical quantities such as the location
of the mass gap; and 3. train the next generation of scientists by coaching
graduate and undergraduate students in this highly interdisciplinary frontier
science. This project will expand the science applications of gravitational wave
astronomy by enabling information about fundamental physics and the processes
governing massive stars to be extracted from gravitational wave catalogs. This
will enable a deeper understanding of stellar structure, nuclear physics,
particle physics, cosmology, and gravitation. The project will probe physics in
regimes that are inaccessible to stellar surveys, particle physics, cosmological
missions, and direct detection experiments, and will thus establish a new
complementary frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.