* 2207284
* The role of intercellular interactions in bacterial swarming motility
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jay Tang, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 06/30/2025
* USD 330,972.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria live in our surroundings,
including in our own bodies. Understanding their ability to move is important
for controlling them for the benefit of our environment and public health. This
research program focuses on the study of swarms of bacteria on a moist surface.
The work is performed on a newly discovered species of bacteria called
Enterobacter sp. SM3, which manifests robust swarming abilities. The goal of the
program is to examine how cell-cell interactions in a crowded population of
bacteria affect their movement. The bacterial swarms will be characterized as
active matter. Understanding the role of cell-cell interactions in bacterial
swarms will aid in the control and treatment of large bacterial populations in
environmental situations, such as large mats of bacteria known as biofilms, and
in the microbiomes of human and animal intestines. The program will directly
fund one PhD dissertation and provide training to several masterâ€™s and
undergraduate students as research assistants, including undergraduate students
from a historically black college for summer research.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the study is to
assess the extent to which intercellular interactions define the swarming
motility in a dense bacterial population. The team seeks to observe and
characterize specific patterns and collective motion of a large bacterial
population under properly designed conditions that vary intercellular
interactions, such as dynamic alignment, hydrodynamic entrainment, and flagella
entanglement. They also seek to uncover additional interactions mediated either
by secreted extracellular matrix materials or by added polymers which serve as a
viscoelastic medium. The objective is to account for observed patterns and
features of collective motility based on the principles of active matter
physics. If successful, the program will provide new insights, not only on
bacterial swarming behavior, but also on the collective behavior of individually
motile particles in general. The work will further establish bacterial swarms as
biologically significant active matter with a range of emergent properties. The
program integrates knowledge across the diverse fields of soft matter physics,
microbiology, and fluid dynamics. In addition to the direct impact on active
matter physics research, the work may also lead to applications in ecology and
infection control guided by concepts and strategy rooted in soft matter
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.