* 2207642
* Mechanisms and Kinetics of Saltwater-Driven Carbon Dioxide Capture for Environmental and Ocean Health
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Myeongsub Kim, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2025
* USD 420,475.00

Human-caused excessive carbon dioxide emissions in the ocean and the atmosphere
are a significant threat to all life on Earth. This extra carbon dioxide in the
ocean leads to an undesirable process called ocean acidification. In addition,
the increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere causes the global temperature to
rise, significantly altering the Earth's climate. To mitigate these emissions,
many power plants capture carbon dioxide from flue gas through a post-combustion
process that separates the carbon dioxide using freshwater and nitrogen-
containing chemicals, a promising technology that, unfortunately, relies heavily
on freshwater and produces environmentally harmful byproducts. To reduce costs
and energy consumption, chemical-free carbon dioxide dissolution in saltwater
would be a good alternative to conventional freshwater capture techniques. The
overarching objective of this proposal is to evaluate the performance and
environmental impact of seawater to capture carbon dioxide using environmentally
friendly metal nanoparticle catalysts. Successful completion of the project will
provide a strategy to transform the long-term health of atmospheric and ocean
environments by removing harmful carbon dioxide using ample natural resources.
Beyond the direct impact on the environment, the project will advance
decontamination technologies for the agricultural, environmental, and energy
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A healthy ocean is essential for the global
climate, absorbing roughly 40% of carbon dioxide emissions. The development of a
novel catalytic carbon dioxide separation approach is critical for addressing
rapid global warming and ocean acidification. The goal of this research is to
understand the fundamental mechanisms of absorption-based gas separation in
natural seawater using polymer-stabilized nickel nanoparticle catalysts. This
goal will be accomplished by a comprehensive ex-situ and in-situ examination of
the nanoparticle size, morphology, and surface chemistry during reactions in
seawater using nanoscale microscopy and spectroscopy. The research will
investigate the time-dependent surface chemistry at the interface between the
nickel nanoparticle surface and the surrounding solution, enabling a better
understanding of the progressive reaction states of the nanoparticles.
Fundamental insights into the reaction mechanism of nanoparticle-involved carbon
dioxide dissolution in saltwater will explain the unprecedented dissolution
efficiency under conventionally unfavorable conditions. To further understand
nanoparticle-driven carbon dioxide dissolution in saltwater, the dissolution
kinetics will be investigated as a function of carrier fluids, reaction
conditions, and catalyst properties. The final tasks will be to evaluate the
dominant elements that promote precipitation of carbonate minerals, identify the
leading type of minerals, characterize the resultant minerals, and study the
feasibility of carbonate-based mitigation for ocean acidification. This research
will provide a fundamental understanding of catalytic carbon dioxide separation
under variable fluid, reaction, and catalyst property conditions, advancing
science towards effective gas separation in the energy and chemical industry. In
addition, an understanding of carbonate formation in the heterogeneous saltwater
environment will enable the identification of dominant byproducts valuable to
marine organisms as well as the impacts of carbonate minerals on marine
calcification. The learned knowledge will be transformative by promoting the use
of saltwater in many environmental energy processes while saving the
increasingly limited freshwater supply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.