* 2207115
* Collaborative Research: Dust Entrainment Processes by Convective Vortices and Localized Turbulent Structures: Experimental and Numerical Study
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Yulia Peet, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/2025
* USD 331,622.00

Dust in the atmosphere plays a significant role in modulating weather, air
quality, and climate. Most studies of the lofting of dust from the surface have
focused on steady wind conditions. However, there are obvious examples of other
types of dust lifting mechanisms, such as dust devils, that occur in situations
where the wind flow is more complicated. This research project will combine
high-resolution numerical modeling with laboratory experiments to study dust
devils and convective vortices and how they entrain dust from the surface. The
long-term impact of the project will be to improve the prediction of dust
entrainment, which has a significant climate impact. The research team will also
conduct a significant education and outreach effort, with graduate and
undergraduate students, outreach to K-12 students, and a virtual mini-symposium
including international partners. The project plans to enhance diversity through
specific programs that recruit underrepresented undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project is to
identify and characterize the fundamental mechanisms triggering the entrainment
of dust in the non-equilibrium conditions that depart from a canonical, well-
investigated scenario of a fully-developed boundary layer flow that assumes both
spatial homogeneity and statistical stationarity. An example of a non-
equilibrium condition is a dust devil, which is a vortical structure that can
lift significant amounts of dust. The research team will, through a combination
of laboratory experiments and numerical simulations, characterize and identify
the role of individual dust lifting processes in the physics of sediment
entrainment by dust devils and convective vortices. The laboratory experimental
setup consists of a vortex generator with three-dimensional particle image
velocimetry (PIV) and particle tracking velocimetry (3D-PTV) systems. The
computational aspect of the project will use an open-source spectral-element
method (SEM) code Nek5000 which was co-developed by one of the researchers. The
laboratory and numerical techniques would be used to answer the following
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. What is the effect of a horizontal spatial
inhomogeneity of mean and fluctuating properties of the carrier flow turbulence
on dust entrainment mechanisms in non-canonical vortex flows? What is the role
of the competing forces, such as aerodynamic, pressure gradient, cohesion,
gravity and electric forces in the dust entrainment processes?&lt;br/&gt;2. What
is the role of the particle size, Stokes number and the size distribution
modality? Would the main mechanisms be different or similar for inertial
particles of different sizes?&lt;br/&gt;3. What kind of agreement is expected
between experimental and computational results in a representation of multiphase
flow turbulence? What is the source and value of uncertainties?&lt;br/&gt;4.
What are the implications for modeling? How well the global (local) sediment
fluxes are correlated with the global (local) vortex flow variables? This
information is critical for developing improved sediment flux parameterizations
for simulation models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.