* 2207547
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: Nonasymptotic Analysis for Stochastic Networks and Systems: Foundations and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Rayadurgam Srikant, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The confluence of cloud computing, machine learning/artificial intelligence and
Internet-of-things/sensor technology is transforming society in unprecedented
ways, and leading to innovations in autonomous systems, healthcare,
bioinformatics, social networks, online and in-store retail industry, and
education. Breakthrough developments in these widely disparate fields use
machine learning and cloud computing with millions of servers to aid data-driven
decision-making using terabytes of data, some in real-time and some offline. At
the heart of these large-scale machine-learning and cloud-computing applications
are stochastic dynamical systems of enormous scale. Analyzing and optimizing
such systems are often difficult because of the size and the unknown statistical
description of the underlying randomness in such systems. This project is aimed
at understanding the performance of large stochastic systems by developing a new
analytical method that synthesizes tools from probability, machine learning, and
stochastic networks, and will lead to new advances in the design of fast and
more efficient computing systems for training large-scale machine-learning
models, while yielding new fundamental insights into deep reinforcement-learning
algorithms. The project will contribute to education and workforce development
by integrating the theories and algorithms into the graduate-level courses and
by involving undergraduate and students from underrepresented groups in the
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a new analytical method
for obtaining non-asymptotic bounds using Lyapunov drift analysis. The method
combines drift analysis with ideas from Stein's method, dimensionality reduction
from state-space collapse and properties of reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces,
as appropriate. The project leverages three key ideas to advance the state-of-
the-art: Stein's method to choose appropriate Lyapunov functions to study mean-
field limits, identifying lower-order models using the notion of state-space
collapse, and using moment-generating functions or characteristic functions as
test functions to obtain higher-moment bounds on the performance of stochastic
systems. During the course of this project, the method is applied to two
applications: (i) robust and ultra-low latency computing networks for supporting
complex machine-learning jobs with concurrent and dependent tasks, which are
processed in heterogeneous server farms; and (ii) deep reinforcement-learning
for deriving new performance bounds for neural temporal-difference learning and
for the Actor-Critic algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.