* 2207337
* Research in Algebraic Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Michelle Wachs, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2025
* USD 210,000.00

The research supported by this grant is in algebraic combinatorics, an area of
mathematics that seeks to develop connections between combinatorics (the science
of counting, arranging and analyzing concrete discrete configurations) and
fields of pure mathematics that involve sophisticated abstract algebraic
structures. The idea is to use these connections to gain deeper insights and
solve problems in combinatorics and in the other fields. The discrete
configurations that are studied in combinatorics arise in various fields of
mathematics, computer science, physics, biology and engineering; DNA sequences,
phylogenetic trees, and communications networks are all examples of such
discrete configurations. Combinatorial methods are playing an increasing role in
these fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is comprised of three
related projects involving generalizations and variations of classical
combinatorial objects such as chromatic polynomials, Eulerian polynomials,
partition lattices, and free Lie algebras. The first project deals with a
refinement of Stanley's chromatic symmetric functions that was introduced in
work of John Shareshian and the PI. The refinement, the chromatic quasisymmetric
functions, generalizes Eulerian polynomials as well as chromatic polynomials. An
algebro-geometric approach to settling the longstanding Stanley-Stembridge
e-positivity conjecture, involving a connection between the chromatic
quasisymmetric functions and the Hessenberg varieties of De Mari, Procesi, and
Shayman, was presented in this work. This approach initiated significant
interaction between combinatorialists working with symmetric functions and
algebraic geometers working on Hessenberg varieties. Further study of the
chromatic quasisymmetric functions, as well as its connection with Hessenberg
varieties is proposed. The second project involves a new polynomial graph
invariant and a more general symmetric function graph invariant introduced by
the PI and her former student Rafael Gonzalez D'Leon. These graph invariants
generalize variations of Eulerian polynomials such as the classical Narayana
polynomials and Haiman's parking function symmetric functions. This project is
focused on settling unimodality conjectures, e-positivity conjectures and other
concrete conjectures for these graph invariants. The third project arose in
theoretical physics. It deals with an n-ary generalization of a Lie algebra
known as a Filippov algebra. The study of the representation of the symmetric
group on the multilinear component of the free Filippov algebra was initiated in
work of Friedmann, Hanlon, Stanley, and the PI. Although this work has already
produced some significant results, there is much that remains to be
done.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.