* 2207804
* CRCNS US-German Research Proposal: Computational modeling and real-time visualization of microscale-forces-induced neurovascular unit permeability
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Ali Hafezi-Moghadam, Brigham & Women's Hospital Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 11/30/2025
* USD 308,708.00

The blood vessels in the central nervous system fulfill the complicated task of
providing oxygen and nutrients to the neurons, while at the same time protecting
the neurons from harmful molecules. This is accomplished through tight
opposition and closure of the cells that cover the inner surfaces of these
vessels. How these cells respond to microscale mechanical vibrations is a
mystery. Such vibrations occur when sound waves that are too high-pitched to be
audible propagate through tissues. Another way to generate microscale vibrations
is a brief laser pulse. The goal of this research is to develop a novel
technology that creates controlled microscale vibrations, while at the same time
microscopically visualizing the effect. The neuronal layer in the back of the
eye, the retina, will be used for this study. These experiments will provide for
the first time insights into how cells react to mechanical alterations and will
open the door to a new category of interventions. It is expected that cells
distinguish the pitch and intensity of these microscale mechanical vibrations
and gauge their responses accordingly. During normal aging or in diseases, such
as Alzheimer’s disease, aberrant molecules accumulate around neurons and impede
their normal functioning. Controlled microscale mechanical vibrations bring
about new possibilities for dislodging and removing these deleterious molecules
before neurons are harmed and the individuals’ cognitive or visual functions
decline. The principal investigator will engage with students and educators in
the broader community to share the novel technologies under development herein.
A goal will be to attract, enroll, and train individuals with disabilities,
women, and minorities in this area of research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Blood-
Retina-Barrier (BRB) selectively regulates the permeability of molecules that
reach the neurons. There is an unmet scientific and medical need for a temporal
and non-injurious opening of the BRB. The goals of this project are A)
development of a novel technology to deliver microscale mechanical vibrations to
the retina under live microscopy, B) to visualize the effect of these microscale
vibrations in the BRB, and C) to computationally model the process of the
molecular passage through the BRB. The expected outcome will be image-guided
acoustic and/or photo-acoustic alterations of the BRB. The project team's
approach combines in vivo animal experiments with computational modeling in
silico. To modulate BRB’s permeability, the project team will implement a
recently developed new laser-based photo-acoustic and pure acoustic technologies
to study the resulting dynamic processes in real-time with an image-guided
approach using custom-developed hardware. A computational model will be
developed based on mass balance equations. In rodents, BRB permeability will be
measured through quantitative analysis of angiographic images. The results of
the in vivo experiments will refine the computational
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion project is being funded by the
Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany (BMBF). This project is
jointly funded by the following NSF programs: Disability and Rehabilitation
Engineering and Collaborative Research in Computational
Neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.