* 2207995
* Theoretical Concepts for Generation and Characterization of Ultraviolet Laser Pulses
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Andreas Becker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The ultraviolet region is an important part of the electromagnetic spectrum
since excitation and ionization energies of many atoms, molecules,
nanoparticles, and materials lie in this spectral regime. Light sources
operating at ultraviolet wavelengths can be used to trigger, steer, probe, and
image physical processes, chemical reactions and transitions in materials on
ultrafast time scales. Beyond their significance for fundamental scientific
research, applications of ultraviolet lasers can be found in nanotechnology,
microlithography and micromachining, medicine and other areas. Applications and
interpretation of scientific results are however still limited due to a lack of
bright tunable light sources generating well-characterized short pulses at
ultraviolet wavelengths. Research in this project will promote the progress of
science in this area by developing and applying new theoretical methods to
understand aspects of the generation of short-pulsed ultraviolet laser light and
to measure the generated ultrashort pulses in experiments. A graduate student
will receive training in a forefront topic in theoretical atomic, molecular, and
optical physics. This includes the analysis of concepts towards the project
goals, the development of software and its applications, as well as the
dissemination of the results in oral and written form. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
focus of this project is to provide theoretical support for the development of
short-pulsed ultraviolet laser sources. To this end, numerical simulations of
the macroscopic high harmonic generation in a gas jet experiment will be
performed. Specific emphasis will be given to the analysis of the impact of the
spatial phase dependence across the laser focus of a short Gaussian laser pulse
generating the harmonic response. Conditions for good coherent build-up of
harmonic radiation will be identified and the influence of experimental
limitations, such as fluctuations in laser intensity or gas density, will be
analyzed. Furthermore, a multi-Gaussian auto- and cross-correlation approach and
its application to various pulse forms will be
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.