* 2207395
* RUI: Effects of Traffic Noise on Avian Cognition
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Christopher Templeton, Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2025
* USD 350,000.00

Human-derived noise pollution is a ubiquitous feature of many landscapes and has
been shown to have a variety of negative effects on the ecology and behavior of
animals. Recent research indicates that noise pollution could also affect how
well animals learn to solve problems. This award examines the mechanism through
which noise pollution affects animal cognition and will help determine whether
animals living in noisy habitats (e.g., near highways or busy cities) can
overcome the negative impacts of these noise sources on their cognitive
performance. This research will provide generalizable insights about how animals
respond to changing environmental conditions and will have key implications for
the conservation of animal populations. With similar negative effects of noise
on cognitive function also proposed for humans, better understanding this
relationship will also likely have direct application to the welfare of human
societies. The award will provide key infrastructure and research capability at
a primarily undergraduate and minority-serving institution, leading directly to
numerous opportunities for undergraduate students to gain hands-on research
experiences that will help support their future careers in science, especially
from groups who have traditionally been underrepresented in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anthropogenic noise has a number of detrimental
impacts on animal physiology, behavior, populations, and communities. A recent
study demonstrated further negative effects on cognitive function in one species
of captive-raised songbird, but this phenomenon has been little studied and the
mechanisms driving this relationship are unknown. The goal of this research is
to determine whether traffic noise similarly impacts cognition in other songbird
species and whether animals that regularly encounter noise pollution in their
environment continue to experience the same level of reduced cognitive
performance as na√Øve individuals. This research will expose birds to foraging
tasks designed to measure a variety of aspects of animal cognition (e.g.,
inhibitory control, motor learning, associative learning, spatial memory, etc.)
under varying road traffic noise regimes. This research will make several
advances by examining how varying the type and duration of traffic noise
exposure impacts cognitive performance in birds held under carefully controlled
laboratory conditions, determining whether previous findings extend to wild
songbird species, and establish whether noise differentially affects those
animals living in wild populations that are more exposed to noise pollution. The
results of this award will shed light on the mechanisms driving noise-induced
cognitive inhibition, with implications for cognitive science, animal behavior,
urban ecology, and conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.