* 2207953
* Conference: Quantum materials in the post Covid-19 era
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Gregory Fiete, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2023
* USD 19,366.00

This award provides support for U.S. participation in the international
conference “Topological Quantum Electrons Interacting In-person” to be held July
10 - 16, 2022, at the International Centre for Interdisciplinary Science
Education (ICISE) in the city of Quy Nhon, Vietnam.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
conference will bring together a diverse international group of theorists and
experimentalists working in the field of electronic properties of quantum
materials. Quantum materials refers to a class of materials for which their
principal interesting properties result from unusual states of electronic matter
that require quantum mechanical description. They are a consequence of the
correlated motion of many electrons acting collectively. Often the relevant
electrons are confined to two-dimensions. This conference will highlight recent
developments in the study of the properties of novel quantum materials,
including topological states of matter, twisted bilayer systems, magnetic
materials, transition metal dichalcogenides, superconductors, and quantum
phenomena in mesoscopic systems. Technological aspects of these subjects will be
covered as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by the long period in which in
person interactions were disallowed due to the pandemic, the program of the
conference will be prepared with in-person participation and an emphasis on
highlighting junior participants and their scientific achievements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will commence with a short series of
pedagogical lectures by experts in theoretical and experimental aspects of
quantum materials. The pedagogical lectures will be aimed at junior researchers
to provide them with the necessary background to appreciate the research-level
talks to come by leading researchers from across the world. The conference is
organized to allow for informal interactions among junior and senior
researchers, and cultural exchanges with the participants who will be
representative of the global research community, particularly between US-based
and Asian-based researchers who may not otherwise have the opportunity for
extended interaction or even meet. US based researchers will have the
opportunity to present their research and interact with a pool of world leading
experts in the field that is difficult to assemble in the US. The NSF supported
participants will be selected from a nationwide pool with selection determine by
the organizing committee of the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.