* 2207780
* Compact Objects and Gravitational Radiation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Pablo Laguna, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Albert Einstein's famous Theory of General Relativity predicts and explains the
role of gravity in our universe. Two of its most famous predictions are
gravitational waves, basically message carriers for gravity that travel as
radiation, and black holes, the most compact objects in the universe. In 2015,
the NSF-funded LIGO observed a universe that behaved consistent with Einstein's
theory, at least at the current sensitivity of the detectors. Since then, 90
events have been observed from the coalescence of compact objects, namely black
holes and neutron stars, and the understanding of the universe has entered a new
era driven by these gravitational-wave observations. To realize their promise,
scientists must identify the source of the gravitational wave and extract
information about that source, which requires solutions to Einstein's equations.
This award works toward realizing the promise of gravitational waves by using
numerical relativity to provide Einstein's theoretical predictions of the
waveforms. This award also supports education and training. The investigators
will participate in a newly developed American Physical Society Bridge program
at the Department of Physics at the University of Texas at Austin and will
continue to capitalize on the excitement generated by the detections of
gravitational waves by providing movies of gravitational wave events made
available to all on the YouTube site, Maya
Collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award supports two scientific endeavors
related to the interpretation of gravitational waves. First is the continuation
of the Maya Collaboration's bank of binary black hole simulations, which will be
expanded to cover the physical parameters of the sources at the accuracy
required by increasingly sensitive detectors. The focus will be on simulations
involving eccentric and highly precessing binaries. The effort will also involve
a new catalog of simulations of neutron star -- black hole mergers. Motivated by
the improvements that future gravitational wave detectors will bring, the work
in both catalogues will pay particular attention to assessing the impact of
errors on the parameter estimation as well as finding ways to optimize the
placement of runs. The second recognizes that as the gravitational wave
detectors increase in sensitivity, they will reveal more exotic signals.
Interpreting these signals requires a fast, reliable, and robust parameter
estimation algorithm that can be used with state-of-the-art waveforms. Using an
in-house team of experts in numerical relativity and gravitational wave
parameter estimation, the PI's team will follow-up unusual gravitational wave
events with numerical relativity simulations, investigate the measurability of
new parameters, and assess the waveform systematics resulting from waveform
models and numerical relativity errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.