* 2207638
* Collaborative Research: A Data Challenge for the Next Generation of Ground-Based Gravitational Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Bangalore Sathyaprakash, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2025
* USD 110,000.00

The National Science Foundationâ€™s Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave
Observatory (LIGO) has begun a new era in the exploration of the Universe.
Scientists can now use gravitational waves, ripples in the fabric of spacetime,
to explore distant objects like black holes and neutron stars. As LIGO continues
to explore the universe, scientists are making plans for the next generation of
gravitational-wave observatories; observatories that can see every black hole
merger in the universe and have the potential to reveal the physics that governs
the behavior of dense matter. In the United States, the community has been
developing a design for a detector called Cosmic Explorer and Europe is
proposing a complementary observatory known as the Einstein Telescope. Achieving
the scientific potential of these observatories requires advanced algorithms and
computational techniques that need to be developed now, so these algorithms are
ready when the detectors begin exploring the gravitational-wave sky in the
2030s. These skills that students will learn developing these technologies will
advance the competitiveness of the U.S. STEM workforce. This award will also
support an effort to bring high-performance computing to school districts in
rural Pennsylvania and promote STEM education in K-12
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of progressively more difficult data
challenges will be created to confront the data-analysis hurdles presented by
the next generation of gravitational-wave detectors. These challenges will: (i)
inform the progress that would need to be made in the development of new
algorithms for efficient detection and parameter inference, (ii) help estimate
the computational resources required to fully exploit the science potential of
next-generation detectors and (iii) build and engage a community of researchers
that is ready to explore the Universe with this new observational window. This
award will provide an opportunity to determine if science results from the
signal-rich data of future detectors can be reliably extracted and stimulate
research in the development of new analysis and inference algorithms that can
deal with overlapping multiple signal types and strengths, of varying duration
and cadence, all buried in data with non-stationarities and
gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.