* 2207663
* Space-Time Quantization and Dark Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Ali Chamseddine, American University of Beirut
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 20,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Ali Chamseddine at the
American University of Beirut.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical elementary-
particle physics research aims to develop a better understanding of the building
blocks of nature and their fundamental interactions. This is done by searching
for and building theoretical models which go beyond what is presently known and
which could be tested by experiments or which satisfy stringent mathematical
requirements. This forces researchers in this field to explore the frontiers of
knowledge and invent new methods for their analysis of such theories. Thus,
research in this area advances the national interest by promoting the progress
of science in one of the most challenging directions requiring human ingenuity:
finding the physical laws that govern the universe and its matter constituents
ranging from cosmic to subatomic scales. As part of this project, Professor
Chamseddine will invent new mathematics to reach this scientific goal. In
particular, the research of Professor Chamseddine will continue to develop new
geometry that describes the hidden structure of spacetime and helps to explain
why nature behaves in the way in which it is observed. Professor Chamseddine
will also study a modified model of Einstein's General Relativity which explains
the origin of dark matter and helps to solve some long-standing problems such as
removing singularities in cosmological models at the birth of the universe and
for black holes. This work will also have an important broader impact. The
American University of Beirut plays a very important role in promoting the
American educational system in the Middle East. This grant will therefore help
to sustain a world-class scientific research program within that part of the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the technical level, the research of Professor
Chamseddine is aimed at developing consistent noncommutative geometric models at
the quantum level. One important step is to identify quanta of geometry that
could be used as building blocks of matter to construct four-dimensional
manifolds and their noncommutative extension. In addition, the work of Professor
Chamseddine on the newly developed mimetic gravity will be applied to solve some
outstanding problems in cosmology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.