* 2207023
* Neural stem cell mechanisms of resilience across the lifespan
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Matthew Huentelman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,099,733.00

The vertebrate nervous system contains active stem cells that generate new nerve
cells throughout life. Creating new nerve cells is a core mechanism underlying
resilience, adaptive capacity, and ‘plasticity’ in the brain. These new nerve
cells are regulated, in part, by age- and sex-dependent factors. However, how
age and sex influence new nerve cells is not well understood. This research
project will investigate how neural stem cell function across various ages and
in response to sex hormones. These studies will help an understanding of how
neural stem cells contribute to neural plasticity which, in turn, can promote
lifelong healthy brain function and replacement of neural cells lost to injury
or disease. Moreover, this project will provide training of diverse
undergraduate and graduate students and the projects include conducting outreach
via the Brain Bus program’s mobile neuroscience unit that serves students at
K-12 schools in Southern Arizona. The project will also engage senior citizens
to enhance public awareness of stem cells and brain resilience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the mechanisms of neural plasticity and
resiliency is a central challenge of neurobiology. This project investigates the
evolving dynamics of neural stem cell-based resilience mechanisms across
developmental time in the mammalian brain. Specifically, using aging rodents as
a model, the project will: (1) study how neural stem cells change, at cellular,
molecular and functional levels over time; and (2) address the role of the
female sex hormones estrogen and progesterone in this process. The PI’s prior
work discovered specific critical periods of vulnerability and identified a
vital role for the NRF2 transcription factor in regulating neural stem cell
function with age. The current project builds on this foundation, and utilizes
transgenic animals, viral vectors, single-cell sequencing, and functional
assays, to answer fundamental questions of (1) how neural stem cell populations
are maintained with age, (2) how sex hormones affect neural stem cells, and (3)
the nature and consequences of neural stem cell heterogeneity during the
lifespan. Overall, the expected project outcomes will help define the basic
attributes of this class of stem cells and reveal mechanisms underlying their
resiliency. The project will also improve science education and promote
diversity in neuroscience by incorporating the proposed research into training a
diverse population of undergraduate and graduate researchers in stem cell and
brain resilience research, and by educating K-12 students and senior citizens on
this topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.