* 2207286
* Dynamical, Strong-Field Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Frans Pretorius, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2025
* USD 315,027.00

The research goals of this award are focused on understanding the strong-field
regime of Einstein's theory of general relativity. This encompasses both
astrophysical and theoretical aspects of general relativity. On the
astrophysical side, the main effort is the numerical simulation of binary black
hole, black hole-neutron star and binary neutron star collisions. This is
critical for the nascent field of gravitational wave astronomy that began in
2015 with LIGO's detection of the collision of two black holes. The speed at
which the field is advancing is breathtaking, with the first gravitational wave
detection of a binary neutron star collision in 2017, accompanied by intense
study of the aftermath across the electromagnetic spectrum by a large community
of observational astronomers. Numerical models of such events are needed to aid
in detection, and are crucial to decipher details of what happened. On the
theoretical side, there are many outstanding questions about the nature of
spacetime in extreme situations. One example is the behavior of black holes that
rotate close to the maximum rate theoretically allowed by Einstein's theory :
there have been suggestions that the horizons of such black holes could exhibit
some form of turbulent dynamics, and one goal of this award is to investigate
those claims. The pursuit of these projects will involve graduate students,
undergraduates and postdoctoral fellows. They will be trained to do leading
scientific research, become knowledgeable in corresponding areas of physics, and
adept in high-performance computing and numerical methods. These skills are
invaluable to many professions, and would thus also benefit and further the
development of those students and postdocs that subsequently wish to pursue
careers outside academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A specific list of gravitational
wave source modeling projects that will be pursued are (1) using properties of
the quasi-normal ringdown of the remnant black hole following a binary black
hole merger to test general relativity, in particular the uniqueness properties
of black holes, (2) constraining certain modified gravity theories using black
hole merger observations, (3) developing models of exotic compact object
alternatives to black holes to allow concrete predictions of how their merger
waveforms differ from those of binary black holes, and hence detect, constrain
or rule out such models, and (4) modeling tidal and dissipative effects in the
merger of binaries containing neutron stars. To address the problem of
turbulence in near-extremal Kerr black holes, the group will continue
development of analytical and numerical tools to study perturbations of such
black holes to second order in perturbation theory; the outcome of this will
guide whether a full numerical code adapted to the problem warrants
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.