* 2207368
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance:  Peach State Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2027
* William Kisaalita, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,499,998.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts to significantly increase the number of students successfully completing
high-quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-
Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Peach State
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, led by the University of
Georgia, consists of Fort Valley State University (FVSU, an HBCU), Georgia State
University Perimeter College (GSU-PC – two-year institution), Georgia Institute
of Technology (GT), Kennesaw State University-Kennesaw Campus (KSU-K), Kennesaw
State University-Marietta Campus (KSU-M) and Savannah State University (SSU, an
HBCU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peach State LSAMP will leverage funding, resources,
partnerships, and commitments of each member institution to provide academic,
social, professional, and financial support and programming for LSAMP
populations pursuing baccalaureate degrees in STEM fields of study. Over the
next five years, the alliance will conduct scholarly research to understand the
impact and student outcomes for LSAMP students as they engage in research
through a Vertically Integrated Project (VIP) program. The LSAMP VIP program
will be a transformative approach for engaging undergraduate and graduate
students in ambitious, long-term, large-scale, multidisciplinary project teams
led by faculty solving real-world problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Peach State
LSAMP aims to achieve the following goals by 2027:&lt;br/&gt;Goal 1: Increase
enrollment of students underrepresented in STEM disciplines by 20% above the
2019-2020 benchmark enrollment of 12,121 per year.&lt;br/&gt;Goal 2: Increase
baccalaureate degrees obtained by students underrepresented in STEM disciplines
by 20% above the 2019-2020 benchmark BS degree production of 1,627 per
year.&lt;br/&gt;Goal 3: Increase the transfer of GSU-PC LSAMP students to 4-year
institutions by 20% above 2019-2020 benchmark transfer total of 20 per
year.&lt;br/&gt;Goal 4: Increase the number of LSAMP students who participate in
research/internships by 25% above the 2019-2020 benchmark total of 270
undergraduate students per year.&lt;br/&gt;Goal 5: Increase the number of LSAMP
students who pursue graduate degrees in STEM by 20% above 2019-2020 total of 30
graduate students per year.&lt;br/&gt;Goal 6: Develop Broadening Participation
in STEM scholarly knowledge to understand the impact and student outcomes for
LSAMP student engagement in VIP teams.&lt;br/&gt;Goal 7: Assess continued Peach
State Alliance institutionalization and sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Peach State LSAMP program is comprehensive and designed to enhance academic and
research outcomes, including well-prepared and successful professionals
underrepresented in STEM disciplines, evidence-based mentoring and student
retention models, and a sound and rigorous evaluation plan. The program will
leverage its institutional research infrastructure, as well as collaborate with
other organizations and industry partners, to help students underrepresented in
STEM transition into applied and research-based STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student academic and professional development
interventions implemented in this project will have transferable value for STEM
students and other institutions worldwide. Long-lasting impact from outcomes
achieved will create a more diverse and inclusive environment on college
campuses and in the STEM workforce. Ultimately, the Peach State Alliance will
contribute significantly to preserving and improving the United States’
competitiveness in overcoming key global technology, health, and economic
development challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.