* 2207350
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: Iowa-Illinois-Nebraska LSAMP: IINSPIRE – A STEM Partnership for Innovation in Research and Education
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Jonathan Wickert, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 12/31/2027
* USD 2,999,850.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based recruitment and
retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in support of
populations underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic
Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native
Pacific Islanders. These strategies facilitate the production of well-prepared
students highly qualified and motivated to pursue graduate education or careers
in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United States (U.S.) to remain globally
competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent of all its citizens and
provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the
knowledge-based economy. The Iowa-Illinois-Nebraska STEM Partnership for
Innovation in Research and Education LSAMP (IINSPIRE) program was established in
2011 in response to the need for a more diverse and skilled technical workforce.
The 16 two-year and four-year colleges and universities that make up the
Alliance are diverse and include 10 four-year institutions, five community
colleges, and one tribal college. The institutions are Augustana College, Des
Moines Area Community College, Doane University, Eastern Iowa Community College
District, Grinnell College, Hawkeye Community College, Iowa State University,
Iowa Valley Community College District, Kirkwood Community College, Little
Priest Tribal College, Luther College, Nebraska Wesleyan University, University
of Iowa, University of Northern Iowa, Upper Iowa University, and Wartburg
College. The goal of the Alliance is to increase the number of STEM
baccalaureate degrees awarded annually, and increase the community college
transfer enrollment, and to enroll a cohort of Alliance students in STEM
graduate programs. These goals will be accomplished by continuing successful
programming from previous years and by expanding the campus-specific student
experience model, in which each campus customizes a general model based on their
own needs and contexts. The models include various high-impact practices,
including undergraduate research experiences. This approach enables campus
leaders to share effective practices and learn from one another. It is central
to supporting institutionalization and sustainability in different academic
environments. These goals support the National Science Foundation's strategic
goal to "cultivate a world-class, broadly inclusive science and engineering
workforce, and expand the scientific literacy of all
citizens."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alliance's broadening participation research
is guided by two questions: (1) How does participation in IINSPIRE LSAMP mediate
students’ goals over time? (2) How does the IINSPIRE LSAMP alliance create an
intentional network to broaden the participation of racially and ethnically
minoritized students across STEM fields? A blended theoretical framework drawing
on community cultural wealth, intersectionality, and social cognitive career
theory facilitates studying both individual student experiences and contextual
factors. This research is also investigating how alliance institutions engage
students in STEM fields, including newer, emergent fields, such as artificial
intelligence, data science, cybersecurity, and quantum science and technology.
Preparation and partnerships in these fields is a broader impact of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.