* 2207664
* Lithography-Free Manufacturing of Metal Structures Separated by Nanogaps
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Svetlana Neretina, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2025
* USD 389,620.00

This grant supports research that will advance the manufacturing techniques and
knowledge base required for the on-chip fabrication of optical and electronic
components composed of metal structures separated by nanometer-scale distances
referred to as nanogaps. Despite proof-of-concept applications in chemical and
biomedical sensing, nanoelectronics, and photovoltaics, progress in nanogap-
based device processing is hampered by the need for technically demanding, time-
consuming, and cost-prohibitive techniques. Moreover, current methods are far
from ideal in terms of generating the configurations needed to fully express
nanogap-related phenomena. This award aims to remedy this situation by
transforming on-chip nanogap fabrication from processes that are inextricably
complicated to those offering synthetic ease and unprecedented control while at
the same time being responsive to the low-cost, high-throughput, and scalability
needs of a manufacturing setting. The research carried out will be integrated
into educational activities through graduate student training, undergraduate
research internships, lab modules, and the mentorship of individuals
participating in well-established programs promoting diversity, equity, and
inclusion. The overall aim is, therefore, to advance applications of importance
to the health and well-being of society while training the diverse workforce
needed to enact leading-edge technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of the award is to define the benchtop techniques required for the on-chip
processing of opposing metal surfaces separated by sub-5 nm nanogaps as they
relate to plasmonics and molecular electronics. Specifically targeted is the
fabrication of (i) dimer arrays where the nanogap is occupied by molecular
linkers, (ii) dimer arrays with air-filled nanogaps, and (iii) patterned
electrodes connected by a bridge with a nanogap discontinuity along its length.
Each of these forms a research thrust guided by an overall strategy in which
nanoimprinting provides for deterministic positioning, a spacer material defines
the nanogap width, and structures formed through liquid-state syntheses form a
nanogap by butting up against a spacer material. The use of a spacer material is
crucial to the overall approach in that nanogap definition is reliant, not on
lithography, but on materials that are readily applied with monolayer-scale
precision. Such capabilities, once demonstrated, will provide a path forward for
integrating nanogaps into application platforms and provide new capabilities to
the community of researchers prototyping state-of-the-art
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.