* 2207641
* Application of XUV and Soft-x-ray Attosecond Spectroscopies to Quantify Vibronic Couplings and Charge Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Arvinder Sandhu, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2025
* USD 331,579.00

The primary quantum process behind many phenomena in our daily lives is the
light-driven motion of electrons. Important examples of this include
photosynthesis, vision, vitamin D synthesis from sunlight, DNA damage by UV
light, and more. As a first step towards developing a better understanding of
such phenomena, it is important investigate and harness the electronic motions
inside atoms and simple molecules with light pulses. However, the electrons are
extremely fast, and can move on the timescale of an attosecond – a billionth of
a billionth of a second! To capture the images of what transpires in the quantum
realm at such dizzying speeds, one needs to use a sophisticated camera alongside
an extremely fast flash or strobe light. The PI’s team employs advanced
technologies such as a charged particle velocity imaging detector, which serves
the purpose of a camera film, and ultrafast laser pulses that play the role of a
strobe light. The proposed research project will investigate how electronic
charge gets distributed after excitation by light, and how the changes in atomic
positions within a molecule impact this process. Graduate and undergraduate
students working on this this project will develop an important scientific
skillset and will be empowered to generate new ideas and devise applications of
their research. This impact will multiply as they move to the next stage of
their careers in universities, national labs, and tech companies, thus fostering
scientific innovation and productivity in the
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attosecond extreme ultraviolet and
soft-x-ray spectroscopy techniques form a very powerful toolkit for fundamental,
real-time investigations of electron dynamics. In the proposed work, the PI and
graduate students will employ these approaches for time-resolved study of
coherent electronic wavepacket motion. Specifically, they will investigate XUV
induced Rydberg, ionic, and many-electron excitations in atoms and molecules. To
quantify the vibronic couplings that mix electronic states due to nuclear
motion, the research team will conduct pump-probe measurements near conical
intersections in small molecules. They will also aim to perform elementally
specific transient absorption studies to monitor the coherent evolution of
charge in photoionized molecules. Results obtained here will guide the
development of theoretical methods that can accurately model the light-matter
interaction, and the coupled and correlated evolution of electron and nuclei.
The spatio-temporal mapping of charge dynamics in complex systems will serve to
establish attosecond science as a versatile spectroscopy technique. These
objectives will be achieved while training the graduate and undergraduate
students in the frontier fields of attosecond science, laser technologies, and
optical and x-ray spectroscopies. The PI will also place an emphasis on the
participation of students from minority and underrepresented groups. Annual
outreach events will be used to engage and educate the community about the
importance and impact of physics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.