* 2207777
* Nonequilibrium Dynamics and Site-Resolved Imaging in a Three-Dimensional Spinor Bose-Hubbard Model Quantum Simulator
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Yingmei Liu, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2025
* USD 260,177.00

Physical modeling of three-dimensional (3D) strongly correlated many-body
systems such as superconductors is a fast-moving research frontier with
immediate applications spanning areas from the development of novel materials to
quantum state preparation. Classical computers - even fast supercomputers -
cannot perform accurate simulations/studies of these systems due to the
intrinsic complexity of the systems and the limitations of existing numerical
techniques. This project will implement a 3D highly-programmable quantum
simulator using a sodium Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) and experimentally
demonstrate that this quantum simulator can be more powerful than its classical
counterpart in studying such intricate many-body systems. BECs are ultra-cold
gases in which atoms become essentially indistinguishable from one another,
allowing for observations of quantum behaviors at a macroscopic level. Research
goals of this project are both of fundamental interest for advancing our
understanding on quantum physics and of technological significance. The
principal investigator (PI) will integrate research and teaching by involving
undergraduate and graduate students into research projects, and endeavor to
broaden the participation of under-represented groups including Native American
students and women in physics. The PI will also organize one-day workshops for
local high school students to get hands-on experience with state-of-the-art
quantum physics equipment and techniques. This project will encourage more
students to pursue a career in science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will perform experimental studies on many-
body systems in a 3D spinor Bose-Hubbard model quantum simulator consisting of
an antiferromagnetic sodium spinor BEC confined in an optical lattice.
Possessing spin degrees of freedom and exhibiting magnetic order and
superfluidity, this quantum simulator is highly programmable with a remarkable
degree of control over many parameters, such as temperature, spin, density, and
dimensionality. The experimental studies include investigating out-of-
equilibrium spin and spatial dynamics and non-exponential tunneling with spinor
BECs in moving/driven lattices and achieving site-resolved spatial resolution
via a quantum gas magnifier imaging technique to directly detect spatial
distributions of 3D quantum systems and explore previously inaccessible
microscopic regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.