* 2207296
* Collaborative Research: Analyzing Deployable Torque-Activated Structural Mechanisms for Enhanced Tension Capacity of Geosystems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Joe Tom, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 484,665.00

This award focuses on understanding how complex, deployable structural systems
can be utilized in geotechnical infrastructures to reduce their overall size and
therefore transportation, material, and life-cycle costs. Deployable underground
structures are ones that change size or shape after being installed under the
ground. This allows for larger foundation capacities to be achieved with less
installation effort and cost. Using deployable mechanisms to increase foundation
capacity is a novel concept for geostructures since these mechanisms have only
been utilized in aerospace and over-ground applications. More specifically, this
research focuses on deployable underground structures with awns that increase
their size underground once they are installed. The idea can be applied to
foundation piles for offshore wave and wind energy converters, land-based wind
turbines, and tall buildings. Future advances from this research will enable
increased sustainability of geostructures to create systems that uses less
material and have better packing for transportation while maintaining the
required load carrying capacity. Furthermore, in this project advanced
visualization techniques such as virtual reality will be used to develop
outreach tools that introduce students to concepts of structural deployment and
advanced soil-structure interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of
the research is to unlock this fundamental concept of underground awn deployment
by gaining the fundamental physical insight required to mechanistically describe
the soil-structure interactions occurring during the deployment process. The
grand challenges addressed are to 1) understand soil-structure interaction of
deployable, compliant structures and 2) demonstrate underground structural
system deployment using an awn arrangement that enhances system foundation
capacity. Development form-finding methods with load-transfer informed soil-
structure hybrid models in combination with statistical uncertainty analysis for
health diagnostics will be used to advance the knowledge base on nonlinear soil-
structure interaction. This work will also advance scientific knowledge on
structural analysis for deployable structures and computational modeling for
soil-structure interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.