* 2207891
* CRCNS US-Israel Research Proposal: Multiscale analysis of brain-wide neuromodulation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Mikail Rubinov, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Ongoing changes in motivation, mood, and alertness, play an important role in
healthy brain function, and are disrupted in neurological and psychiatric
disorders. The project will analyze neural circuitry that underpins these
changes across behavioral states. It will do so by developing a new
computational analysis method, validating this method on recordings of zebrafish
brain activity, and using this method to analyze human brain activity. The
project will also develop an online educational workshop on extraction of
knowledge from big neural data. The workshop will provide a hands-on approach to
analysis and modeling of large neuroscience datasets — from simulations to
zebrafish to humans — and in this way will help train a new generation of
computational neuroscientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes a new
computational framework for statistical inference of neuromodulation in
functional imaging data across species and scales. It will validate and deploy
this framework in three steps. First, it will validate this framework in
simulations of neuronal network activity with known ground truth. Second, it
will deploy this framework to zebrafish brain-wide cell-resolution calcium
imaging data. This deployment will enable the discovery of neuromodulatory
systems, and the benchmarking of these discoveries against existing anatomical
knowledge. Third, it will translate this framework to analysis of human
functional MRI data. This translation will facilitate noninvasive inference of
neuromodulation in living humans across brain states. Collectively, completion
of these steps will deliver an integrative statistical framework for inferring
brain-wide neuromodulatory systems across species and spatial scales. In the
short term, this completion will provide investigators with new ways to infer
effects of neuromodulation from non-invasive imaging. In the long term, this
completion will help facilitate detection of dysregulated neuromodulation across
brain states. Collectively, these deliverables will accelerate discovery of
foundational aspects of brain activity and function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded jointly by the Neural Systems Cluster in the Biological
Sciences Directorate and the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems in
the Computer and information Science and Engineering Directorate. A companion
project is being funded by the US-Israel Binational Science Foundation
(BSF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.