* 2207448
* CAREER: Characterizing Error Management Cognitive Bias in Design - A Path to Better Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Katherine Fu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 277,202.00

Cognitive bias can have significantly negative impacts on the success of
decision-making and actions in human behavior, having been documented in many
different forms and areas of application. The research objective of this Faculty
Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award is to gain a deeper
understanding of the role that error management cognitive bias plays in design
process, and to identify and test means to mitigate that bias. Error management
biases decision-making toward errors that are less costly. In design practice,
error management may relate to concerns like self-preservation of one's
livelihood or conservation of resources. Cognitive-based engineering design
studies are performed with the perspective that if we can understand the way
that designers think and work, we will be able to determine the practices,
methods, tools, environments, and stimulation that lead to the best design
output. Error management bias is a permeating presence in all human decision-
making, and a clearer picture of its effects on design could fundamentally
improve the way design problems are solved. A deeper, more complete
understanding of the role of error management bias in design will also enhance
design education techniques and learning outcomes. The educational objective of
this CAREER award is to contribute to increasing the diversity of STEM fields,
with particular focus on strengthening the pipeline through programming for K-12
girls and young women and racial minorities. In partnership with the Center for
Puppetry Arts in Atlanta, GA, a three-part project will be executed: 1) engage a
diverse national audience of children in Title I schools through a puppet-based,
STEM-focused Distance Learning curriculum; 2) provide a local interactive,
puppet-based, STEM education experience geared toward girls and minority
children in the Atlanta area; and 3) provide a service learning experience for
Georgia Tech engineering undergraduate students to engage in mentorship of girls
and minority children through a cooperative STEM puppet exhibit design course.
Through the these educational activities, underrepresented K-12 students,
locally and nationally, will gain more interest in, and self-efficacy for,
pursuing STEM studies and careers. Ultimately, by increasing diversity in STEM
fields, more successful teams and innovation outcomes will be
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is focused on furthering the
development of new fundamental knowledge in the areas of design theory and
methodology to gain a deeper understanding of the role that error management
bias plays in the way design practice is performed and learned. Error management
biases can include loss aversion bias, status quo bias, context-dependent
preferences and many more. The specific goals are: 1) to gain a deeper
understanding of the role that error management bias plays in design process; 2)
to identify means to mitigate error management bias in the design process; and
3) to test and validate the means to mitigate error management bias in the
design process. In design practice, error management bias could be beneficial,
or dangerous, when it comes to decision-making. When approaching the study of
error management biases in design, it will be important not only to recognize
when, where and how these biases manifest, but also the potential impact of the
biases on the design outcomes--which may not necessarily be negative. This
research approach is centered on in-situ, ethnographic, and laboratory based
studies of design practice in novices and expert designers to uncover and study
the most prevalent forms of error management biases in design, as well as
techniques for their mitigation, in detail. By studying error management biases
in design more broadly and deeply, researchers and practitioners will be able to
understand and improve design practice for more objective, rational actions and
decision-making and, ultimately, better design innovation outcomes. This
research will help to open up a broad, relatively unexplored area of inquiry in
design theory and methods research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.