* 2207739
* Atomic Layer Deposition Enabled Perfluorinated Ligand Imprinted Molecular Layer Sensor for Total PFAS Detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Yu Lei, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

As emerging contaminants, per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances make up a large
group of persistent anthropogenic chemicals that are persistent and not easily
degradable in the environment and in the human body. Due to their impact on
human health, the exposure health advisory of perfluorooctanoic acid and
perfluorooctane sulfonate in drinking water is recommended by the US
Environmental Protection Agency to be no more than 70 parts per trillion.
Measurements at such low concentration require ultrasensitivity. This project
will illustrate how nanotechnology and sensing technology can be meshed together
for ultrasensitive detection of those substances. The work will revolutionize
the atomic layer deposition-enabled molecular sensing platform if successful.
The outcome will not only have an enormous impact on environmental monitoring
and public health, but also provide a demonstration from basic science to
applications. This project will also involve the students at all levels and
integrate advanced device fabrication and sensing knowledge into their education
and research training. The research results will be disseminated to general
public and industry companies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary
project aims at developing a novel, simple, portable, low-cost sensor for rapid
and ultra-sensitive detection of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances based on
unique atomic layer deposition-enabled molecularly imprinting technology and
ultrasensitive electrochemical signal detection in a portable platform. Several
novel features crossing nano-, material- and sensing technologies will be
seamlessly integrated into the sensing platform. After validation of the sensing
device using spiked water samples in the controlled laboratory environment, the
devices will be applied for in-field tests of river water samples. In addition,
this new methodology is naturally not limited to any particular small molecules.
Therefore, it can be generalized as a universal platform for monitoring a wide
spectrum of small molecules of interest after molecularly
imprinting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.