* 2207383
* EAGER: Inferring Activity From Anatomy in Neuronal Cultures
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Peter Littlewood, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 02/29/2024
* USD 299,126.00

Emerging technologies to map whole brains at the synaptic level will soon
produce complete maps of neural anatomy, but activity is only indirectly related
to circuits, leaving large gaps in how we use anatomical maps to infer activity.
Before facing the exabyte scales of whole brains, it is necessary to develop
methods to infer activity from anatomy in smaller, simpler, but still complete
model systems. Neural cell cultures (in vitro) are highly simplified systems
that show complex dynamical activity, can be monitored in terms of spatial
activity, and can have parameters tuned by chemistry. Critically, cultures are
small, complete networks where every physical connection can be mapped and
activity monitored at the single cell level. Thus, interpretations on how the
physical wiring and activity in neural networks are correlated will not be
confounded by artifacts or limitations encountered by other experimental methods
that utilize living animals or brain tissue (e.g. living brain slices have
thousands of severed connections.). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As well as a substrate
on which to develop methods later to be applied to whole brains, neural cell
cultures are of interest as model systems in their own right. In a separate
development far from neuroscience, research on 'active matter' - the
interactions of autonomous agents - has suggested new principles about how
quiescent states become active, and potentially synchronize. This project aims
to bring together the novel theoretical perspective with simplified but
biologically relevant experiments, using the latest tools of cell culture,
neural recording, and connectomics. The goal of the project is to produce an
explicit physical model where the three key elements of neuronal systems are
joined up: functional recording from a 2D neural cell network; connectivity
measurement through serial electron microscopy; explicit theoretical modelling
of the dynamics of the neural system. The fundamental question is: Can one infer
activity from anatomy?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on dynamical
transitions between neural states, including synchrony. Epilepsy is a disease of
synchrony and one of the co-investigators has his principal research activity in
clinical investigations of pediatric epilepsy. There is little fundamental
understanding about the (temporal) transition to seizure and we hope that
understanding in a model system a (parameter driven) transition could be useful.
Model systems are important in biology and physics. We hope that establishing a
framework to analyze neural cell cultures will help normalize investigations
which would otherwise be disconnected. The PIs will work with the electron
microscopy program at Chicago State, a historically minority serving university.
CSU students will be engaged in data analysis both as a component of their
training in microscopy techniques and as full partners in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs specifically ask: What does it mean to
have a balanced network that can spontaneously fire without complete synchrony?
Can one control the transitions from one generic dynamical phase to another? Is
there emergent spatial and temporal scaling at such a transition? Are there
qualitative differences between networks with long- and short-range
correlations? This work is intended to build a framework that can be applied in
the future to the growing number of published connectomic datasets derived from
different brain regions and other ex vivo experimental platforms such as living
brain slices/organoids and inform the analysis of large scale connectomics in
whole brains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.