* 2207963
* Applications of Superradiant Lasers for Inertial Sensing
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Murray Holland, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 05/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This is a theoretical project to build a new kind of inertial sensor capable of
observing and measuring extremely small rotations and extremely small
accelerations. Inertial sensors, including both gyroscopes and accelerometers,
are especially important in navigation applications for aviation, marine
vehicles including submarines and ships, and space-based transport platforms.
Existing technologies are impressive, but still suffer from slight imperfections
that lead to significant drifts and imprecision. These imperfections are hard to
overcome with standard approaches, since they arise from phenomena such as light
scattering that are ubiquitous. In this project, the PI presents a planned
program of research that brings to the table a new kind of technology with
potential gains in performance and robustness to these adverse effects. The PI
will analyze theoretically this new type of inertial sensor founded on a
completely novel physical principle.

At the heart of the proposed device is a phenomenon known as superradiance, that
is, a term that describes the potentially rapid dissipation of energy in the
form of light from an ensemble of atoms when they are prepared in special
internal states. The atoms in the superradiant laser gyroscope are coupled
together by photons that circulate around a high fitness optical ring resonator.
The approach employs special atoms that possess long lived optically excited
states; the same states that are used for the best atomic clocks. When compared
with existing technologies, the system offers potential performance advantages
that arise from the fact that the optical coherence is stored in the atomic
dipoles rather than in the optical resonator field. This provides a phase
rigidity due to collective effects that avoids the gyroscope being sensitive to
the standard adverse imperfections that limit the performance of virtually all
gyroscopes in the field. The outcomes of the project will be quantitative
calculations of the ultimate sensitivity and precision, the dynamic range, and
an analysis of motional effects in the ensemble. Evaluations will be made of the
robustness to noise sources, including homogeneous and inhomogeneous dephasing
(primarily Doppler effects), as well as the omnipresent vibrational and thermal
fluctuations of the optical cavity length.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.