* 2207299
* Carbon-based nanocomposites for sensing and catalysis
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Timothy Swager, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2026
* USD 546,312.00

Non-Technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon-based electronic
nanocomposites offer new opportunities to improve the environment by enabling
sensors and improving processes that underpin the materials used in our day-to-
day existence. Harnessing this potential requires deep understanding of the
reactivity of these materials and new methods to create composite materials with
novel functionalities. Chemists have a great understanding of the reactivity of
small molecules in solution in a homogenous environment. With support from the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research and the Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry, this research
seeks to extend the known precision of small molecules to carbon-based
nanomaterials, which have much more complex structures and solid-state
organizations. Translating homogenous reactivity concepts for catalysis and
sensing is accomplished by building on new methods for attaching structures to
or assembling structures around carbon nanomaterials. For example, carbon-based
nanomaterials can support metal catalysts when materials that actively bind the
metals are part of the assembled compositions. Researchers at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology develop new methods that deliver electrons on demand to
drive reactions in more efficient and selective processes. For example, in many
cases in catalysis, rare metals such as platinum are needed. This is
particularly true in catalysis needed for energy conversion technologies. This
research creates supporting nanomaterials that allow for superior reactivity
with much smaller quantities of these valuable materials. This effort also
supports educational opportunities to diversify the STEM workforce through an
exchange program between Massachusetts Institute of Technology and minority
serving institutions, and to inspire new generations of scientists in both
research and business careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research and the Catalysis program in the
Division of Chemistry, this research seeks to create multi-component functional
materials systems from graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), metal nanoparticles,
and porous polymers. It leverages new methods for the covalent functionalization
of graphene surfaces and confined cavities in porous polymers to produce highly
active small (&gt; 5 nm diameter) metal nanoparticles of controlled composition.
Covalent modification of the sidewalls of carbon nanotubes is used as a method
to “hard wire” molecular catalytic species to a conductive element and produce
high catalytic activity and this approach will be expanded to the generation of
asymmetric electrocatalysis. The electrophilic metal-oxo intermediates generated
in the oxygen evolution reaction is used to react with alkenes for
electrochemical epoxidation and chiral CNT-catalysts are employed to generate
optically active epoxides. The researchers covalently functionalize carbon
nanotubes and carbon nanotubes coated with porous poly(phenylene ether)s (PAEs)
that contain metal binding ligands, which allows them to investigate reductive
coupling of aryl-halides by Ni(0) in such conducting supports. Developing new
synthetic methods for PAE opens up the scope of possibilities and a diversity of
metal binding ligands can be included in the polymer. The principal investigator
and his team also study whether porous ligands containing PAEs could be used to
deliver only a single metal center to each NP with the balance of the
composition containing one or more other earth abundant metals. Multi-elemental
NP compositions are explored to create catalysts for fuel cell relevant
reactions, including ethanol oxidation, hydrogen oxidation, and oxygen reduction
as well as new chemiresistive sensors. Porous PAEs with integrated dyes are
investigated as photoredox catalytic systems, in particular to determine if
asymmetric PAE pockets can produce chiral products. In addition to advancing
fundamental materials chemistry and potentially producing new commercially
relevant technologies, this research also supports educational opportunities to
diversify the workforce and inspire new generations of scientists in both
research and business careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.