* 2207980
* RUI: Linking Ecology, Behavior, and Immunology to Spatio-Temporal Variation in Helminth Transmission
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,11/30/2022
* Sebastian Schreiber, Grinnell College
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 11/30/2022
* USD 2,580,787.00

Parasites are often spread unevenly across space, where some host populations
have few parasites and others are heavily infected. This pattern is common, but
still poorly understood and poses a considerable barrier to accurately
predicting and managing diseases. This is especially true for parasites that
have complex life cycles or move between different host species. This includes
many parasitic worms (helminths), which infect over two billion people worldwide
and cause serious disease in livestock, yet have been historically understudied.
This project connects empirical data with mathematical models to understand and
predict how behavior, immunology, and ecology within each host species shapes
parasite transmission across space and through time. This research focuses on a
well-studied tapeworm system which infects fish-eating birds (Loons), copepods,
and threespine stickleback fish in freshwater lakes. By integrating field
studies, laboratory experiments, genetic studies, and mathematical models across
all three hosts and the parasite itself, this project provides a detailed
understanding of the transmission of a complex-life cycle parasite and builds a
modeling toolkit that can be applied to other parasites. To share this work, the
investigators have developed an art-science collaboration involving indigenous
artists and a science journalism student to produce a traveling exhibition
focused on this project. Research is also being incorporated into the classroom
through a course-based undergraduate research experience, an interdisciplinary
undergraduate course focused on the connections between art and science, a high
school summer science program, and is being made broadly available through
published lesson plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parasite transmission is shaped by
a complex interplay of ecological, behavioral, and immunological factors, yet
our understanding of how these factors interact and their relative impacts on
disease prevalence across scales remains fragmented. The project develops a
general framework, informed by empirical data, for understanding and predicting
how these different processes operate within multiple hosts and shape parasite
transmission and distribution across space and time. This work addresses four
main questions: (1) What are the relative contributions of parasite exposure (a
dose-response) versus immunity on transmission dynamics? (2) How sensitive are
exposure and immunity to environmental variation, namely resources and host
population structure? (3) To what extent is parasite abundance driven by local
factors or landscape-level patterns of parasite dispersal? (4) Is the uneven
distribution of parasites driven more by traits of the first, second, or
tertiary host? Using the model tapeworm system, S. solidus, this research
develops and applies cutting-edge statistical and mathematical approaches and a
global sensitivity analysis to large temporal and spatial datasets spanning
multiple levels of biological organization. This project builds on our knowledge
of the well-studied threespine stickleback host and filling in important missing
information for the other two hosts in this system (loons and copepods). This
research produces a general, yet mechanistic, modeling framework to better
understand transmission in this system, as well as inform work with other
complex life cycle parasites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
the Division of Environmental Biology, Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems, and Division of Mathematical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.