* 2207317
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: Systems Support for Federated Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Aditya Akella, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 290,320.00

Traditional approaches toward applying machine learning techniques to end-user
data often require copying all data to the cloud. This is not only expensive but
faces data privacy risks as well. By analyzing data on the device where it is
generated, federated learning aims to mitigate both cost and privacy concerns of
centralized machine learning without sacrificing its benefits. This
collaborative project brings together investigators from two institutions to
develop building blocks for practical federated learning by addressing
challenges arising from the diversity of user devices and the heterogeneity of
data distributions in those devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes a
three-pronged approach: (1) enable performance improvements for machine learning
developers (e.g., judicious participant selection instead of randomly selecting
participants); (2) provide efficiency improvements for service providers (e.g.,
redundancy elimination for data transfers); (3) enable end-users to control
their data privacy (e.g., akin to app permissions in Android) without
sacrificing device usability. Two core principles underpin these solutions:
multi-tenancy both in the cloud and on individual devices; and maintaining
theoretical correctness, convergence characteristics, and privacy/security
guarantees of federated learning algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Widespread
adoption of practical federated learning can fundamentally change how we gather
insights from end-user data and how users value data privacy, because users may
not have to sacrifice privacy for convenience in many cases. This, in turn, can
force large corporations to rethink their data collection and usage practices,
and influence policy makers to consider stricter privacy regulations. All
software from this project will be open source. Through outreach and new
educational materials, this project will pioneer the training of privacy-aware
systems builders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will produce
software artifacts, experimental harnesses, benchmarks, and results of running
those benchmarks and artifacts. These materials will be available for public use
under permissive open-source licenses at multiple locations, including
https://github.com/symbioticlab. They will be retained for at least three years
after the completion of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.