* 2207985
* Exploring Open Channel Operations with Atomic Qubits as A Processing and Measurement Resource
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Wesley Campbell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2025
* USD 472,639.00

Physicists tend to adhere to a broad notion that quantum mechanical effects tend
to appear when physical systems are very small and very cold (compared to
something called Planckâ€™s constant). More recently, however, as technology has
allowed us to routinely work with individual atoms (very small) using laser
cooling (very cold), we have a better understanding of how information flows
between the environment and the system under study. This has revealed some
loopholes in the expectation that hot systems are necessarily non-quantum. This
research program is exploring some of the ways that well-controlled dissipation,
a potentially hot and typically classical process, can help us to control and
use quantum systems for measurement and computation. For this, the group will
use a single atom levitated in a vacuum chamber and study how "hot" things like
sunlight shining directly on the atom can be cleverly employed to cool the atom
to nearly absolute zero for quantum information applications that will help us
advance scientific understanding and harness quantum information for the greater
good.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the size, complexity, and precision of quantum
devices employed in practical applications grows, these instruments push closer
to the fuzzy boundary between thermodynamic and unitary behavior. A dual
challenge arises to improve practical instruments and better understand the
transition between the statistical and quantum realms. This program will explore
these challenges using trapped atomic ions with long-lived metastable electronic
states (a highly quantized subsystem) interacting with classical light from
lasers and thermal sources (a highly classical subsystem). This project will
address three key questions: 1) Can more powerful trapped atom processors or
sensors be created by tapping into the larger resource of available stable
atomic levels? 2) How can the nearly ideal projective null measurements (PNMs)
in such a system enable new processing primitives? and 3) What happens when
these quantum measurements are pushed toward the classical regime by bringing
the system into contact with a hot, thermal reservoir such as the
sun?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.