* 2207298
* PM: Precision Laser Spectroscopy of 2S-nS Two-Photon Transitions in Hydrogen
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Dylan Yost, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2025
* USD 583,587.00

For this project, a laser will be used to probe the internal quantum states of
atomic hydrogen. Hydrogen is the simplest atom and is comprised of only one
electron and one proton. Due to this simplicity, the theory describing hydrogen
is very well-developed and precise measurements in hydrogen can provide a
stringent test of our best physical theories and determine key fundamental
constants of nature. One constant that can be determined through hydrogen
measurements is the proton size, which can also be measured at high-energy
physics facilities where electrons are scattered off of protons, or through
measurements of an exotic form of hydrogen where the electron is replaced by a
heavier fundamental particle called a muon. Determinations of the proton size in
these different physical systems have produced inconsistencies, which may be
indicating a problem with our current theories, or the need for additional
theories. This project will help bring clarity by providing measurements with an
order of magnitude less uncertainty over previous measurements of the same
hydrogen states. The planned experiments will train students in the fields of
atomic, molecular, and optical physics, precision laser science, and precision
measurement. Ultimately, this project could provide more reliable values for our
fundamental constants, establish consistency in the physical constants derived
from different physical systems and within different scientific disciplines, or
possibly provide indications of new physical laws. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to perform high-precision laser spectroscopy of atomic
hydrogen. The specific transitions to be measured will be the hydrogen 2S-nS
two-photon transitions (with n between 8 and 12). In conjunction with well-
developed hydrogen theory, these measurements can be used to extract the Rydberg
constant and proton charge radius. Previous determinations of these constants in
different physical systems – such as other hydrogen transitions, measurements in
muonic hydrogen, and electron scattering – have produced inconsistencies which
may indicate new physics. The spectroscopy will be performed on a cryogenic and
velocity-characterized hydrogen beam, and the spectroscopy laser will be a
cavity-enhanced continuous-wave Ti:sapphire laser referenced to a coherent
optical frequency comb. In previous measurements, the AC Stark shift broadened
and distorted spectroscopic resonances which introduced systematic uncertainty.
However, for these experiments, an additional laser with a wavelength of
approximately 650 nm will be used to cancel the AC Stark shift. This
cancellation will allow for the recovery of narrow Lorentzian resonances with
widths approaching the natural linewidths – between 50 kHz and 144 kHz – and
absolute frequency measurements with relative uncertainties of less than 1 part
in a trillion (twelve digits of accuracy), which represents a one order of
magnitude decrease in uncertainty over previous measurements of those same
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.