* 2207594
* Gravitational Wave Data Analysis: Inferring the Properties of Compact Objects and Searching for New Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Aaron Zimmerman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

This research project is devoted to the analysis and modeling of gravitational
waves. These ripples in the very fabric of space and time are produced when the
densest objects in the Universe -- such as black holes and neutron stars --
orbit and collide. The detection of gravitational waves by the NSF-funded LIGO
and European Virgo collaborations has opened up a new window on the Universe,
revealing previously invisible events like pairs of black holes merging.
Researchers supported by this award will participate in the analysis of
gravitational waves as members of the LIGO collaboration, helping to infer the
properties of the sources of these ripples. In addition to these collaboration
activities, which have far-reaching impacts on astrophysics, cosmology, and
nuclear physics, the research group will carry out searches for new physics
using gravitational-wave data. Detections of gravitational waves provide
information about spacetime at its most dynamic, allowing for strong-field tests
of relativity, as the possibility of detecting extremely compact objects which
are otherwise invisible to electromagnetic observations. This award will enable
both searches for gravitational waves from new, hypothetical compact stars, and
use the final "ringdown" of merged black holes to search for new physics. These
research activities will provide training for graduate students in modeling and
data analysis, skillsets which are in great demand and of great benefit to
society. In addition, members of the group will engage in outreach activities in
order to educate and inspire the public about this new field of physics and
astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this project focuses on searching
for new physics with gravitational wave detections, while continuing to support
the LIGO Scientific Collaboration by performing Bayesian parameter estimation on
detections made in the collaboration's next observing campaign. The PI and other
members of the group will participate in the planning and development of
parameter estimation pipelines, and carry out inferences on detections made in
low latency. These inferences are a crucial first step in the use of
gravitational waves for understanding the populations of compact objects,
inferring the nuclear equation of state from observations of binary neutron
stars, testing the theory of relativity, and using gravitational waves to
measure cosmic expansion. The project will also include the development of
accurate, reduced-dimensional waveform models to enable the search for low-mass
compact objects with large spin-induced quadrupole moments. Such hypothetical
objects can be missed by current searches, and their detection would reveal
exotic new physics. The GstLAL search pipeline and random template banks will be
used to carry out searches for these systems in publicly available data. The
team will also use methods borrowed from quantum mechanical perturbation theory
to predict how possible deviations from relativity are imprinted on the ringdown
spectrum of spinning black holes. After predicting the changes to the spectrum
from particular deviations, Bayesian parameter estimation will be used to
constrain or measure the underlying parameters of these models using ringdown
signals from previously detected binary black hole
mergers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.