* 2207822
* Generation, Control and Storage of Broadband Transverse-Mode-Entangled Photons
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Virginia Lorenz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 07/31/2025
* USD 179,812.00

Photons, the fundamental particles of light, can be “entangled” with each other
such that the measurement of one instantaneously changes the state of the other.
Entangled photons can be used to enhance our ability to communicate securely and
to image sensitive biological materials, amongst other applications. While
techniques to generate photons entangled in polarization, frequency, and time
are well-developed, there is much to explore in the generation of photons
entangled in their shape, or spatial mode. In addition, building an efficient
memory that allows us to store and retrieve entangled photons on demand would
allow communication and sensing applications to be much more efficient. The
research team will investigate optical fiber as a source of spatial-mode-
entangled photons and the use of hot atomic gases as storage media for such
photons. Graduate students will be trained in state-of-the-art quantum optics
experiment and theory, and group members will actively support efforts to
enhance minority representation in the sciences and create new hands-on
laboratory modules for instruction of undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will develop methods based on optical
fibers and atomic ensembles to enhance control over quantum correlations in
broadband photonic quantum sources, with a focus on enhancing entanglement
dimensionality, quantum memory operation, and scalability in four-wave-mixing-
based systems. An optical fiber platform will be explored for hybrid
entanglement, multimode interference, and highly multimode entanglement. The
fundamental role of broadening mechanisms in determining memory efficiency and
lifetime for broadband quantum states will be explored both theoretically and
experimentally through an atomic ensemble platform, and methods will be
developed to extend the memory lifetime, enable transverse mode storage and
retrieval, and generate photon pairs via Raman-mediated spontaneous four-wave
mixing. The development of transverse-mode entanglement in optical fiber will
provide new resources for quantum processing by enabling a high-dimensional
space for enhanced quantum protocols in a platform naturally suited for coupling
to other fibers for long-distance transmission. Investigations of quantum memory
operation in the broadband regime of such sources, and explorations of new
fiber-based sources, will provide tools for enhanced efficiency and scalability.
These efforts will help advance the overall field of quantum information science
towards the broadly impactful goals of improved computation, communication, and
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.