* 2207189
* Some Algorithmic Questions Related to the Mordell Conjecture
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Brian Lawrence, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 03/31/2023
* USD 131,475.00

Number theory is a fundamental branch of mathematics that deals with properties
of the integers. Since ancient times, people have been interested in integer
solutions to equations, called Diophantine equations; the Pythagorean equation,
the Pell equation, and Fermat's Last Theorem are well-known problems of this
type. In modern times, research has focused on general techniques for this sort
of problem. A breakthrough result, proven by Faltings, shows that certain types
of equations have only finitely many integer solutions. However, there is no
known algorithm to find these solutions in general; algorithmic approaches to
Diophantine equations are an active area of research. Surprisingly, this problem
relates to many other areas in math, including algebraic geometry, complex
analysis, Galois theory, and more. In order to compute solutions to Diophantine
problems, we need to develop methods to perform some calculations in these other
fields. This project involves studying several of these difficult computational
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to investigate
various computational and algorithmic topics related to finiteness theorems in
number theory. For example, a theorem of Faltings guarantees a polynomial
equation of a certain type can have only finitely many rational solutions. (In
geometric language, a curve of genus at least two can have only finitely many
rational points.) All known proofs of Faltings's theorem are ineffective: one
knows that the solutions are finite in number, but the proof provides no way to
tell whether one has found them all. Recent work, including a new proof of
Faltings's theorem by the PI and Venkatesh, has opened up promising new avenues
toward an algorithmic solution. The PI will study algorithmic and computational
questions in algebraic geometry and number theory, motivated by Faltings's
theorem and other problems in algebraic and arithmetic geometry. The PI hopes to
study algorithmic approaches to the Shafarevich conjecture (determining abelian
varieties over a fixed number field, with good reduction away from a fixed
finite set of bad primes) and the Riemann-Hilbert correspondence (finding
algebraic differential equations with given monodromy representations). The
Riemann-Hilbert correspondence, in turn, should be applicable to the problem of
finding branched covers of curves, as well as the problem of studying variations
of Hodge structure over a given base. Both these problems relate to Faltings's
theorem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.