* 2207409
* SBIR Phase I:  Point-of-Care Periodontal Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Reza Khazaeinezhad, STYLOSONIC LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 255,757.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve digital imaging in dentistry. The
goal is to create an imaging device to assist dentists when they assess gingival
health. This project uses ultrasound in contrast to the X-rays typically used in
dental imaging. The project impact will be a decreased overall radiation dose to
both patients and oral health professionals as well as high-resolution imaging
details on the soft tissue (gums). Details on the gingiva is often difficult or
impossible to obtain with X-ray imaging. The impact of commercialization will
include improved patient satisfaction as well as faster and better treatment
outcomes. Oral health professionals will be able to treat more patients per unit
time. This ultrasound-based approach will also offer early detection of
periodontitis to reduce the high cost of treatment associated with advanced
periodontal disease.  This device will reduce the risk of advanced periodontitis
and tooth loss and thus improve patient quality of life. Other broader impacts
include new insights into miniaturizing imaging equipment and processing imaging
data: These insights will improve acoustic imaging in areas well beyond the
mouth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project offers creative ideas to improve oral healthcare. The gold
standard in dentistry is physical inspection and X-ray imaging. This project
will take advances in ultrasound and integrate them into oral health. Ultrasound
is ideally suited to image the gingiva where gum disease resides and leads to
tooth loss. The first objective of the project will use creative strategies to
miniaturize the size of the imaging equipment. This miniaturization is important
in order to access all teeth in the mouth—conventional ultrasound imaging
equipment can only access the incisors and canines. The second objective is the
development of novel algorithms to automate image collection and image analysis.
The software resulting from this project will document dental health and track
it over time. The software will give clinicians detailed information about teeth
and gums for diagnosis, prognosis, risk assessment, and treatment planning. The
ultimate technical result will be an integrated device for acoustic imaging of
the entire mouth that automatically processes the imaging
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.