* 2207697
* Coherent Electron Control
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Herman Batelaan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2025
* USD 588,032.00

Classical Mechanics tells us how bridges, cars, and other objects in our
everyday world at the macroscopic scale work. Quantum Mechanics tells us how
electrons, atoms and other objects in the microscopic world work. We need to
find a description of nature that works at the microscopic and macroscopic
scales and everything in between. This is a century-old unsolved problem and is
called the “Quantum Measurement Problem.” Not only do we want to solve the
problem, but we want to use “quantumness” at a larger scale, and not
understanding the problem stops us from doing this. To solve this problem,
objects at an intermediate scale, in between the microscopic and macroscopic,
need to be studied. This is what the project: “Coherent Electron Control” is
aiming to do. Microscopic objects, electrons, are placed close to an everyday
world object, a wall, so that the description of how the two interact is neither
described by Quantum Mechanics, nor Classical Mechanics. New models and theories
can be tested in this way. On the practical side, the interaction between
electrons and walls has been proposed to be the cause of what limits how well
electron microscopes can see. The nearby electron microscope walls destroy the
useful quantum mechanical properties of the electrons. If this “decoherence” can
be overcome, this may point the way to improving electron microscopes, a widely
used scientific tool including in the field of nano-medicine. A second objective
of the research team is to look at the “quantumness” of a group of electrons
close to each other. This situation exchanges the electron interaction with the
wall for the interaction between an electron and electron. It is predicted that
this quantumness can be used to further improve the resolution of electron
microscopes. The research project will provide experience to postdocs, graduate
students, undergraduate students and high school students in quantum science,
which is an area of national need. Patents, based on the technologies being
developed, will be pursued and will potentially contribute to the national
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron diffraction from
nanofabricated gratings will be used to split electron beams coherently into two
parts. Walls will be placed close to the electron beams to partially decohere
the electron beams. The electron beams are recombined and the measured amount of
quantum mechanical interference tells us about the amount of decoherence. A
femtosecond laser will be used to extract multiple electron from a nanotip, that
is, make an electron pulse. This will ensure that the electrons are close enough
together to interact. The research team will search for a quantum mechanical
signature called the Hanbury-Brown Twiss effect by controlling the time
duration, the size, and the polarization of the electron
pulse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.