* 2207763
* Loop Quantum Gravity with Cosmological Constant
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Muxin Han, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2025
* USD 103,900.00

Einstein's General Relativity (GR) is the theory describing the physics of the
classical gravitational field. The theory of GR has made tremendous progress in
understanding the fundamental aspects of space and time. The theory has been
successful in making predictions for the evolution of the universe and various
astrophysical phenomena. However it is well-known that GR is incomplete. It
loses its capability of making predictions in an extremely strong gravitational
field, e.g. inside a black hole, or at the very early stage of universe near the
big bang. One of the most fundamental open questions in physics is how to
complete GR in order to predict physics in an extremely strong gravitational
field. The complete theory of gravity that we are searching for is called
"Quantum Gravity". The theory of Quantum Gravity should play a crucial role in
describing the physics inside a black hole and helping us to understand the
early universe near the big bang. Eventually Quantum Gravity will lead us to a
revolutionary understanding of space and time, and advance our research of
fundamental physics and applications in all aspects. This award supports the
development of a candidate Quantum Gravity theory known as "Loop Quantum
Gravity" (LQG). This project contains an education plan as part of the broader
impact and supports education in physics at both levels of the university and
the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LQG is a theory featured with the
background independence and non-perturbative quantization of spacetime
structure. This project focuses on developing the theory of LQG with
cosmological constant in four dimensions, in particular the spinfoam formulation
of theory. The main objectives and tasks of this project are: (1) understanding
the emergence of smooth curved spacetimes from spinfoams by applying numerical
methods to investigate the behavior of spinfoam amplitudes by Pachner moves, (2)
developing several aspects of the spinfoam model with cosmological constant,
including numerical computations, timelike tetrahedra, the boundary Hilbert
space, and geometrical operators, (3) developing the quantum theory of black
holes and cosmology with the spinfoam formalism, and investigating numerically
the quantum behavior near the singularities from the spinfoam LQG, and (4)
clarifying the fermion coupling in LQG, and developing the theory of matter
coupling in LQG.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.