* 2207476
* RUI: Quantum Thermodynamics of Atomtronic Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Mark Edwards, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2025
* USD 179,997.00

Ultracold quantum gases can now be confined and manipulated with exquisite
precision using laser light. When these gases are squeezed into thin, horizontal
sheets they can be confined into various shapes within the sheet such as rings
and disks. Cooling these confined gases to near absolute zero can cause them to
transition to a state where the quantum (i.e. wave-like) natures of all the gas
atoms lock together and become identical and thus act as one. Such a state is
called a "Bose-Einstein condensate" (BEC) and a system in this state can display
ultra-sensitivity to the acceleration and rotation of its environment. This
research will investigate how such systems, called "atomtronic systems," can
therefore be used as rotation and acceleration sensors. In particular this work
will investigate how keeping such systems at low but non-zero temperatures can
be used to enhance their performance as sensors. Fundamental studies will also
be carried out to understand the thermodynamics of these gases and this
knowledge will be used to inform the sensor performance studies. This work will
be performed by a team of researchers at Georgia Southern University and at the
Joint Quantum Institute housed at the University of Maryland, College Park. This
work will be performed in partnership with ColdQuanta, Inc. ColdQuanta provides
cold-matter technology to government and academics. They have donated time on
their "Albert" quantum matter machine to facilitate these studies. The societal
benefit of this work will be to improve sensors for precision navigation
applications that are essential to commercial travel and the US national
defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual Merit of this project has two
areas. In the first area the effects of finite temperature on the operation of
atomtronic quantum sensors and interferometers will be studied. Atomtronic
precision navigation ideas such as double-ring BECs accelerometers, double-
target BEC array rotation sensors, dual-Sagnac atom interferometer (AI) rotation
sensors, and large-ring BEC waveguides will be investigated. Simulations will be
performed of their operation with a variety of non-equilibrium finite-
temperature models. These models will investigate how the presence of a thermal
cloud might be used to enhance sensor operation. In the second area fundamental
studies of the quantum thermodynamics (QT) of systems in the QT "Sandbox" will
be performed. The QT Sandbox is a quasi-2D gas containing one or more BECs
created in various potentials at different temperatures that can be stirred,
phase-imprinted, moved into and out of contact, and probed. Studies include
thermalization of shaken/stirred/phase-imprinted finite-temperature BECs; how to
probe thermal characteristics systems by imaging; how to build traditional
thermodynamic systems such as heat engines and refrigerators; how atomtronic
thermometers can be constructed; and finally the thermodynamics of transport of
atomtronic systems. This project will also provide two undergraduate physics
majors at Georgia Southern University with research experiences in cutting-edge,
ultracold-atom research. Students will also be able to collaborate with
scientists at the Joint Quantum Institute. They will also develop ways of using
the Georgia Southern University planetarium and virtual-reality headsets for
visualizing, analyzing, and presenting data obtained from simulations of
atomtronic sensors and interferometers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.