* 2207439
* Intense laser-Atom Physics in Scaled Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Louis DiMauro, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2025
* USD 436,530.00

The invention of the laser in 1960 enabled a wide range of scientific and
technological advances, from communications to surgery to facial recognition to
analysis of Martian soil. At the heart of these innovations is the interaction
of the laser light with physical objects, for example the bar code reader at the
supermarket. This project will study a specific interaction of laser light with
the basic building block of all matter, the atom. In this interaction, a large
amount of energy from the laser light is coupled into the atom and dissipated by
fragmenting the atom into secondary particles such as electrons, ions and other
photons. Analyzing the composition of the fragmentation process and the energy
flow among the constituents provides a microscopic view of the elementary
physics. In the project, sensitive detector configurations are used to allow the
measurement of the type of particle, their energy content and their emission
direction in space. The program implements a detailed strategy of exploiting the
scaling predicted by both classical and quantum mechanical models for exploring
the global physics of the single atom response to an intense laser field. The
critical scaling parameter is the color, i.e. wavelength, of the laser light and
the PI shows how novel wavelength lasers can extend the breadth of experiments
into an unexplored regime and thus contribute to our overall understanding of
nature. Understanding this basic physics can be exploited in applications that
provide direct benefits to society, such as non-invasive surgery and tomorrowâ€™s
energy sources. In addition, the laser sources developed by the research team
are anticipated to have broad applications in other sectors of science and
technology. Furthermore, the interdisciplinary nature of this research coupled
with state-of-the-art optical engineering provide an excellent training ground
for postdocs, undergraduate and graduate students. Former group members are
contributing to various areas of science and technology in academia, energy and
defense laboratories, and the private sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, atoms and molecules are exposed to intense (atomic unit of field),
femtosecond light pulses whose wavelength can be varied from 0.4-4 microns. At
these low frequencies, the electronic response, e.g. ionization, is highly
nonlinear and the field energy that quivers the electron can exceed the binding
energy of the valence electron. In the experiment, the ionized electrons are
angularly energy resolved and studied as a function of laser intensity,
polarization and frequency. The main objectives are to map the global behavior
of strong-field ionization, observe how it evolves with scaled field parameters,
provide stringent tests of theory, and identify the invariant behavior in the
physics. In addition, the program extends the studies into the high frequency
regime, i.e. x-rays. This is accomplished by using the X-ray Free Electron Laser
(XFEL) at SLAC National Laboratory. The XFEL can generate fields in the soft
x-ray regime comparable to our laboratory lasers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.