* 2207720
* Acquisition of a JR-6A Spinner Magnetometer
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Joseph Meert, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 78,410.00

The Earth’s magnetic field is a fundamental force surrounding our planet and has
been for at least 3.5 billion years. The magnetic field provides a shield around
the planet protecting us from incoming energetic particles from space.
Paleomagnetism, or the study of Earth’s magnetic field as recorded in rocks,
artifacts, or sediments, is a powerful tool that can be used study an array of
important topics in the geosciences. Knowledge of past paleogeography, resulting
from paleomagnetic research, aids in exploration in natural resources critical
to society. In addition, magnetic signatures in plants and soils can provide
information about the level of pollutants in the environment. All these studies
require the use of the sensitive spinner magnetometer funded in this proposal to
be able to identify and quantify the magnetic signature in rocks and other
natural materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the era of supercomputers and
artificial intelligence, models of plate motion, climate change, and the
behavior of the geodynamo inside the Earth are increasingly complex. These
models should be data driven (ground truthing), which requires a direct record
from the rocks or sediments. To generate these data, the laboratory space must
be maintained, efficient, and modern. This proposal allows us to upgrade and
modernize an aging Molspin spinner magnetometer that was commissioned in 1996.
An updated JR-6a magnetometer will allow us to maintain high productivity given
its flexibility, sensitivity, and modern computer interface. More generally, the
work that would be supported by the acquisition of a new magnetometer addresses
science priority question one, “How is Earth’s internal magnetic field
generated?”, released in the National Academies decadal report Earth-in-Time for
NSF-EAR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.