* 2207624
* RUI: Clock Transitions, Coherence and Quantum Dynamics in Molecular Nanomagnets
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jonathan Friedman, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 365,113.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The burgeoning field of quantum computation
and quantum information relies on the ability to control the quantum states of
qubits, the physical systems used for quantum information processing. Unlike
classical bits, in which information is stored as zeros or ones, qubits can be
put into quantum superpositions of zero and one states. In addition, qubits can
be entangled with one another to create unique states that cannot be described
as belonging to any individual qubit. Superposition and entanglement are the
quantum underpinnings that give quantum computation its potential power, a power
that is accompanied by a certain delicacy: the information stored and processed
in a quantum computer can easily be disturbed by interactions with uncontrolled
elements of the environment, such as fluctuating magnetic fields or vibrations.
This project focuses on employing molecular nanomagnets as qubits and
understanding and mitigating the environmental elements that affect the magnets’
ability to retain quantum information. So-called clock transitions can help
isolate the magnets from the effects of fluctuating magnetic fields. In this
research, microwave photons are used to control the magnetic states of these
magnets and to measure how long quantum information can be stored in these
systems, the coherence time. In the process of conducting this research, the
team is investigating fundamental quantum properties of these magnets in the
presence of microwave radiation. The research is being conducted at a primarily
undergraduate institution with the participation of undergraduate student-
scholars and graduate students. These researchers are all gaining valuable
research skills that will further the development of their careers in scientific
and related technical fields in academia and the rapidly growing commercial
quantum information sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The burgeoning field of quantum computing and quantum
information requires qubits with long coherence times that are also easy to
manipulate with external control parameters. This project focuses on employing
molecular nanomagnets as qubits and understanding and mitigating the decoherence
from environmental degrees of freedom. The molecular magnets studied in this
project exhibit “clock transitions” that reduce the decohering effects of
fluctuating magnetic fields. Using pulse electron-spin resonance techniques, the
quantum states of these molecules are controlled, and their coherence times are
measured. Mechanisms of decoherence are investigated by comparing the coherence
times at clock transitions with those measured when the system is tuned away
from clock transitions. In addition, the researchers are exploring various pulse
schemes to dynamically decouple the magnets from decohering environmental
fluctuations. Pulsed microwave radiation is also being employed to investigate
using an ensemble of molecular magnets as a medium for the holographic storage
of quantum information. In the process of conducting this research, the team is
investigating fundamental quantum properties of these magnets when coupled to a
microwave radiation field. The research is being conducted at a primarily
undergraduate institution with the participation of undergraduate student-
scholars and graduate students. These researchers are all gaining valuable
research skills that will further the development of their careers in scientific
and technical fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.