* 2207179
* The Governing Dynamics and Predictability of Recurving Eastern North Pacific Tropical Cyclones
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Lance Bosart, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 06/30/2025
* USD 533,186.00

When hurricanes, more broadly known as tropical cyclones, move northward from
the tropics into the middle latitudes, they encounter colder environments and
cooler ocean waters, sometimes transitioning into extra-tropical cyclones. These
extra-tropical cyclones, and the remnants of tropical cyclones that do not
transition, can produce significant societal impacts through heavy rainfall,
temperature extremes, and wildfires (fueled by lightning strikes), which have
limited forecast certainty. Although studied extensively in the Atlantic and
western North Pacific oceans, scientific understanding of the atmospheric
processes important for these events is limited over the eastern Pacific Ocean.
The investigators and graduate students will investigate why a relatively small
number of hurricanes in the eastern Pacific transition into extra-tropical
cyclones by examining how the evolution of these storms are impacted by
conditions upstream over the western and central Pacific Ocean basins, and what
atmospheric flow patterns foster infrequent, but significant, impacts from these
storms over Mexico and the western United States. These tasks will be
accomplished by means of climatological, composite, and case study analyses
using datasets from global weather forecasting models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to a better understanding of the atmospheric processes that cause
eastern North Pacific hurricanes to become extra-tropical cyclones and produce
major impacts in the western United States, the investigators will contribute to
the training and advanced education of graduate students, share findings with
the scientific research community, and incorporate our findings into the
classroom and outreach events. The investigators and graduate students will work
with forecasters in the San Diego office of the National Weather Service to both
help transition our research findings into operations and to better inform of
hazards associated with tropical cyclones. Research findings will also be
discussed and expanded upon with the international and national atmospheric
community through conferences, workshops, and using the University at Albany
Department of Atmospheric and Environmental Sciences Map listserv. Finally, the
investigators intend to increase the representation of underrepresented
minorities for graduate students studying atmospheric sciences through the
American Geophysical Union Bridge Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.