* 2207616
* Collaborative Research: Accelerating the Pace of Discovery in Numerical Relativity by Improving Computational Efficiency and Scalability
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Hari Sundar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2025
* USD 180,000.00

The dawn of gravitational wave astronomy is just beginning, and the LIGO and
Virgo gravitational wave detectors have already made some stunning discoveries.
Future upgrades to these detectors, as well as the advent of new detectors, such
as Kagra, will significantly expand the range of gravitational wave science. As
the sensitivity of gravitational wave detectors improves over the next decade,
the accuracy of numerical solutions of these events must correspondingly
increase by at least an order of magnitude in the same time frame. This is a
significant computational challenge that must be met to enable the full
scientific potential of the new detectors. This project will study mergers of
binary neutron stars and black holes using computer simulations created by
Dendro-GR, a new computer code that runs very efficiently on the largest
supercomputers. Tests of general relativity will also be performed by examining
alternative models of gravity. New algorithms for solving differential equations
will be explored to improve the efficiency of long simulations of binary
mergers. Work done for this project will promote the progress of science and
contribute to undergraduate and graduate training in multiple STEM fields
including computer science, mathematics, and physics. Finally, Dendro-GR is an
open source project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the dynamics
of merging binary compact objects at the frontier of current computational
capabilities. The ability to model a wide variety of possible mergers will
correspondingly increase the ability of gravitational wave scientists to find
and understand these high-energy events, and to search for possible new physics
that lies beyond our current gravitational models. This project will be directed
at the following goals: (1) The Dendro-GR computational framework will be
expanded to calculate gravitational waveforms for binary neutron star inspirals
of sufficient accuracy to be used in waveform catalogs. (2) Binary black hole
inspirals with large mass ratios will be studied to expand the range of current
waveform catalogs. (3) Gravitational waveforms for merging black hole binaries
will be calculated within alternative gravitational theories to probe possible
deviations from the predictions of general relativity and to search for new
physics beyond our current model for gravity. (4) The computational challenge of
improving accuracy in numerical relativity will be studied by focusing on
reducing the time-to-solution. This complicated problem requires a broad
approach that uses GPUs, innovative finite differencing, improved spatial
discretizations, and exposing the temporal discretization to more
parallelism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.