* 2207283
* Manipulating Spinor Quantum Gases --- Spin, Charge and Their Interplay
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Han Pu, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 06/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Understanding quantum materials is essential for developing emerging quantum
technology. Many of the quantum materials belong to the class of quantum many-
body systems, which consist of quantum particles interacting with each other.
The challenge here lies in the fact that the study of quantum many-body systems
is in general extremely difficult. The proposed research tackles this
challenging problem using the platform of cold atoms --- atoms isolated in
vacuum chambers in the gaseous phase and cooled down to extremely low
temperature such that their behavior is governed by the rules of quantum
mechanics. These cold atomic systems are amenable to exquisite experimental
control and their microscopic interactions are often well understood. As such,
the study of cold atoms can often provide new fundamental insights into general
quantum many-body systems. Therefore, the proposed research will promote the
progress of science. Through student involvement in the research, this proposal
will also support education and technical training in a spectrum of STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the proposed research builds upon the
group's past success and involves the study of spinor quantum gases, focusing on
the interplay between the spin and the charge degrees of freedom. The research
is organized around three themes: study of spin-charge separation in one-
dimensional spinor quantum gases; quantum simulation of lattice gauge theory and
Dirac string using spinor condensates; study of multicriticality in generalized
Dicke models beyond the two-level atom paradigm. To tackle these problems, a
wide spectrum of analytical and numerical tools will be employed and developed.
The projects addresses both long-standing challenges (for example, the detection
and characterization of exotic quantum phenomena in one dimension such as spin-
charge separation and spin-incoherent Luttinger liquid), and new developments
(for example, developing new methods to study 1D lattice models in strong
interaction limit, building a theoretical platform to systematically study
multicritical phenomena).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.