* 2207733
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Modeling Human Brain Development as a Dynamic Multi-Scale Network Optimization Process
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Catherine Stamoulis, Children's Hospital Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 458,369.00

Over a period of almost two decades (from birth to young adulthood), the human
brain undergoes profound changes, driven by genetic, environmental and
experiential factors. These changes are part of a maturation process that leads
to optimally organized neural circuits that support complex behaviors and
cognitive processes, and facilitate learning across the lifespan. Fundamental
questions remain about how developing brain circuits become optimally organized.
Specifically, the underlying biophysical mechanisms -- the interval drivers of
this process are incompletely understood at the macroscale of the human brain.
This is in part due to the complexity of some developmental periods, such as
adolescence, during which a constellation of endogenous and exogenous factors
contribute to an avalanche of partially unique physiological changes that are
difficult to track. Using neuroimaging data collected over years of development
from almost 12,000 adolescents, advanced computational tools and engineering
principles, the overarching goal of this project is to understand how internal
mechanisms in the brain control its functional circuits to optimally support
cognitive function. Research activities aim to quantify these mechanisms and
their inherent changes, as the brain becomes increasingly optimally connected
with age, and to map these changes onto fundamental aspects of cognitive
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to transform mechanistic
understanding of the optimization of human brain circuits during the uniquely
complex developmental period of adolescence. For this purpose, it will integrate
a historically large, longitudinal neuroimaging dataset with novel tools from
network science and computer science, and principles of control theory. The
primary hypothesis is that the brainâ€™s topological optimization is partly driven
by an internal control process, which has a quantifiable, age-varying impact on
network topology and dynamics. Thus, neural maturation leads to parsimonious
network topologies that maximize efficiency of information processing but also
optimal network controllability, both of which are reflected on the efficiency
and flexibility of cognitive processing. Findings from this project may have a
transformative impact on the understanding of mechanistic principles underlying
the emergence of the adult brain circuitry, and the impact of adolescence on its
development. They may also provide critical insights towards the development of
targeted therapies for improving cognitive outcomes in the diseased or
atypically developing brain. Given cross-disciplinary and highly computational
activities, this project also involves significant tool development for use by
the neuroscience research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.