* 2207854
* Coherent Control and Analysis of Atomic Multi-Photon Processes
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Daniel Fischer, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2025
* USD 493,565.00

Coherent control aims at manipulating the outcome of quantum processes such as
the excitation or ionization of atoms, chemical reactions, or collective many-
particle processes by using light. Applications range from medical imaging
techniques (magnetic resonance imaging) to structural and dynamical analysis of
large biomolecules (magnetic resonance spectroscopy) to quantum information
processing (quantum computing). Present techniques rely on the shaping of the
microscopic properties of the light, such as the temporal structure of the light
pulses as well as the electric field frequency, direction, and strength
corresponding to the photons' energy, spin polarization, and density,
respectively. In this project, the senior investigators and graduate students
will advance established coherent control schemes and develop new ones to
control the electron dynamics in photo-absorption processes in one of the
simplest atomic systems – a lithium atom with a single active electron. In the
new experiments, previous limitations will be overcome by shaping the
macroscopic properties of the laser beam. Specifically, the laser field
wavefronts will be altered, creating so-called electromagnetic "vortex" laser
beams, which carry orbital angular momentum in the direction of propagation,
thereby opening additional ionization pathways which are “forbidden” in
conventional photo-absorption processes. Shaping ALL properties of laser pulses,
including their wavefronts, will significantly expand the available scientific
toolbox to induce and observe specific quantum pathways and it will unlock new
dials for the coherent control of electron dynamics governing many processes in
nature.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;On a more technical level, lithium atoms are
trapped in an all-optical trap and subjected to femtosecond laser pulses. In a
first step, the microscopic properties of the femtosecond laser fields will be
altered, e.g., by creating tunable sequences of bichromatic laser pulses with
variable polarization. This will enable enhancing specific multiphoton
absorption pathways, studying time-dependent Rydberg dynamics, or creating
exotic electronic wave packets. In the second step, the macroscopic properties
of the laser beam will be shaped, and optical vortex beams carrying internal
orbital angular momentum will be generated using holography. The goal is to
couple this angular momentum to the electrons, thereby opening dipole-forbidden
ionization pathways. The imprint of the optical vortices on the ejected electron
wave packet will be analyzed employing a "reaction microscope", allowing the
measurement of the momentum vectors of atomic fragments. Despite recent
theoretical predictions, experimental evidence on non-dipole transitions in
photoionization, i.e., on bound-free transitions, are, to date, entirely absent.
This lack of data is not surprising considering the formidable experimental
challenge to position a (microscopic) atom accurately in the center of a helical
laser beam. The new experiments aim to overcome this obstacle and provide the
first evidence on orbital angular momentum transfer in photoionization
processes, thereby providing a benchmark for theoretical
descriptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.