* 2207168
* Collaborative Research: NSF-BSF: Interbacterial and environmental signaling impacts on Vibrio coralliilyticus pathogenesis of coral
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Julia van Kessel, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2026
* USD 520,375.00

Reef-building corals provide habitats and nutrients for &gt;25% of marine fish
and invertebrates. Not only are coral reefs a critical ecosystem, but they also
provide local areas with numerous ecological, cultural, and economic benefits.
The world has lost about half of its total coral reef cover since the 1950s,
which is attributed to threats like anthropogenic climate change and disease
outbreaks. Increasing ocean temperatures correlates with increased disease
incidence and outbreaks in coral. The marine bacterium Vibrio coralliilyticus is
a pathogen that infects numerous species of coral and causes bleaching and
tissue loss and other diseases. The focus of this research is to understand the
signaling cues that promote V. coralliilyticus coral colonization and enable
this bacterium to overtake the hostâ€™s protective microbiome and initiate disease
in coral. An integrated understanding of V. coralliilyticus signaling and
mechanisms of regulating virulence genes will contribute to the development of
applied treatments for coral disease. Further, understanding the environmental
cues that trigger outbreaks will be critical for disease management and
prediction of outbreaks. The work proposed here also aims to demonstrate to the
community how global warming affects coral, their natural microbiomes, and
microbial pathogens. The three research institutions will collectively
participate in four programs/committees to broaden dissemination of scientific
discoveries and promote teaching, training, and participation of diverse groups:
the Biology Summer Institute at Indiana University, Science Fest at Indiana
University, The Alpha Program at Tel Aviv University, and the Science, Access,
iNclusion, and Diversity committee at University of North Carolina
Wilmington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coral field has a wealth of descriptive
observations of disease ecology and the bacteria isolated from diseased coral.
However, there is a dearth of information detailing the environmental signals
that drive disease initiation and the molecular mechanisms employed by coral
pathogens to respond to these signals. Bacterial signaling is a core component
of pathogenesis, and Vibrio bacteria are central models for studying quorum
sensing control of virulence. The central hypothesis is that quorum sensing
signaling and temperature variations control virulence genes required for V.
coralliilyticus pathogenesis of coral. Preliminary data suggest that virulence
genes include toxins that directly target host coral cells, toxins that
indirectly affect the host coral by killing the protective natural microbiome
and/or the Symbiodiniaceae endosymbionts, and protective genes that confer
resistance to V. coralliilyticus against antibacterial compounds. The
researchers will test how quorum sensing, temperature, and host-derived signals
affect virulence factors in vitro and in vivo. The first three objectives will
identify and examine the virulence factors controlled by three primary bacterial
systems that respond to the environment: 1) the V. coralliilyticus quorum
sensing signaling system, 2) the toxin regulator ToxR, and 3) the type VI
secretion system. The fourth objective will examine how each of these systems
influence coral colonization and disease progression in a live coral infection
model and its microbiome. This collaborative research will significantly
contribute to the coral pathogenesis field because it will identify V.
coralliilyticus virulence genes, virulence regulators, and the fitness of
strains that are defective in virulence pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.