* 2207401
* Louis Stokes B2B Alliance: Strategic Transfer Alliance for Minority Participation (STAMP) Training While Online (TWO)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Louise Pagotto, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,082,983.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups historically under-represented in STEM
disciplines: African-Americans, Alaska Natives, American Indians, Hispanic
Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific
Islanders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Strategic Transfer Alliance for Minority
Participation (STAMP) Training While Online (TWO) led by the University of
Hawaii - Kapiolani Community College includes the seven University of Hawaii
Community Colleges (UHCCs): Hawaii CC, Honolulu CC, Kapiolani CC, Kapiolani,
Kauai CC, Leeward CC, Maui CC, and Windward CC. The key objective of this
LSAMP-B2B is to create a sustainable, articulated and purposeful community
college program incorporating best practices in online teaching and learning
with the goal of doubling the number and increasing the resilience of
populations of students from Native Hawaiian, Native Pacific Islander and other
underrepresented groups who enroll, persist in, and transfer to a four-year
degree program in the STEM fields at the University of Hawaii. Students who
navigate through and persist in the STEM UHCC programs will acquire the
requisite skills, training and knowledge needed to successfully transfer to a
four-year university and ultimately pursue graduate education or move into the
STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LSAMP B2B STAMP TWO Alliance will
implement proven strategies and activities to increase the number of Native
Hawaiian and other underrepresented students transferring annually into
baccalaureate STEM degree programs over the next three years. The STAMP-TWO
Alliance will employ key strategies built upon lessons learned in an earlier
STAMP project funded by the NSF LSAMP program, and best practices informed by
the Tinto model for student retention as well as “high context” activities to
serve Native Hawaiian and other underrepresented minority learners. Key
strategies include recruitment activities, mentoring, and undergraduate research
experiences. Further, Alliance intends to build a sustained, fully-articulated
transfer curriculum through institutional collaborations between the UH two-year
colleges and the UH four-year campuses, members of the LSAMP Islands of
Opportunities Alliance. The Alliance leadership will collaborate with the UH
System to promote institutionalization, articulation, and sustainability of the
pathways, while leveraging other funded STEM programs at UH and strengthening
the alliance and communication between UH campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.