* 2207707
* CRCNS US-French Research Proposal: Impact of network state on corticocortical communication
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Diego Contreras, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 10/31/2025
* USD 679,999.00

In great contrast to a digital computer, the brain is constantly active and
responses to stimuli of single cells are noisy and unreliable. Instead of speed
and accuracy by a single processor, brains rely on the parallel, simultaneous
sampling of information by thousands of neurons. Neuronal populations, albeit
noisy and slow, together generate sufficiently accurate perceptual
representations of reality to conduct behavior much more efficiently and orders
of magnitude faster than any computer in existence today. Key to such parallel
processing is efficient communication among neural networks in the cortex of the
brain. The interaction of the fluctuating activity of the brain and the ability
of populations of neurons to efficiently communicate between cortical networks
in order to encode information is unknown. In this project, the investigators
explore and test the mechanisms and rules of cortico-cortical communication
using state of the art experimental and computational tools. The work will not
only address long-standing hypotheses about cortico-cortical communication and
result in the development of novel computational analysis tools but also help
shed light on cognitive disorders believed to be due in part to faulty
information transmission between cortical areas. In addition, the project will
provide opportunities for students from diverse backgrounds to participate in
cutting-edge international interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, the investigators examine how visual responses are communicated
between local networks in layers 2-3 of primary visual cortex under those two
well-defined network states. Specifically, the investigators will use
electrophysiological, optogenetic, pharmacological and computational approaches
to quantify cellular and network communication in primary visual cortex in vivo
under network states that have been proposed to ideally allow corticocortical
communication: gamma oscillations and non-oscillatory noisy states globally
termed asynchronous irregular. The investigators are able to elicit and control
those states with specific visual stimulation and will characterize the statesâ€™
neuronal background activity as well as their role in efficient transmission of
information between cortical columns. The large volume and new qualitative
aspects of the data will allow the investigators to generate novel analysis
algorithms and theoretical approaches, as well as large-scale computational
models. Ultimately, the computational models will help understand population
dynamics for the transmission of information in well-defined network states.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by the Neural Systems
Cluster in the Biological Sciences Directorate and the Division of Information
and Intelligent Systems in the Computer and information Science and Engineering
Directorate. A companion project is being funded by the French National Research
Agency (ANR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.