* 2207964
* Branched Flow of Light
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Miguel Bandres, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 07/31/2025
* USD 81,331.00

When waves propagate through a homogeneous medium, they diffract and spread.
However, when waves propagate through a smooth disordered medium, instead of
producing completely random patterns, they form channels of enhanced intensity
that keep diving as they propagate, forming a beautiful pattern resembling the
branches of a tree. This fundamental wave phenomenon is known as branched flow
and has been often overlooked. It was first observed for electrons, but it is a
universal wave phenomenon that can occur for any kind of wave, from microwaves
and light to sound and tsunami waves. This project will study new aspects of
branched flow by studying light propagating in thin-liquid films. These
explorations could not only improve our understanding of branched flow but
potentially provide new insight on how to characterize and effectively transmit
waves through smooth disordered media, such as light and sound waves through
biological tissue or mechanical waves through disordered materials. This work
will have a broad impact on the community by providing educational opportunities
for students at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate new
aspects of the universal wave phenomenon of branched flow by bringing it to
experimentally unexplored regimes. The PI and his undergraduate and graduate
students will theoretically and experimentally study the propagation of laser
beams inside thin liquid films â€“ where the local thickness variations lead to a
smoothly disordered effective index of refraction landscape that generates the
branched flow of light. The research team will study branched flow in
anisotropic and strongly disorder media to investigate how branched flow could
be used to characterize such media. This project will experimentally study how
to control branched flow by wavefront shaping to allow efficient energy
transmission through smooth random media by exciting single branched flow
channels. Finally, by studying how light interacts with a thin liquid film by
radiation pressure, light absorption, and gradient forces, the research could
open the door to possible applications of these interactions in optofluidic
devices. The project objectives will be accomplished with graduate and
undergraduate students by conducting multi-disciplinary research at the boundary
between photonics and fluid mechanics, from theory and design to experimental
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.