* 2207457
* Distributed and Quantized Kernel-based Learning over Interconnected Sensing Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Hamid Jafarkhani, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 420,000.00

Kernel-based learning is widely used for nonlinear function learning, which is a
general task in various machine learning problems, e.g., classification and
regression. This leads to its wide application in pattern recognition and data
analysis in many challenging tasks, including but not limited to time series
prediction in various interconnected sensing systems such as sensor and IoT
networks. For example, sensors measure the temperature, humidity, pressure, or
other physical phenomena to predict future measures, and cameras take pictures,
or videos to recognize an object. In many applications, multiple access nodes
collect and/or disseminate information over a certain geographical area of
interest. In addition, sensing systems include many computationally capable
devices like smartphones, UAVs, cars, and so on. In such distributed networks,
both data and computational power are distributed. Transmitting the collected
data back to a central entity for processing is not desired. Also, it is
impossible to transmit the massive amount of collected data in real-time over
networks. In addition, in many applications, there are valid security and
privacy concerns about transmitting personal data, for example in medical and
finance applications. Therefore, the proposal aims to design distributed and
quantized learning algorithms that do not transmit the collected data over
networks. The results of this research will be disseminated broadly through
traditional scholarly venues to the entire research community, government, and
industry. The results of the proposed activity will be integrated into
coursework and educational research initiatives at UCI, which is a Hispanic-
serving institution (HSI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose the design of online
distributed and quantized kernel-based learning algorithms that calculate some
"local" updates and communicate the corresponding "updates" to their neighbors
such that collectively the network can learn a "global" model. This is done
without transmitting the collected data over sensing systems with static and
dynamic network architectures. We propose to formally present different
distributed and quantized function learning algorithms and study their
performance including their convergence and regret analysis. Our algorithms will
be designed for different network structures while accounting for network delays
and dynamics. We also propose the design of adaptive distributed and quantized
algorithms and study their performance and regret analysis. In addition, we
study the optimal network resource allocation in these scenarios and the
corresponding trade-off between computation accuracy and network resources. Our
goal is to design robust distributed and quantized kernel learning algorithms
over distributed sensing systems that only need to communicate with neighboring
nodes and are less sensitive to network characteristics, like network topology
and delays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.