* 2207436
* RAPID: Using Mobile Phone Data to Understand the Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Food Assistance Use in Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Guangqing Chi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 01/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has strained national and international transportation
systems, affecting the cost and availability of food and other essentials. The
pandemic has also exacerbated economic inequalities, disproportionately
affecting vulnerable and low-income communities. In Alaska, most households rely
on costly imported foods, and many, especially those with children, are
experiencing food insecurity and undernutrition. This project investigates the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on household use of food assistance in urban
Alaska over the past three years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through an innovative
methodology using mobility data and spatial analysis, the PI team evaluates
links between social and demographic variables and food pantry access,
identifying food insecurity hotspots where need is greatest. This methodology
may be applied elsewhere in the U.S. to identify and assist communities facing
food insecurity. Working with local partners, research findings will be rapidly
disseminated to stakeholders to inform food assistance programs. Research
findings will also be used for university curriculum development and workshops.
More broadly, assessment and response to food assistance needs during periods of
crisis will improve the household security of vulnerable and low-income
Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.