* 2207784
* Development of Ultrafast Cavity-Enhanced Two-Dimensional Spectroscopy for Coherent Control Experimental Design
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Melanie Reber, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 07/31/2025
* USD 525,682.00

With support from the programs in Atomic, Molecular and Optical Experimental
Physics (AMO-E), Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A) and
Integrative Activities in Physics, Prof. Melanie Reber at the University of
Georgia is increasing the sensitivity of a laser technique for studying and
controlling molecules. The idea of using light to selectively control the
breaking of a bond and to control the outcome of a chemical reaction is a long-
standing dream. It could potentially provide new avenues to synthesize molecules
or even create new molecules. In order to use light for a controlled synthesis,
ideally one would have detailed knowledge about the molecular electronic,
vibrational, and rotational energy landscapes and how they are coupled. One
challenge with describing the molecular system for designing control sequences
is if the molecule has complicated dynamics that are not well described by
current computational chemistry or spectroscopic methods. This project will
develop a spectroscopy-driven approach to designing coherent control
experiments, specifically improving the sensitivity and resolution of two-
dimensional spectroscopy through the use of optical enhancement cavities and
frequency comb lasers. Two-dimensional spectroscopy provides information about
the structure and dynamics of molecules, but currently can only be used on
condensed-phase samples. Over the three years of the project, the research team
will develop the capability to perform multidimensional spectroscopy on dilute
species, enabling studies of small, isolated molecules without the effects of
solvent, for example. The students working on this highly-technical project will
gain valuable interdisciplinary training in electronics, optics, lasers, vacuum
technology, programming, data analysis, CAD design, and quantum mechanics. This
training will set the students up for successful careers in technical fields in
industry and academia. In addition, the PI will start a yearly workshop aimed at
students from local colleges, including several HBCU’s, to learn about chemistry
and physics graduate school and the application
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will develop a high-resolution
and ultrafast two-dimensional spectrometer for characterization of vibrational
and electronic coupling in molecules for a detailed molecular approach to
designing coherent control experiments. The main goal of the project is to build
the cavity-enhanced two-dimensional spectrometer with a visible pump and tunable
visible probe with a dual comb detection scheme. They will use frequency comb
lasers and techniques, including dual-comb detection, to increase the
sensitivity and enable high-resolution spectral detection. The cavity-
enhancement will improve the sensitivity of two-dimensional spectroscopy, such
that dilute species in molecular beams can be studied with two-dimensional
spectroscopy for the first time. This instrument will then provide new data on
the structure and dynamics of gas phase molecules with the potential for
ultrafast time resolution and high-precision frequency resolution to be used for
coherent control experimental design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.