* 2207191
* Collaborative Research: ERASE-PFAS: Hydrothermal Treatment as a Strategy for Simultaneous PFAS Destruction and Recovery of Energy and Nutrients from Wastewater Residual Solids
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jeremy Guest, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2025
* USD 207,907.00

Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are fluorinated organic chemicals
that are used in numerous consumer products and industrial applications. During
the last decade, PFAS have emerged as priority pollutants due to increasing
concerns about their persistence, stability, and toxicity to humans and other
living organisms as they accumulate in the environment. The increasing detection
of PFAS in sludge and biosolids from water resource recovery facilities (WRRFs)
has raised serious concerns about using these solids in agriculture and farming
as soil amendments, and sources of organic matter and nutrients. The goal of
this collaborative project is to evaluate the use of hydrothermal liquefaction
(HTL) as a platform technology to advance the simultaneous destruction of PFAS
and recovery of liquid fuel and nutrients from sludge. The HTL process uses high
temperature (250-350Â°C) and high pressure (100-250 bar) to break down PFAS-in
sludge from WRRFs in a specially designed reactor. The proposed research will
evaluate the effectiveness of HTL to remediate PFAS-laden sludges while
producing liquid fuel and nutrients. The successful completion of this project
will benefit society through the development of new fundamental knowledge and
technology to advance the cost-effective remediation and management of PFAS-
laden sludges from WRRFs. Additional benefits to society will be achieved
through outreach and educational activities including the mentoring of a
graduate student at Colorado School of Mines and a graduate student at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The detection
of PFAS in agricultural fields and farms where sludges were applied to the land
has raised serious concerns about the land application of sludge, a farming
practice commonly used to improve soil quality and crop yields. The goal of this
collaborative research is to evaluate and advance the application of
hydrothermal liquefaction (HTL) as an alternative technology for managing PFAS-
laden sludges from water resource recovery facilities (WRRFs). This goal will be
advanced through a combination of experiments and modeling efforts with a focus
on two critical objectives: (1) identify HTL process conditions that ensure
destruction of PFAS that accumulate in sludges from WRRFs; and (2) develop and
apply a system modeling framework to optimize sludge valorization through the
recovery of fuel and valuable products (e.g., nutrients) while safely destroying
the PFAS contaminants. The proposed experiments will evaluate the destruction of
PFAS and track the mass balances of the carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus that
are generated during sludge HTL. The results of the HTL experiments will inform
and guide the development and validation of process modules that will be
incorporated into QSDsan (Quantitative Sustainable Design for sanitation and
resource recovery), an open-source modeling framework for optimizing resource
recovery from wastewater and waste biomass. Model predictions that optimize
resource recovery while destroying PFAS will then be validated with sludges and
digested biosolids obtained from several WRRFs. The successful completion of
this project has the potential for transformative impact through the development
and validation of a new technology that addresses sludge PFAS contamination
while advancing the recovery of valuable products. To implement the education
and outreach activities of the project, the Principal Investigators (PIs) plan
to leverage an existing REU program at Colorado School of Mines (CSM) to broaden
participation in STEM education by recruiting students who have not previously
participated in undergraduate research. In addition, the PIs plan to 1) conduct
virtual workshops to support and broaden the use of QSDsan modeling by the water
research community and 2) develop summer camp activities on resource recovery
from waste streams for K-6 students that will participate in a summer camp for
children with dyslexia at CSM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.