* 2207923
* Carbon cycling and food web energy transfer in salinized headwater streams
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Carl Zipper, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robyn Smyth
* 02/28/2026
* USD 699,997.00

Freshwater ecosystems are becoming salinized (or “salty”) across the globe from
activities associated with agriculture, road de-icing, wastewater discharge, and
mining. In central Appalachia, headwater stream ecosystems are particularly
vulnerable to the impacts of salinization from surface coal mining, a widespread
economic activity in the region. Increased salt concentrations stress aquatic
organisms and can make headwaters unlivable for some microbes and animals. This
is concerning because Appalachian headwaters are home to some unique organisms
and collectively, have some of the most diverse aquatic insect communities in
the world. Stream insects are especially adapted to cycling nutrients and
distributing food energy from the surrounding forests into aquatic food webs.
There is an urgent need to understand how salinization affects the freshwater
insect community, stream productivity, and food web energy transfer. The
consequences of salinization on freshwater animals in headwater streams will be
shared with local K-12 teachers and trainees, scientists, and regional policy
makers. New metrics for stream bioassessments will also be developed and shared.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will assess salinity effects on carbon (C)
processing in headwater streams through measurements of food web C production
and transfer. Enhanced weathering of mining-exposed minerals can elevate major
ions and salinity in headwater streams, with documented impacts to microbial and
macroinvertebrate growth and community composition. Such organismal stress
responses likely have cascading effects on stream food webs and ecosystem
processes like decomposition and primary production. Salinization is predicted
to alleviate salt limitation in primary producers and increase gross primary
production (GPP). In contrast, subsidy-stress responses are predicted in
heterotrophic production. Thus, along an increasing salinity gradient, similar
subsidy-stress responses in trophic transfer efficiency could ultimately
decrease food web C transfer at the highest salinities. To test these
hypotheses, simultaneous measurements of C pools, transfers, and transformations
will be taken in nine study streams that represent a salinity
gradient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.