* 2207747
* CRCNS US-Spain Research Proposal: Collaborative Research: Tracking and modeling the neurobiology of multilingual speech recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Kevin Brown, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 09/30/2025
* USD 186,479.00

More than half of the world's population speaks two or more languages fluently.
Speaking more than one language allows you to communicate and interact with
individuals in other countries and cultures through conversation and reading. It
also has economic benefits, and possibly even cognitive and health benefits.
Scientifically, there are many open questions about bilingualism for education
(how can we best train people in new languages?), health (how can you best treat
a bilingual person with language difficulty after a brain injury?), and
technology (how can we make speech recognition systems as flexible as
multilingual humans?). To better understand multilingual language processing,
researchers will record neural responses to speech in people who know either
one, two, or three languages, while they listen to the languages they know. The
project is a transatlantic collaborative effort with US researchers partnering
with Spanish researchers. High school, undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
trainees will receive training in cutting-edge computational and cognitive
neuroscience and psycholinguistics, including data science and modeling skills
transferable to a range of academic and non-academic STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the fundamental questions that researchers
will explore is how two or more languages co-exist within a single language
system and how each is represented in the brain. Some prior research suggests
there is a deep continuous coactivation of all the languages a person knows even
when they are in a single language context, while other research suggests that
under many circumstances, only the language relevant in the moment is activated.
The project will use the tools of computational neuroscience to develop
cognitive theories and implemented models of bilingual and trilingual language
processing, which the research team will compare to neuroimaging data with high
temporal resolution (magnetoencephalography or MEG). MEG will be collected while
monolingual, bilingual, and trilingual individuals process speech from languages
they know under conditions designed to promote attention to a single language
(isolated words or continuous speech from only 1 language) or two languages
(random interleaving of isolated words from 2 languages, or more ecological
'code-switching' between 2 languages). Researchers will use a state-of-the-art
neural network model of human speech recognition developed with previous NSF
support. They will use continuous speech tracking to relate neural activity to
both theoretically-generated hypotheses regarding potential impacts of language
co-activation and the behavior and internal activity of neural network models.
In this way, researchers will be able to compare human brain responses and
neural network model responses to statistical predictions of the expectation
level for each successive speech sound (consonant or vowel) and word during
presentation of continuous speech. Comparing different models to neural
responses will help researchers address fundamental questions, such as whether
all the languages a person knows are active whenever they hear any language, and
whether this is helpful or causes interference. This research promises to deepen
our understanding of multilingual language development and processing in the
human brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion project is being funded by the
State Research Agency, Spain (AEI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.