* 2207771
* Collaborative Research: Attosecond Electron Dynamics in Polyatomic Molecules Probed by Water Window X-Rays
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Wendell Hill, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2025
* USD 350,910.00

Ultrashort pulses of laser light enable the highest-speed shutters for X-ray
cameras that can record slow-motion pictures of rapidly-moving charged particles
in atoms, molecules and solids. X-rays are ideal for this purpose as they can
differentiate three important elements -- carbon, nitrogen and oxygen -- by
their characteristic absorption features. In a collaborative research program
between the University of Central Florida (UCF) and the University of Maryland
(UMD), the team of Dr. Chang and Hill observe the hopping of electrons between
atoms in organic molecules by taking advantage of the time-resolving power of
ultrashort pulses and the element-resolving capabilities of X-rays. The tools
developed by this program are anticipated to impact a variety of research in
other fields. Two examples are (1) addressing fundamental biological questions
associated with photosynthesis and (2) making technological advances in the
photovoltaic effect necessary to improve the efficiency of solar panels. The
collaborative project provides opportunities for graduate students and postdocs
to work at one of the forefronts of atomic, molecular and optical physics, while
being trained to become leaders in the research area of ultrafast molecular
dynamics and experts in attosecond technologies. Courses on attosecond optics
and physics are offered at UCF for undergraduate and graduate students, which
include lab demonstrations held in the attosecond facility (students from UMD
are able to attend via an internet link). A key element of this program is the
special effort made to attract and engage investigators from underrepresented
groups and building connections with students and investigators at Historically
Black Colleges and Universities in Florida and
Maryland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UCF-UMD collaboration has assembled the
instrumentation and personnel (1) to study photoinduced dynamics in prototype
molecules and (2) to analyze the results with state-of-the-art analytical tools.
Specifically, ultrafast charge-migration dynamics is being probed experimentally
with transient absorption of core-level states of carbon and oxygen while
quantitative analysis is done in collaboration with UCF theorists with
specialized numerical codes. Attosecond transient absorption spectroscopy (ATAS)
was first demonstrated in the extreme ultraviolet (10 to 120 eV) using light
sources based on high harmonic generation (HHG) driven by near infrared
Ti:Sapphire lasers. During the last funding period, the spectrum range of ATAS
was demonstrated at the nitrogen K-edge (400 eV) by taking advantage of the new
generation attosecond HHG light sources enabled by short-wave infrared drivers.
There are two objectives in the current investigation. The first is to extend
the spectral range of the attosecond source to cover the full water window, and
to conduct ATAS at the oxygen K-edge (530 eV), nitrogen edge, and carbon K-edge
(280 eV) simultaneously. This will enable charge migration in large molecules
such as propionic acid to be investigated more quantitatively. The second
objective is to track structural changes induced by the infrared pulse in
methane as hydrogen atoms are removed (deprotonization), and to observe infrared
light-induced isomerization of acetylene into vinilydene with sub-femtosecond
resolution. An overarching aim of the project is to show that it is possible to
trace the dynamics of charge density with atomic spatial resolution and
attosecond temporal resolution by measuring spectroscopic features related to
the element-specific core-to-valence transitions induced by X-ray
radiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.