* 2207475
* Enabling Research for the Third Generation Gravitational Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Albert Lazzarini, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,038,009.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
Advanced LIGO transformed gravitation, astrophysics and cosmology by opening the
gravitational- wave window on the universe, establishing a new paradigm for
multi-messenger observations. The scientific case for constructing a network of
3rd generation ground based interferometric gravitational wave detectors with
about a factor 10X sensitivity improvement is compelling. The detectors would
observe all the compact binary coalescences in the universe and bring the new
field into cosmological research. The most realistic way to improve the
detectors is by increasing the length of the interferometer arms as the
gravitational wave signals grow with the length while most of the significant
limiting noise is independent of, or varies slowly, with the length. A
significant fraction of cost of the detectors will be in the ultra-high vacuum
(UHV) system needed for the beam tubes and the civil work in preparing the site.
The team proposes to explore a range of concepts in vacuum technology that could
reduce the cost of UHV tube systems by a factor of about 2X, amounting to a
saving of $200M to $300M in a 3rd generation detector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
program will explore novel techniques to economically fabricate vacuum systems
using and building on the latest metallurgical and materials science
innovations. The investigations will be conducted in collaboration with the DOE
(FNAL) and an international partner (CERN). The group will also be sharing
results with the EU ET vacuum group in Italy (supported by INFN). Successfully
identifying novel fabrication approaches and beam tube designs will have
applicability beyond the immediate interests of gravitational wave astrophysics.
Next generation high energy colliders that dwarf the LHC will also need
innovative concepts for their vacuum infrastructure. The applicability of the
material coatings research that will be explored also promises to have an
economic impact in the use of coated steels for various industrial applications.
The initiative here, to enable the construction of 3rd generation detectors,
will generate new opportunities to attract, inspire and educate future
scientists, citizens and leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.