* 2207650
* Probing Extreme Gravity with Gravitational Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Nicolas Yunes, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2025
* USD 328,484.00

Gravitational wave astrophysics has entered a new era of discovery and
exploration. In 2015, NSF's LIGO detected gravitational waves for the first
time, earning the pioneers of gravitational wave physics a Nobel prize, and the
collaboration several other prestigious prizes. Since then, LIGO and its
European partner, Virgo, have detected over 90 other events. All of these
gravitational waves were emitted by black holes and/or neutron stars inspiraling
and colliding against each other, at a high fraction of the speed of light. All
signals were shown to be consistent with the predictions of general relativity
in a regime that had never been tested before: where the gravitational force is
enormous and violently changing. The extraction of this physical information and
interpretation required the accurate construction of gravitational wave models
with which to pull the signal out of the detector noise. The main objective of
this award is to develop ready-to-use models to extract and interpret
gravitational waves emitted in eccentric and precessing collisions, so that
these models can be used to study astrophysics and test general relativity with
future observations. The award also leverages state-of-the-art artificial
intelligence techniques to test general relativity with gravitational wave data
but without prescribing a detailed gravitational wave model beforehand. The
award integrates this research with broader impact activities, aimed at changing
the attitudes of K-12 students and the general public toward physics and science
through activities the award develops in the Illinois Center for Advanced
Studies of the University at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, a
fertile training ground for the next generation of gravitational scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is aimed at (i) developing analytic models for
the orbital dynamics and the gravitational waves emitted by generic (spin-
precessing and eccentric) compact binaries during inspiral, and (ii) carrying
out model-specific and model-agnostic tests of GR using current public data
released by the LIGO/Virgo/KAGRA Scientific Collaboration. Existing models are
sufficient for the detection and characterization of gravitational waves emitted
by sources that are precessing due to spin misalignment, but not if the orbits
are also eccentric. LIGO has already detected at least one source that is
strongly spin-precessing, and more are expected as detectors are upgraded to
reach design sensitivity. The model this award constructs prevents parameter
estimation biases because of mismodeling eccentricity systematics, allowing for
the extraction of eccentricity, informing astrophysical population models and
allowing new general relativity tests. This research will enhance existing and
developing new theory-agnostic gravitational-wave tests of general relativity,
by creating a higher-harmonics version of the parameterized post-Einsteinian
model, and by creating a brand-new artificial-intelligence-enabled test of
general relativity through a tailor-made conditional variational auto-encoder.
This award also implements broader impact activities aimed at changing the
attitudes of K-12 students and the general public toward physics and science. In
"The Art of Physics/The Physics of Art", the project educates undergraduate and
graduate students in cutting-edge physics to create art works that convey
physics concepts. The art pieces compete at a juried exhibition, with the
winning artist becoming the resident artists in physics for one year. In the
"Physics Facts and Fictions" activity, the project creates a series of short,
educational YouTube videos, which correct misconceptions about gravity for the
general public. The videos are accompanied by cartoons that visualize the
physics misconceptions and their resolutions. Through "POINT", the award creates
a distribution channel for a new virtual reality simulation for middle school
students that focuses on gravity. Virtual reality headsets and this simulation
are taken on the road to nearby middle schools, and short lectures on gravity
are created to accompany these simulations, with all material generated becoming
freely available to download online. The "GW Artisan‚Äù is a book that introduces
gravitational-wave physics, and its applications to astrophysics, cosmology,
nuclear physics and theoretical physics, to advanced undergraduate and young
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.