* 2207713
* Oregon Experimental Relativity Group: Monitoring, Measuring and Mitigating Environmental Influences on LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Raymond Frey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 01/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

On February 11, 2016, the era of gravitational wave astronomy began with NSF's
Laser Interferometric Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) announcement of the
detection of a black hole merger. This first detection led to a Nobel prize and
spectacularly confirmed predictions of general relativity, but it also opened a
new window on the universe, promising many more discoveries. This award will
help make these discoveries by contributing to the monitoring and measuring of
environmental influences on the LIGO detectors. By helping improve LIGOâ€™s
performance, this research will contribute to human understanding of fundamental
aspects of the cosmos, an endeavor that is widely believed to have intrinsic
societal benefits. The broad public interest in LIGO discoveries excites
interest in STEM, also a societal benefit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The awardees
will work with LIGO site employees to upgrade and improve the sensor arrays
(seismometers, accelerometers, magnetometers, etc.) and the injection equipment
(equipment for injecting environmental signals) so that the system can be used
for measuring coupling and vetting detections. The awardees will help measure
the coupling of the environment to the LIGO detectors as the next observing run
(O4) approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.