* 2207681
* Relativistic Gravitation and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Clifford Will, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Since the first detection of gravitational waves from merging black holes in
2015, gravitational-wave science has emerged as a new and vibrant branch of
astronomy. In addition to opening new avenues for exploration, such as the
origin of cosmic black holes, it has yielded new tests of Einstein’s general
theory of relativity. Observations by astronomers of the motions of stars and
gas near supermassive black holes, such as the one at the center of the Milky
Way, have also opened the possibility of testing Einstein’s theory in realms
where the warping of spacetime is extreme, and raised questions about how stars
form and evolve near such extreme objects. Yet in order to test Einstein’s great
theory, it is essential to know what it actually predicts for real measurements.
This project continues a program of research to provide concrete links between
the abstract beauty and complex mathematics of Einstein’s theory and the real
world where measurements are made by physicists and astronomers. These links are
established by finding approximate, yet accurate solutions of the equations in
forms that are practical and usable. The outcomes of this research will be used
by data experts at the gravitational-wave observatories to perform better tests
of general relativity using newly detected signals, and will be used by
astronomers to probe how general relativity affects complex systems such as
stars orbiting supermassive black holes, or three-body systems involving bodies
ranging from black holes to exoplanets. Einstein's theory is a topic that
fascinates the general public, and the PI will continue to give public lectures
on topics related to this research, bringing understanding of Einstein's ideas
to the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will
contribute to the ability of ground-based gravitational-wave observatories such
as the LIGO-Virgo-Kagra network to test general relativity, by computing the
gravitational waves emitted by binary systems as predicted by an important
alternative theory, known as Einstein-Aether gravity, to high accuracy in the
so-called post-Newtonian approximation. The project will continue to extend
recent work of the PI on incorporating the effects of Einstein’s theory into the
dynamics of three-body systems, such as a binary-black-hole system in a galactic
core with a supermassive black hole at its center. A specific goal is to see
whether observations of the star known as SO-2 which revolves around the
galactic center black hole can be used to detect or limit a hypothetical
intermediate-mass black hole in orbit around the supermassive object. Another
project is to study general relativistic effects in N-body systems at the
second-post-Newtonian approximation, with the goal of assessing how relativistic
effects impact the long-term stability of dense stellar
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.