* 2207218
* Collaborative Proposal: SaTC: Frontiers: Center for Distributed Confidential Computing (CDCC)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Raquel Hill, Spelman College
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2027
* USD 140,058.00

Advances in AI and big data analytics rely on data sharing, which can be impeded
by privacy concerns. Most challenging in privacy protection is protection of
data-in-use, since even encrypted data needs to be decrypted before it can be
utilized, thereby exposing data content to unauthorized parties. A practical and
scalable solution to the challenge will transform computing, enabling
unprecedented capabilities such as confidential outsourcing, trusted computing
services, and confidential or privacy-preserving collaboration. In quest of such
a holy grail of data protection, this frontier project establishes multi-
institution and multi-disciplinary Center for Distributed Confidential Computing
(CDCC) to create a research, education, knowledge transfer and workforce
development environment that enables scalable, practical, verifiable and usable
data-in-use protection based upon Trusted Execution Environments (TEE) on cloud
and edge systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;CDCC focuses on four building block
thrusts fundamental to distributed confidential computing (DCC), regardless of
specific TEE hardware, including assurance of TEE code, assurance of TEE nodes,
assurance of a TEE workflow and assurance for the stakeholder. The first thrust
leads to an open ecosystem for TEE code certification, not relying on any
trusted party but on a trustworthy application store whose certification
operations are public, accountable and verifiable. The second thrust aims to
develop novel dynamic data-use policy models and enforcement mechanisms for
scalable trust management and data control on the TEE nodes running certified
code. The third thrust focuses on ensuring protection of the computational
workflow built on TEE nodes and the last thrust studies the stakeholder's
preference and expectations to guide the design of DCC technologies and ensure
their usability. On top of these building blocks, the center explores various
transformative applications (e.g., confidential distributed AI supports for
healthcare) to be enabled. CDCC also has a number of efforts for outreach
(development of a massive open online course, industry collaboration, etc.) and
for broadening participation (security and privacy lab for attracting minority
students, joint summer schools and others).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.