* 2207219
* Louis Stokes New STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: Rocky Mountain Alliance for Minority Participation (RM-LSAMP)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Linda Figueroa, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,788,219.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African-
Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic Americans, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The Rocky Mountain Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation (RM-LSAMP), formerly known as the CO-WY
LSAMP, has been successful in increasing the number of baccalaureate degrees
earned by students from populations underrepresented in STEM and will now be a
new STEM Pathways and Research Alliance with important representation of
Hispanic American and Native American students. The RM-LSAMP will continue to
grow the successful program that has been supported by LSAMP funding since 1995.
The RM-LSAMP Alliance consists of 13 institutions: Colorado State University,
University of Colorado Boulder, University of Denver, University of Colorado
Denver, University of Northern Colorado, Colorado School of Mines (Doctoral
Universities), Adams State University, Colorado State University – Pueblo
(Master’s Universities), Fort Lewis College, Metropolitan State University of
Denver (Baccalaureate Colleges), Central Wyoming College, Otero College, and
Trinidad State College (Associate’s Colleges). The institutions are both urban
and rural, including all the Minority Serving Institutions in Colorado with six
HSIs and two Native American-Serving, Nontribal Institutions. The overall goal
of the Alliance is to increase the number of students from underrepresented
groups earning baccalaureate degrees in STEM. The program focuses on academic
and social support for students across the Alliance, with several specific
interventions being developed with joint institutional efforts. The emphasis on
opportunities for student research includes a First Nations Initiative in
support of summer research experiences for Native Americans, and international
experiences, with a goal of increasing the number of students participating in
research. There is also an emphasis on increasing the number of students
transferring from two to four-year institutions. Alliance activities will also
be focused on preparing students for graduate programs in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alliance’s research will generate knowledge
through two research projects to investigate the relevance of the Goal Congruity
Model for understanding entry into and persistence in STEM fields by students
from populations underrepresented in STEM. The research studies include both a
quantitative study of Native American high school students, as well as a
qualitative study of students from populations underrepresented in STEM
participating in summer research. It is hypothesized that the Goal Congruity
Model explains some of the variance in the participation gaps in STEM by
students underrepresented in STEM, and thus could provide suggestions for
interventions directed at the individual, the academy, and the workplace. The
student academic and professional development interventions implemented in this
project will have transferable value for STEM students and other institutions
worldwide. Long-lasting impact from outcomes achieved will create a more diverse
and inclusive environment on college campuses and in the STEM workforce.
Ultimately, the Rocky Mountain Alliance will contribute significantly to
preserving and improving the United States’ competitiveness in overcoming key
global technology, health, and economic development
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.