* 2207758
* Gravitational Wave Physics and Astrophysics with LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Alan Weinstein, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2025
* USD 989,321.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
Gravitational-wave (GW) physics and astronomy has entered a new era: GW
transient events (so far, from the merger of compact binary systems containing
black holes and/or neutron stars) detected with the LIGO and Virgo detectors in
their first three observing runs (O1, O2, O3) are frequent. In the fourth
observing run (O4), estimated to begin in December 2022 and continuing for one
year, the KAGRA detector will also participate, and the LIGO and Virgo detectors
will have increased sensitivity to distant sources. This will result in
unprecedented rates of discovery of GWs from compact binary mergers, and the
potential for many discoveries of GWs from other astrophysical sources such as a
stochastic GW background. Indeed, entirely new classes of GW sources may be
discovered. These observations will enable a wealth of studies, ranging from
fundamental physics to astronomy, astrophysics and cosmology. Observations of
binary black hole mergers are used to understand stellar evolution and the
formation, evolution and death of binaries. They enable uniquely powerful tests
of general relativity in the strong-field, highly-dynamical regime of gravity.
Observations of binary neutron star mergers enable constraints on the nuclear
equation of state, unique measurements of the local Hubble-Lemaitre parameter,
and insights into the origins of element formation in the universe. The proposed
work, in coordination with the LIGO Laboratory and LIGO, Virgo and KAGRA (LVK)
Collaborations, focuses on the development of methods to confidently identify
weak GW signals from astrophysical sources in the noisy data, using highly
optimized search pipelines, and interpret the results in their astrophysical
context. These methods will be further developed and applied to data from the
LVK O4 run, and lessons learned will be incorporated into appropriate
preparation for future observing runs. A variety of activities involving
students and teachers from local middle and high schools, mentoring summer
undergraduate research fellows, and organizing and participating in GW Open Data
Workshops, aim to make these advances in gravitational wave science accessible
to a broad range of people and groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is devoted
to discovering and analyzing gravitational-wave (GW) signals in the LIGO, Virgo
and KAGRA detectors during FY2023-FY2025 (LIGO's observing runs O4 and O5).
Specific scientific goals are: (a) Identifying GW signals from compact binary
mergers in data from LIGO, Virgo, and KAGRA, using two of the LSC "flagship"
search pipelines, PyCBC and gstlal; (b) performing ever more sensitive Tests of
General Relativity as the theory of strong-field gravity governing binary black
hole (BBH) mergers, through searches for post-merger GW "echoes", searches for
non-tensorial polarizations in GWs from CBCs, and searches for beyond-GR
parameters in signal waveforms from BBH mergers; (c) performing ever deeper
searches for strong gravitational lensing of GW signals from compact binary
mergers - the identification of GW event pairs, including sub-threshold event
candidates, and joint parameter estimation; (d) improving the efficiency and
robustness of single-event astrophysical parameter estimation to infer the
masses and spins of the compact objects with accuracy and precision; and (e)
using the much larger event count from O4 and O5 to further develop our
understanding of the BBH merger rate as a function of mass, spin, and
cosmological redshift. The work will build on existing expertise and experience
in all of these efforts, and extend them to the era of frequent detections by
automating routine tasks. The results of these efforts will make it possible to
make confident detections of GW events as they become frequent, and make the
information obtained available to the LSC, to the astronomical community, and to
the public, promptly, so that they can be fully exploited by those communities
to advance gravitational-wave astronomy. In order to make gravitational wave
science accessible to a broad range of people and groups, the following
activities will be pursued: training and mentoring a diverse range of
undergraduate students in the LIGO SURF/REU program; supporting open science
through the GW Open Science Center; organizing and participating in annual GW
Open Data Workshops; using scientific computing as a tool to engage high school
and undergraduate students through online tutorials and through outreach to STEM
teachers at local schools; and engaging in K-12 outreach and communicating with
the general public, through visits to local middle- and high-school STEM fairs
and classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.