* 2207183
* Planning: Planning Grant for EPSCOR Chemurgy 2.0 - Advanced Biomanufacturing for Next-Generation, Bio-inspired Products
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2022
* Laura Jarboe, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 12/31/2022
* USD 97,879.00

The activities proposed in this planning grant are intended to support the
development of a meritorious&lt;br/&gt;RII Track-1 program for the state of
Iowa. This program will be state-wide, with integration of
individual&lt;br/&gt;researchers, institutions and organizations. It will both
build research capacity, in order to implement a&lt;br/&gt;sustained increase in
research competitiveness, and build human infrastructure in the form
of&lt;br/&gt;broadening participation and workforce development. During
implementation of the planning grant, the team&lt;br/&gt;will assess the
existing research and human infrastructure, coordinate and plan state-wide
efforts, host&lt;br/&gt;an all-hands meeting, and develop a collaboration
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning grant from Iowa State University
presents a plan for the development of a Chemurgy 2.0 proposal &lt;br/&gt;for
submission to the FY23 RII Track-1 competition. Planning activities have been
ongoing for several months &lt;br/&gt;now, and the funding requested will allow
a consultant to orchestrate the discussions within Iowa needed &lt;br/&gt;to
formulate a strong full proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.