* 2207348
* LOUIS STOKES B2B ALLIANCE: SHORELINE-WEST STEMConnect
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Dwayne Smith, Housatonic Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 05/31/2026
* USD 353,334.00

The overall goal of the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation
(LSAMP) program is to assist universities and colleges in diversifying the
nation's science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce by
increasing the number of STEM baccalaureate and graduate degrees awarded to
persons from LSAMP populations LSAMP populations are defined as persons from
groups underrepresented in the STEM enterprise: Blacks and African-Americans,
Hispanic and Latino Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians, and Pacific Islanders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three community colleges
comprise the Shoreline-West STEMConnect Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation, Bridge-to-the-Baccalaureate (B2B) project-Housatonic Community
College in Bridgeport, Norwalk Community College in Norwalk, and Gateway
Community College in New Haven. Through academic, social and financial support
to community college students and in coordination with four-year partners across
Connecticut, New York, New England, and several Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs), the program will increase recruitment, retention,
persistence and graduation rates for successful transfer to four-year STEM
degree programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Shoreline-West STEMConnect LSAMP program
components, such as Guided Pathways advising, tutoring, mentoring, a STEM-
focused summer bridge program for incoming first-year students. STEM Centers of
Excellence will be established to support students' STEM socialization and
belongingness in addition to student tours of four-year campuses. Research
experiences at government labs or universities and boot camps for exposure to
four-year colleges and universities will be available. These evidence-based
activities are designed to accomplish the goal of increasing the number of
underrepresented groups who select STEM disciplines and transfer into and
graduate from baccalaureate-producing institutions. Through articulation
agreements with multiple four-year colleges and universities, students will
seamlessly transfer to baccalaureate STEM programs throughout the nation. The
Shoreline-West STEMConnect B2B website and social media sites will offer an
effective means to disseminate information and create networks of support for
STEM students alliance-wide and nationally. Project results, including
evaluation recommendations, will be disseminated widely at local, regional and
national meetings where the persistence, performance, advancement and careers in
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.