* 2207656
* Theory of Dynamical Correlated-Electron Processes in Molecules Induced and Probed with x-Ray Light
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Francois Mauger, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2025
* USD 150,000.00

X-ray free-electron laser (XFEL) light sources are opening avenues to observe
the motion of electrons inside matter with unprecedented space and time
resolution. By accessing core levels, x-ray pulses can discriminatively
interrogate different atoms in molecules, and they can do so with femtosecond
(one millionth of a billionth of a second) resolution or faster, reaching the
natural scales at which electrons move in these systems. This project will study
a range of time-dependent correlated-electron processes in organic molecules
that can be induced and probed with x-rays. To do so, the PI and his group will
leverage existing quantum-chemistry packages to simulate the interaction between
x-rays and molecules. While theoretical, this project will aim to identify
processes and observables that are accessible to measurements, with the ultimate
objective to collaborate with XFEL experimental campaigns. The project will
serve the national interest through the advancement of x-ray-enabled molecular
science and through the development of human resources via the training of
junior researchers at the undergraduate and graduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his group will study the interactions
between molecules and x-ray light, as the vehicle for triggering and observing
time-dependent correlated processes in these systems, with an emphasis on core
electrons. Of the two main objectives, one will be to routinely simulate a range
of correlated processes in organic molecules that can be induced and/or probed
with x-rays. To do so, simulations will use an explicit treatment of electron
correlation in a multi-reference complete- or restricted-active space formal-ism
(MR-CAS/RAS) using density-functional-theory, or otherwise optimized, molecular
orbitals to improve the convergence of the MR-CAS/RAS. An additional objective
of the project will be to uniquely connect the correlated dynamics and processes
observed in these simulations, i.e., the wave functions, to observables that are
accessible to experiments. This project will also investigate some of the
practical aspects of modeling light-matter interactions with realistic XFEL
pulses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Atomic,
Molecular, and Optical Physics Theory Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.