* 2207072
* III: Small: Spatial Deep Learning from Imperfect Volunteered Geographic Information
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Zhe Jiang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2023
* USD 366,000.00

This project aims to investigate novel spatial machine learning algorithms based
on imperfect volunteered geographical information as ground truth for
applications at the intersection of machine learning and geographic information
science. The rapid growth of geospatial and spatiotemporal data being collected
from space, airborne, and terrestrial platforms provides scientists, farmers,
and first responders critical information they need about the surface of the
Earth. This emerging area that intersects machine learning, especially deep
learning, with geographic information science is called GeoAI. GeoAI can
potentially transform society by addressing grand challenges such as rapid
disaster response, water resource management, and transportation. One major
obstacle, however, is that deep learning heavily relies on a large number of
training labels, which are often not easily available for geographic
applications due to slow and expensive field surveys. Existing research on semi-
supervised learning could not fully resolve the issues due to the complex nature
of geographic data such as spatial heterogeneity. This project will fill the gap
by exploiting large scale, low-cost, and near real-time volunteered geographic
information. The project will contribute towards the next generation water
resource management for the U.S. in the 21st century. This research can not only
improve the situational awareness for disaster response agencies but also
enhance the flood forecasting capabilities of the National Water Model. Planned
algorithms will be implemented into open source tools that will enhance the
research infrastructure for disaster management and hydrology communities.
Educational activities include curriculum development, K-12 computer science
education at Alabama Computer Science Summer Camps. The principal investigator
has a past record in mentoring undergraduate students from a historically black
university and will continue the efforts at the University of Alabama, which has
a reputation for producing African American researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned framework will bring about several innovations
to address significant technical challenges due to data quality issues. First,
to address the noisy, biased, and incomplete label semantics, the project will
develop novel label enhancement and enrichment algorithms based on physics-aware
spatial structural constraints, which advance existing methods (that often
assume independent labels) by jointly enhancing labels based on structural
dependency. Second, the project will explore a new location error model that
better captures geometric shapes than existing square patch-based models, and
design efficient joint learning algorithms to update deep model parameters while
inferring true shape locations. Finally, to address location ambiguity, the
project will explore location ambiguity models and mitigating location ambiguity
by leveraging geographical contexts from input imagery features as well as
spatial hierarchical constraints. Such ideas advance existing location
disambiguation methods merely based on the textual semantic context in natural
language processing. The project can potentially transform the field of
geospatial data science by addressing a major obstacle of limited training
labels by a systematic framework of exploiting large-scale, low-cost, and near
real-time volunteered geographic information data. The project can potentially
make transformative impacts on interdisciplinary GeoAI applications such as
rapid disaster response and national water forecasting. This project is jointly
funded by III and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.