* 2208009
* Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Organic Electronics Using Laser Patterning in a Continuous Solvent Flow Liquid Cell
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Adam Moule, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2025
* USD 470,298.00

This grant supports research that contributes to new knowledge in scalable
nanomanufacturing processes, thereby promoting progress in science, technology,
economic development, and human wellbeing. Photolithography is a manufacturing
process that enables the patterning of electronic elements into small,
controlled volumes to produce all modern integrated circuits, displays and
computers. The aspect of photolithography that makes it so useful is that the
size and shape of electronic components are controlled by focused light or laser
patterning, which makes the technique fast, inexpensive, and reconfigurable for
many applications. This award supports fundamental research to modify existing
photolithography tools and methods and enables optical micropatterning of
organic semiconducting polymers into electronic circuits. The new processing
tool enables micro and nanopatterning, controlled doping and layering of a broad
class of organic electronic materials that currently cannot be micro or
nanopatterned into functional devices, such as, flexible electronics and
wearables. Results from this research enables advancements in many applications
such as chemical sensing, neuromorphic computing, and medical diagnostics. The
ensuing technological impacts result in economic opportunities in healthcare,
energy, and environment. This research lowers the cost for production of
prototype organic electronic devices by orders of magnitude, which spurs
economic growth and national prosperity. The project partners with instrument
manufacturers, trains students at all levels and broadens participation of women
and under-represented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photothermal patterning
is a method that enables the optical writing of organic electronic materials
(OEMs) into sub-micrometer domains, which is a critical processing step for
fabrication of a wide variety of OEM devices. Photothermal patterning uses a
focused laser to heat and dissolve portions of an OEM film that is in contact
with a flowing solvent layer. The laser creates a negative resist pattern and
the solvent flow removes dissolved material. Practical and technical barriers
currently prevent the widespread use of photothermal patterning for OEMs. This
project solves the practical problem by developing a unique design for an OEM
micro and nanopatterning insert that is compatible with existing
photolithography instruments. This allows researchers everywhere to use their
existing cleanroom equipment to pattern this new class of materials. The main
technical challenges are to understand and predict how processing conditions
must be controlled to achieve high resolution patterning for different OEM
materials. The research team develops a time-dependent continuum model that uses
easily measurable experimental parameters to predict the shape, resolution,
doping level and write-speed of real films under real
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.