* 2208724
* Properties of Strongly Interacting Matter at Finite Density from First Principles
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Claudia Ratti, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2025
* USD 397,672.00

Just a few microseconds after the Big Bang, the Quark-Gluon Plasma permeated our
universe. This phase of strongly interacting matter exists under extreme
conditions of temperatures or densities, like the ones achieved in ultra-
relativistic heavy ion collisions currently taking place at the Relativistic
Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) and the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), or the ones
realized in nature in the core or neutron stars or their mergers. This project
will advance our knowledge of hot and dense strongly interacting matter by
calculating observables from first principles and relating them to measurements.
The PI will investigate effects which, if verified, could change our
understanding of the deconfinement phase transition and strongly interacting
matter. The high precision now achievable in the theoretical calculations allows
such a combined effort between theory and experiment for the first time. The
project will contribute to training the next generation of students working on
the theory of fundamental interactions, both at the undergraduate and graduate
levels. The PI will promote physics to underrepresented minorities through
public lectures, seminars and visits to Houston schools. She will work with
associations of underrepresented students to develop a program to recruit
undergraduate and graduate students at UH. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The purpose of
this project is to significantly advance our understanding of strongly
interacting matter by means of first principle lattice simulations, complemented
by phenomenological approaches, to build a bridge between theory and experiment.
The PI plans to achieve this goal by calculating several observables from first
principles: conserved charge fluctuations to connect to heavy-ion experiments,
Equation of State at finite baryonic and strangeness density for the first time;
inclusion of a critical point with the correct features for QCD. The methodology
is to calculate relevant observables using numerical simulations from first
principles. These observables can then either be directly compared to
experimental results from RHIC and the LHC, or they can be used as inputs into
phenomenological models for the evolution of heavy-ion collisions or neutron
star mergers. Finally, some of them can be used to improve phenomenological
models through parameter or interaction constraints. The Quark-Gluon Plasma
exhibits several features in common to other strongly interacting systems, such
as ultra-cold atom gases in a magneto-optical trap. Thus, the study of hot and
dense QCD matter will yield novel insight into a class of physical systems, not
limited to the domain of nuclear physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
advances the objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.