* 2208205
* Modeling Studies of Transitions from Slow to Fast Tropical Cyclone Intensification
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* David Schecter, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 05/31/2025
* USD 399,852.00

This research project is part of a broader effort to advance current
understanding of how underdeveloped tropical cyclones intensify into potentially
devastating hurricanes. Computer modeling studies will be conducted to address
deficiencies in our knowledge of the nature and effectiveness of the
intensification process that operates when there exists markedly asymmetric
convection linked to substantial misalignment of the mid-level and low-level
cyclonic circulations (tilt). Changes to the asymmetric state that are required
for a fast intensification mechanism to supersede a slow mechanism, and the time
scale for such changes to occur under a variety of environmental conditions will
be elucidated. Knowledge gained from this project will assist complementary
efforts to improve the accuracy of operational intensification forecasts that
determine the preparations needed to adequately mitigate damage to coastal or
island communities that lie in the predicted path of a tropical cyclone. In
addition to offering new insights relevant to forecasting, this project will
support student internships that will contribute to the development of the next
generation of atmospheric scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research strategy
will entail a combination of reduced and full-physics modeling studies. The
reduced modeling studies will add parameterized diabatic forcing to the dry
primitive equations primarily to represent the heating associated with
convection concentrated downtilt of the lower tropospheric vortex center. A
variety of intensification mechanisms are expected to exist over the expansive
multidimensional parameter space of the diabatic forcing, the state of the
vortex, and the environmental vertical wind shear. The spectrum of possibilities
ranges from very slow asymmetric modes of spinup to a fast mode associated with
core reformation. The domain of applicability for each distinct intensification
mechanism will be determined through extensive numerical experiments.
Theoretical formulas will be sought for the hypersurfaces that separate regions
of parameter space in which different intensification mechanisms operate. The
full-physics simulations will be used to elucidate the moist thermo-fluid
dynamics governing the convection that drives each intensification mechanism,
and to elucidate the processes that lead a tropical cyclone to transition from
slow to fast spinup. The sea surface temperature and vertical wind shear will be
varied to uncover an assortment of transition-types and the environments in
which they occur. Many of the transitions are expected to transpire through
contraction or shear-relative reorientation of the tilt vector that
characterizes the misalignment of the tropical cyclone. Thus, to better
understand what controls the timing of a transition to fast spinup, a sizeable
part of this project will involve analyzing how diabatic processes regulate the
decay and precession rates of the tilts of the simulated tropical
cyclones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.