* 2208697
* High-Barrier Biodegradable Paper (HB2P) as Alternatives to Plastics
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Rafael Auras, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

The proliferation of plastics, microplastics, and per- and polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS) in water, air, and soil poses environmental and health risks.
The aim of this project is to use a unique dual-layer approach to create high-
barrier biodegradable paper (HB2P) as an alternative to plastics and PFAS-coated
paper. The use of innovative dual-layer-coated paper has the potential to offer
water and oil resistance, as well as gas and moisture barrier properties for
single-use packaging (cups, plates, food wrappers, bags, flexible pouches, and
so on), which can be used as alternatives to plastics and PFAS-coated paper in
the packaging industry. The designed coated paper is to be biodegradable and can
be converted into compost soil under controlled conditions, while being able to
readily biodegrade into non-harmful products if it leaks into the environment.
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) and Techno-Economic Analysis (TEA) of the proposed
coated paper will be performed to ensure environmentally responsible and
economically feasible solutions. The project will also address several knowledge
gaps including those associated with the creation of biodegradable polyester
latex without using organic solvents, obtaining high-barrier coated paper that
matches or exceeds the performance of conventional high barrier multilayer
plastics, and the environmental footprint of high-barrier paper. The results
acquired through this work aim to provide foundational knowledge to create data-
informed technologies that will promote environmental sustainability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives that will be pursued are:
Objective 1: Investigate and develop solvent-free methods for creating
biodegradable polyester latex. Objective 2: Investigate the impact of
biodegradable polyester latex on the development of HB2P via a dual-layer
approach. Objective 3: Evaluate the end-of-life scenarios, overall environmental
footprint, and economic feasibility of high-barrier biodegradable paper via LCA
and TEA and biodegradability studies. This project intends to open and advance
new corridors of research in areas such as materials science, biodegradability,
paper surface modification, and wood preservation. The intention of the project
is to transform the landscape of the packaging sector by enabling a shift away
from the existing environmentally harmful single-use plastics and high barrier
multilayered structures by offering PFAS-free, compostable, and biodegradable
packaging materials. This work has transformative potential for the field of
active and smart packaging because dual-layer coatings can potentially
accommodate both polar and non- polar active additives as well as low-
temperature processing demands. This research offers foundational knowledge for
many packaging technologies with applications ranging from paper cups to juice
packs and from disposable plates to flexible pouches with a market value of over
$300 billion. This project targets strengthening the position of US
manufacturers by enabling them to produce sustainable products at competitive
prices in the global marketplace. The technologies stemming from this research
will have the potential to reduce landfilling/incineration by &gt;20% (32
million tons/year). The microplastic reduction could be much larger than 20%
because flexible packaging is the source of 50% of microplastics, and the
proposed technology is suitable for this flexible packaging. In addition, the
project could help to create PFAS-free single-use packaging paper. Thus, this
work will promote the protection of the environment and human health. Graduate
and undergraduate students working on this project will gain valuable education,
mentoring, and hands-on research experience in materials and environmental
sciences. The outreach component of this project includes several STEM-related
demonstrations per year for elementary-, middle-, and high-school students, and
arranging multiple visits for students to local recycling facilities. A focus
will be on inclusion of programs that foster the participation of groups that
are typically underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.