* 2208746
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel photographic steganography to reduce digital piracy on live streaming platforms
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Eric Wengrowski, STEG AI CORPORATION
* Cooperative Agreement
* Peter Atherton
* 11/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project will be to reduce video and image copyright-related liability for social
media companies and retain profits for digital media licensing companies and
other content owners/distributors who are holding or enforcing content rights.
Beyond content protection, the technology being developed can also address the
emerging need for digital content authentication that can assure users the
digital images or videos they are viewing are legitimate and not altered through
the use of “deep-fake” or other similar technologies. Global piracy of digital
video has been estimated to cost media providers, content creators, and legal
distributors $67-$79 billion in lost revenue. While companies pay billions of
dollars per year for sports broadcast rights, illegal sports streaming sites can
generate enormous ad revenues at virtually no cost. With the advent of the
internet and the abundance of high-quality recording equipment on small,
portable devices, it has become easier for video pirates to capture and share
copyrighted material. Using photographic steganography to mark copyrighted
content with undetectable messages will provide stakeholders with built-in anti-
piracy protections. This technology, in turn, will help ensure legal content
distribution, content protection for producers, and content assurance for
consumers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project seeks to develop a competitive solution to copyright protection
through imperceptible watermarking of digital images and digital videos using
photographic steganography. This project is distinct from prior work in that it:
(1) models the human vision system so that pixel modulations are machine-
readable but imperceptible to humans; (2) robustly handles video compression
algorithms like H.264, HEVC, MPEG, and VP9; (3) employs single-frame,
synchronization-free methodology compatible with both still images and videos;
(4) enables free-space light communication (light field messaging) using
smartphone cameras; (5) works with ordinary camera and display hardware with no
special spectrum or speed requirements; and (6) employs state-of-the-art deep
learning algorithms trained with hundreds of thousands of images. The proposed
product will be able to reliably detect screen-to-camera piracy while
maintaining broadcast video quality standards. During this project, the
technology will be strengthened in four key technical areas of development: (i)
robustness to critical image/video mutations; (ii) real-time encoding; (iii)
computationally efficient decoding; and (iv) industry-standard certification for
visual quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.