* 2208984
* NSF PRFB FY22: Disentangling early stages of diversification: The roles of biotic and abiotic environment and evolutionary history on floral phenotypes in species complexes
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Katherine Wenzell, Wenzell, Katherine E
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 04/30/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Understanding how life on earth evolves
requires understanding the processes that give rise to this diversity of life.
The process generating new species (called speciation) is a continuous, ongoing
process, and questions remain about its early stages. Early stages of speciation
can be well understood by studying what are called species complexes, which are
groups of species that are closely related, and often exhibit distinct but
overlapping variation in traits and likely continue to interbreed. Studying
species complexes allows this research to zoom in on early stages of speciation
to examine how an organismâ€™s local environment shapes the evolution of both its
physical traits (phenotype) and its genetic makeup (genotype). By doing so, this
research will contribute to our understanding of how the diversity of life on
earth has arisen and how it continues to evolve. This work will help inform
efforts to support and protect biodiversity and will encourage the next
generation of scientists through outreach and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will characterize incipient
divergence among flowering plants by examining floral trait variation in the
recently radiating genus Castilleja (the paintbrushes), focusing on the C.
sessiliflora and C. pilosa species complexes. The research will explore patterns
of phenotypic and genomic divergence in contrasting environments, resulting in a
predictive model of species delimitation in young lineages. This project will
employ ddRad-sequencing to identify evolutionary units and spatio-temporal
patterns of divergence in these groups. Next, the fellow will explore processes
potentially driving these patterns by using structural equation modeling to
compare how different biotic and abiotic environmental factors contribute to
floral variation. She will then identify regions of genomic variation associated
with floral variation, assessing them for signatures of selection and
divergence, which will shed light on specific regions of the genome important in
early stages of speciation. Overall, this project will connect genomic and
phenotypic variation to understand how interactions with the environment drive
incipient speciation. Additionally, the fellow will contribute to outreach and
mentoring, through summer research programs and the generation of STEM teaching
materials, which will be available in English and Spanish and will be
distributed from coast to coast in partnership with Maryland 4H and California
Academy of Sciences, thus helping to broaden participation and inclusion in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.