* 2208879
* Conference: Sensory Prediction, Engineered and Evolved
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Sarah Marzen, Scripps College
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 48,280.00

This workshop will bring together sensory prediction experts to collaborate on
an interdisciplinary approach to understanding both the brain and how to improve
prediction algorithms. Both fields are well-studied, but the intersection
between the two fields is nascent. Though diverse in approach, all participants’
research converges in using a single definition of what one needs to infer in
order to predict. This definition has inspired biological work and many
prediction algorithms, which work together in tandem: an understanding of the
biology has inspired improvements to prediction algorithms, and improvements in
prediction algorithms have led to new testable hypotheses about parts of
biological organisms. In convening this globally diverse, interdisciplinary
session, this workshop advances the scientific community’s ability to solve the
prediction problem—how to predict the future given the past.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists predict future input from past input. This can
take the form of prediction of natural video, natural audio, or text, which has
famously led to such products as large language models and proprietary
algorithms for stock market prediction. Organisms and parts of organisms may
have evolved to efficiently predict their input as well, and the hypothesis that
they do is a cornerstone of theoretical neuroscience. How to design adaptive
systems to predict input is still a matter of debate, especially when one has
continuous input and a possible prediction state at every point in time. This
workshop brings together researchers who approach designing adaptive systems to
predict input through the lens of biology with machine learning, information
theory, and dynamical systems for a five-day conference in summer of 2023 at the
Santa Fe Institute, a mecca for complex systems research that should lead to a
unifying framework for sensory prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.