* 2208955
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology: Predicting Extinction Risk across Tree Pangolin Populations
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Jen Tinsman, Tinsman                 Jen            C
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/28/2023
* USD 26,502.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Climate changes poses a grave threat to global
biodiversity. Understanding which species are most at risk of extinction can
help guide the allocation of limited conservation resources. Estimating a
species’ extinction risk from climate change requires an understanding of their
exposure to changing climate and of their ability to adapt to new conditions.
However, current assessments of vulnerability to climate change usually only
consider the risk from exposure, often because determining a species’ ability to
adapt to novel climate is challenging. This research will develop a framework
for studying how species adapt to local climate conditions and for quantifying
the mismatch between those adaptations and future climate conditions. This
framework will be used to estimate species’ extinction risk from climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will use the endangered tree pangolin
(Phataginus tricuspis) as a case study. The tree pangolin is broadly distributed
across several different climatic zones across Western and Central Africa and
shows strong population genetic structure. Whole genomic data from across their
range will be used to identify adaptive genomic variation associated with
climate. These associations will be used to calculate the allelic mismatch
between current and future climate, thus estimating genomic vulnerability to
future climate change. Finally, the fellow will directly compare the amount of
future habitat predicted by traditional, exposure-only models with that
predicted by this adaptation-informed model to quantify how including
evolutionary process changes predictions. By assessing extinction risk at the
population level, this work will identify high-priority populations for
conservation interventions. Actionable conservation recommendations will be
shared with stakeholders working in the region. This work will produce a
genomics pipeline for assessing extinction risk from climate change in other
locally adapted populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.