* 2208983
* Experimental Flavor Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Michael Sokoloff, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kaushik De
* 07/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) at the CERN laboratory near Geneva, Switzerland. However,
the Standard Model as it currently exists, leaves open many questions about the
universe. These include why matter dominates over anti-matter in the Universe
(CP violation), the values of the masses of the fundamental constituents of
matter, the quarks and the leptons, the size of the mixings among the quarks,
and separately among the leptons, and the properties of dark matter. Most
explanations require the presence of new forces and the development of concepts
that now constitute what we call physics Beyond the Standard Model (BSM). This
award supports research that addresses those questions that dominate BSM
physics. The research will be carried out at the LHC, which is the premier High
Energy Physics particle accelerator in the world and one of the foremost
facilities for answering these BSM questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Cincinnati group is a collaboration member of LHCb, an experiment
designed specifically to study the decays of hadrons containing b or c quarks at
the LHC. A goal of LHCb is to identify new physics in nature by examining the
properties of hadrons containing these quarks. New physics, or new forces, can
be manifest by particles as yet to be discovered, whose presence would modify
decay rates and CP violating asymmetries of the hadrons containing the b and c
quarks, and thus allow new phenomena to be observed indirectly. This award will
allow the University of Cincinnati group to further its study of rare decays of
such heavy quark systems using the larger data set now about to be produced at
the LHC. The group will help improve the novel all-software trigger that LHCb
has just installed in the just ended long shutdown. The Cincinnati group's
emphasis will be on GPU-based software trigger and charm quark physics, in which
the group has established expertise. Any discovery of BSM physics would be a
huge step forward in our understanding of the fundamental physics of the
universe. The Cincinnati group has a strong companion education and outreach
program focused on its QuarkNet Center and its conduct of Masterclasses. Many
students who join the research effort are introduced to and engage in the
excitement of the science through these programs and through the group's
participation in the University's Women in Science and Engineering (WISE)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.