* 2208424
* RAPID: Quantifying timescales of groundwater recharge and discharge in seasonally snow-covered headwater catchments
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2022
* Paul Brooks, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2022
* USD 49,843.00

One of the largest challenges in efficient and equitable water resource
management in the western US is the high spatial and temporal variability in
streamflow. Although total winter snowfall is the primary driver of streamflow,
the relationship between winter snow and river discharge is becoming ever more
variable as temperatures warm and precipitation patterns change. This
variability is highlighted by Spring runoff in the upper Colorado River Basin
during 2020 and 2021, where annual snowfall was close to average, but annual
streamflow was much lower than expected. Recent work has demonstrated that a
major cause of this variability is groundwater storage that responds to climate
over multiple years. This project will provide baseline data to determine how
and why regional groundwater storage varies, ultimately allowing resource
managers and water users to anticipate and plan for annual water supply months
to years in advance, eliminating surprises due to having either too much, or
more often too little water to meet demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will directly address the implicit assumptions of water balance closure on an
annual time scale. The work builds on decades of hydrochemical research that
demonstrates snowmelt-derived streamflow consists primarily of “old” water and
that variability in this old water is significantly related to variability in
runoff efficiency. Sample collection and analyses using state of the art age
tracers (e.g. 3H, 3H/3He, SF6), water isotopes, and major ion chemistry during
this project will begin to elucidate the mechanisms underlying these
relationships and how they vary with landscape structure, underlying geology,
and climate. The work focuses on extensively studied catchments in Utah as well
as research catchments (CZCN, CZO, USFS, USDA ARS, USGS) throughout the western
US. Ongoing partnerships with resources managers in Utah, Arizona, Colorado, and
New Mexico will facilitate translation of knowledge gained into
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Hydrologic
Sciences and Critical Zone programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.