* 2208681
* NSF-BSF: Stress-Assisted Structural Phase Transformations and Plasticity in Bicontinuous Nanomaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Niaz Abdolrahim, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 287,357.00

Nanoporous (NP) metals with tortuous surfaces and large surface-to-volume ratio
are promising candidates for various important advanced technologies, from
electrochemical sensors/actuators and fuel cell filters to energy conversion and
storage systems. However, a hindrance to widespread technological application of
NP metals is that they fail suddenly and with minimal uniform macroscopic
plastic deformation. This award supports fundamental research to explore new
ways of enabling homogeneous deformation in bicontinuous NP materials via
alternative phase transformation (PT) mechanisms. The homogenous PT mechanisms
would prevent localized deformation and, thus, enhance ductility across the
whole system. The insights to be gained in this project will enable design of
strong and ductile NP materials by utilizing metastable phases which cannot be
obtained in conventional bulk metals and alloys. The fundamental mechanisms
elucidated in this project will be applicable to other refractory materials and
can also be scaled up for large-scale structural and functional applications.
The award will also support undergraduate summer internships, a workshop on
exploring nanotechnology for high school students with focus on underrepresented
minority participation, and international student
exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to enable mechanisms of
uniform (instead of local) PT and achieve significantly improved plastic
deformability in Molybdenum (Mo)-based NP metals. Extreme stresses (on the order
of tens of gigapascals) are required to thermodynamically drive a PT in Mo from
a low-energy body centered cubic phase to a high-energy face centered cubic
state instead of activating dislocation nucleation or propagation mechanisms.
While this PT has been observed locally and at the atomic scale, it remains
totally unclear whether it can occur homogenously to significantly modify
mechanical behavior of specimens larger than about hundred nanometers in size.
This project will study the combination of microstructure features including 1)
small (defect-free) ligaments, 2) tortuosity of the structure, and 3) interfaces
between Mo and a secondary material, that will enable a uniform distribution of
high internal stresses through the entirety of NP composite structures and
promote uniform deformation and better ductility. Molecular dynamics simulations
and nanomechanical testing experiments with finite elements analysis will be
integrated to study the mechanical response and post mortem microstructures for
potential PT-based uniform plastic deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.