* 2208230
* SBIR Phase I:  Personalized Cancer Screening
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2023
* Armin Tahmasbi Rad, ENCAPSULATE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2023
* USD 255,995.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to increase the success rates of cancer
therapy, reduce the costs and duration of treatment, and to improve patients’
life quality. More than 70% of the 16 million Americans diagnosed with cancer
will undergo ineffective chemotherapy cycles through trial-and-error methods. On
average, a cycle of chemotherapy costs $30 k and takes 12 weeks to complete;
cancer patients undergo 5-6 cycles at a cost of an estimated $180 k. This
project advances a method to pre-screen response to chemotherapy drugs so that
clinicians can select the most effective treatment, consequently shortening the
duration, reducing complications, improving outcomes, and reducing the financial
burden. The technology uses a quick, single-step, scalable, inexpensive, and
automated process that tests a wide range of drugs in less than a week. With
this technology, the oncologist will be able to select the most effective
chemotherapy drug for a cancer patient, on an individualized basis and prior to
initiating treatment. The proposed personalized approach would reduce the number
of chemotherapy cycles to 1-2, and save up to $120 k per treatment, generating
annual national savings of $18.2 B.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project supports the development, proof-of-
concept validation, and preclinical evaluation of an automated biochip platform
that grows patients’ cancer cells outside the body to screen them against
chemotherapeutic drugs. In the research described herein, tumor specimens from
patient biopsies will be grown and maintained as microtumors in the biochips to
recapitulate clinical tumor behavior. The biochips and process will be optimized
to create microtumors that can be used toward evaluating the performance of
cancer treatment. Research objectives are to I) evaluate, refine, and optimize
the design of the biochips through simulation studies to ensure compatibility
with native tumor microstructure and mass transfer behavior; II) evaluate the
formation, growth, and behavior of patient-derived microtumors in the biochips;
and III) investigate the response of patient-derived microtumors to anti-cancer
drugs in comparison to longitudinal clinical data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.