* 2208721
* SBIR Phase I: Dual enzyme system to prevent food waste caused by oxygen
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Ellen Campbell, Nitrate Elimination Company, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is development of new technology for safe, recyclable, and effective
packaging. The system works by protecting packaged contents from damage from
oxygen (technically termed oxidation). An estimated 25% of the world’s food
supply is lost due to food spoilage, with oxidation a major contributor to the
problem. Technology that contributes to food security is a compelling objective
in the 21st century. Today’s methods of protection from oxygen require metals or
complex and expensive barrier materials. These options inhibit efficient
recycling. Reduction in packaging waste is an increasing goal. Industries agree
that current products for oxygen protection are not meeting needs or consumer
preferences. This proposal describes a solution based on a pair of enzymes that
use minute quantities of sugar to consume oxygen by producing a modified sugar
and water. Enzymes perform a specific function (catalyze a chemical reaction)
and are inherently environmentally friendly. For many foods, the sugar in the
food itself powers the system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks
to determine the viability of a dual enzyme, oxygen removal system for
preservation of food quality in real world packaging applications. Prototype
materials have demonstrated sufficient performance to justify this research, and
a series of technical objectives have been defined. Objectives include
determining the oxygen removal activity in a variety of containers and designing
optimal product configurations in different containers. A second objective is to
determine system performance at various temperatures. Active shelf-life of the
system – activity over time – needs to be evaluated. Defining these criteria is
required in order to determine the commercial potential of the technology.
Enzyme activity assays are key tasks for all objectives. Oxygen removal
effectiveness will be determined by an industry standard for measuring oxygen
incursion into sealed packages. The proprietary cell lines developed for
expression of the enzymes in the system have been screened for production
potential at commercial scale. All required enzymes will be produced in house
under previously developed standard operating procedures for fermentation and
purification. Interfacing with developers of new, environmentally benign
packaging materials is ongoing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.