* 2208950
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY22: Investigating evolutionary mechanisms that maintain genomic divergence and facilitate local adaptation in gray wolves
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Lauren Hennelly, Hennelly, Lauren Mae
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2025
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. In response to present-day climate change,
many species are predicted to shift their distribution and adapt to new
environments. This prediction is partly based on knowledge from the past.
Climatic changes of the past caused species to undergo dramatic shifts in their
range, which sometimes caused once isolated populations to come together in
contact with each other. Past shifts in climate and species ranges also required
some populations to quickly adapt to new environments. This raises two important
questions: how do closely related species or populations remain genetically
distinct contact? And what are the sources of genetic variation that facilitate
rapid adaptation to new environments? This project will use cutting-edge genomic
techniques to investigate these two questions using the gray wolf (Canis lupus)
as a study system. The impact of this work will further scientific understanding
on the implications of present-day climate change on species, while also
providing opportunities in training for early career researchers in Pakistan and
other countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will utilize genomic tools,
computational methods, and collaborate with a wide range of researchers to
investigate mechanisms that maintain genomic divergence and facilitate local
adaptation in gray wolves. To address these questions, the Fellow will use
~1,000 gray wolf genomes that are already sequenced or to be collected and
sequenced during the project. The Fellow will combine these data with publicly
available environmental data to address these three aims (1) identify key
historical, environmental, and ecological factors that help explain patterns of
phylogenetic and populations genomic structure for worldwide gray wolves, (2)
evaluate evidence for mechanisms that maintain genomic divergence, and (3)
distinguish genetic sources (e.g. adaptive introgression, standing variation)
that facilitate adaptation to new environments. This work will have significant
conservation implications for gray wolf conservation, especially for wolf
populations that are data deficient and endangered. The Fellow will continue her
efforts during her PhD to mentor early career researchers in Pakistan, as well
as develop and conduct workshops on data analysis and phylogenetic methods to
universities in Pakistan and other countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.