* 2208725
* SBIR Phase I:  A Stakeholder Management Platform for Environmental Justice
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Marcus Griswold, CALM WATERS GROUP LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2023
* USD 255,937.00

The broader impact/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research
Phase I project is to break the negative feedback loop of multi-generation,
multi-sector cascading impacts of environmental and social injustices by
providing effective tools for engagement of underserved communities. The tide is
turning as Environmental Justice policies are increasingly being adopted by
governments at the federal, state, county, and regional levels - to explicitly
and meaningfully engage underserved communities early and often in all
regulatory and planning phases. This project addresses the initial challenges
around automating the process of identifying, building trust with, and elevating
community-based organizations and underserved communities with the goal of
accelerating the implementation of equitable climate-smart infrastructure
projects. The proposed innovation will help agencies scale up their reach,
accuracy, and efficiency of community engagement, establish and build trust with
underserved communities, and accelerate community participation in planning and
infrastructure projects throughout the United States. The project helps
community leaders raise their voice and visibility with agencies, gain access to
timely information across different agencies, and gain access to funding
opportunities. Successfully implementing this project has the potential to
reduce cost burdens on communities, while also supporting economic empowerment
in communities where the project is deployed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate feasibility of
using TextAI (Natural Language Processing using Artificial Intelligence (AI))
and GeoAI (Geographic Information Systems using AI) to perform location-based
stakeholder discovery of Community Based Organizations (CBOs). This goal poses
technical challenges: high variation in unstructured data; quality of manual
annotations; complexity and diversity of attributes; and disambiguation of
location identification and social challenges. The communities of interest have
low trust in the government and technology and need transparent data sharing and
ethics. The key innovation is a workflow that combines deep technology
development with participatory and inclusive co-design with community-based
organizations and government. If the project succeeds, it will have substantial
payback for underserved communities. The first use case is with the San
Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission, which has the right size
and scope of jurisdiction to capture variations in data type, stakeholders, and
users - and includes a highly diverse set of demographics across urban and rural
communities - while also being small enough to manage its
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.