* 2208601
* STTR Phase I: Peripheral Autonomic Regulation Training for Mental Health: Enabling Multimodal Peripheral Biofeedback in a Higher Education Setting
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Wenzhuo Wu, LIFESPAN DIGITAL HEALTH, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 255,409.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is not limited to the higher education
community, but has broader application at the elementary, middle and high school
levels, especially in underserved and marginalized communities experiencing
increased rates of suicide and mental health issues. This project's innovative
technologies can assist in the mental health crisis in the country's youth, and
specifically in the Native American health system as well as Juvenile
Detainee/Juvenile Justice systems. This project's implementation of research
based on the benefits of game-based intervention coupled with biometric sensing
has the potential to provide the technologies necessary to equip the mental
health profession to develop options that could replace pharmacological
interventions with a path to delivering personalized and measurement-based
mental health services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project uses predictive algorithms, wearable technology
and peripheral autonomic biofeedback to provide timely and effective data to
enable mental health professionals to enact treatments and therapeutic support
for students. Challenges in the increase of adult mental illness, shortage of
mental health professionals and shortage of child and adolescent psychiatrists
require a move towards tele-psychiatry, collaborative care and innovative
technology to bridge the gap between inadequate supply and increasing demand.
The proposed approach involves the development of bio-behavioral technology that
provides mental health professionals an interactive stress and anxiety
evaluation to enable deep, transformative connections between young adults and
mental health service providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.