* 2208087
* US:UK Collab: Multi-scale infection dynamics from cells to landscapes: FMD in African buffalo
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Anna Jolles, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,608,206.00

The goal of this study is to determine if viral spread and persistence can be
predicted from viral interactions with host cells. Predicting which viral
genetic variant will be more harmful to hosts, which will spread widely, and
which will persist in host populations is a major challenge. In this study,
researchers from the United States, the United Kingdom, and South Africa will
collaborate to investigate the spread of foot-and-moth disease virus (FMDV) in
wild African buffalo by studying viral growth rate, life span, and the rate of
cell destruction. This information can then be used to screen future variants
and identify dangerous variants before they spread. The project will investigate
spillover of FMDV into domestic cattle. It will also allow US graduate students
and post-doctoral scholars to learn to collaborate internationally with students
from the UK and South Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will investigate
viral dynamics from genomic to landscape scales using foot-and-mouth disease
viruses in their wildlife host, African buffalo, as a model system. FMDVs are
some of the fastest-evolving and most contagious known pathogens, which cause
enormous losses when they spillover from wildlife to livestock populations. FMDV
variants from Kruger National Park, South Africa, have been collected and
archived for over forty years, providing historical and phylogenetic context for
evaluating lineages that are currently circulating in the park’s buffalo
population. The researchers will create a data-driven mathematical framework
linking viral dynamics across organizational scales, to test whether dynamics
within hosts, at population and landscape scales, can be predicted from
phenotypic variation among viral lineages. Using experiments, observational
field studies and mathematical models, the team will: discover patterns of
phenotypic differentiation among current and historic FMDV lineages, evaluate
whether viral phenotypic traits measured in vitro predict viral dynamics in live
hosts, explore how within-host viral and immune dynamics translate to FMD
dynamics in buffalo herds, determine how variation among viral strains
structures viral diversity at the landscape scale, and characterize genotypes
and phenotypes of FMDV strains that caused outbreaks in livestock. The modeling
framework will be tested to see whether the approach correctly distinguishes
historic lineages that spread, diversified, and in some cases spilled over to
livestock, from strains that petered out after modest periods of
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.