* 2208932
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: The genetics, physiology and evolution of diapause
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Karin van der Burg, van der Burg, Karin R
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Specifically, the fellow will investigate the
genetics, physiology, and variation of a biological phenomenon called diapause.
Diapause is a period of suspended or arrested development during an insect’s
life cycle. The fellow will use the eastern sprice budworm to study diapause.
The spruce budworm is a moth species living in the boreal forest across northern
America, covering a range from New England to Alaska, and mostly uses diapause
to survive harsh winters. The fellow will investigate the molecular mechanisms
underlying variation in diapausing moths. This work is important because the
spruce budworm is one of the most destructive pest species in North America, and
its 35-year cyclical outbreaks have devastating effects on the lumber industry
as well as the boreal ecosystem and carbon dynamics. The proposed activity will
help us understand how diapause changes across it’s range, which will be crucial
for predictive models of budworm range expansion and benefit a robust pest
management plan. This in turn will aid the communities depending on the boreal
forests. Furthermore, the fellow will engage in several outreach activities to
engage high school and college level students with insect
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diapause is a fundamental feature in the life
cycle of many insects, as it allows insects to survive temporary harsh
environmental conditions. Precise timing and regulation of the diapause
phenotype can have landscape level consequences, both good (i.e. insects can be
important food sources), and bad (i.e. harmful pest species). The fellow will
(1) characterize the physiological, transcriptomic and chromatin landscape
changes that differentiate diapausing and non-diapausing spruce budworm, (2)
determine the genetic basis of this change in the diapause phenotype, and (3),
investigate how natural selection acts on the diapause specific regulatory
landscape across the range. This study integrates across multiple science
disciplines including physiology, functional genomics, genetic mapping and
population genetics to study the diapause phenotype. Results from this study
will allow us to predict how the diapause phenotype is regulated at different
levels, and how natural selection acts on these regulatory mechanisms. The
fellow will receive training in integrating physiological and genetic research
in an ecological relevant species. Furthermore, the fellow will organize a
functional genomics workshop to make advanced molecular techniques available to
non-model researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.