* 2208404
* Finite Element Methods for Elliptic Least-Squares Problems with Inequality Constraints
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Susanne Brenner, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2025
* USD 361,251.00

Least-squares problems appear naturally in data fitting, where the parameters in
a mathematical model are calibrated by minimizing the discrepancy (measured by a
sum of squares) between the observed data and the output predicted by the model.
They also appear naturally in solving nonlinear equations by optimization
methods. The goal of this project is to develop novel numerical schemes for
least-squares problems that appear in data fitting with infinitely many
parameters, such as the determination of the flux of groundwater from the
observed pressure, and for least-squares problems that appear in solving
nonlinear equations with infinitely many unknowns, such as the equation for an
optimal transport map. The equations in both settings are elliptic equations
that describe steady-state problems in science and engineering, and a priori
information on the underlying problems is included in the form of inequality
constraints. The numerical schemes are based on finite element methods, one of
the leading methodologies in computational engineering and science. The outcomes
of this project will provide new tools for the optimal design process in
engineering and materials science, and new methodologies for image processing
and data science. The project provides research training opportunities for
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two classes of infinite dimensional
least-squares problems with inequality constraints that involve elliptic partial
differential equations will be investigated. The first class is concerned with
elliptic distributed optimal control problems with pointwise state and control
constraints. The second class is concerned with solving fully nonlinear elliptic
boundary value problems with convexity constraints on the solutions. For the
elliptic optimal control problems, novel finite element methods will be
developed for problems with general cost functions that include point tracking
problems for the state as a special case, problems with constraints on the
gradient of the state, and problems constrained by elliptic equations with rough
coefficients. For the fully nonlinear elliptic boundary value problems, finite
element methods for their classical solutions will be investigated. They include
equations of the Monge-Ampere type where the convexity of the solutions plays a
key role, such as the first and second boundary value problems for the Monge-
Ampere equations in two and three dimensions, and the Dirichlet boundary value
problem for the prescribed Gaussian curvature equation in two dimensions. The
2-Hessin equation in three dimensions will also be treated, where the condition
on the positivity of the Laplacian of the solution is the analog of the
convexity condition on the solutions of the Monge-Ampere equations. A common
theme for the research in these two classes of problems is the interplay among
elliptic partial differential equations, optimization, and finite element
technology such as discontinuous Galerkin methods, multiscale finite element
methods, virtual element methods, and convexity enforcing finite element
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.