* 2208011
* Interface-Aware Intelligence for Robot Teleoperation and Autonomy
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Brenna Argall, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2026
* USD 899,998.00

Humans issue control signals to robot systems in contexts ranging from
teleoperation to instruction to shared autonomy, and in domains as wide as space
exploration to assistive robotics. Whether via overt body movement or electrical
signals from the muscles or brain, for a human to issue a control signal to a
robot platform requires physical actuation of an interface. Deviations between
the true signal intended by the human and that received from the interface—in
magnitude, direction, or timing—can have rippling effects throughout a robotics
autonomy system. This award will demonstrate both the need for and utility of
interface-aware robotic intelligence. The research will explore how the physical
source of the human control signal—their physical capabilities, the interface
actuation mechanism, signal transmission limitations, could impose an artificial
upper limit on the human-robot team synergy and success. This limitation impacts
the teleoperation and autonomy of any robot system, but it can be felt acutely
within the domain of assistive robotics, where human motor impairment and
accessible interface limitations can result in dramatic operational constraints.
As part of the project, annual outreach demos at a local museum will educate
K-12 students on assistive robotics. Additionally, undergraduate students will
be retained on summer internships for advanced research experience in
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The characteristics of a particular interface,
operated by a specific human, leave an imprint on the control signal that can be
mined for information pertinent to the intelligent interpretation of the human’s
control command. In this project, novel robot intelligence paradigms will be
designed that aim specifically to complement characteristics of, or compensate
for degradations in, control signals issued from a known and characterized
combination of control interface and human operator. To do so, a framework for
interface-awareness that offers a more complete model of the input pathway from
human to robot control system will be designed, and within this framework
interface-usage interpretations of and techniques to elicit user-defined maps
from human input to robot control space will be developed. Extensive user
studies will be performed both to motivate and evaluate the efficacy and impact
of interface-aware robotic intelligence within two salient application domains
dramatically impacted by the choice of interface activation and mapping: shared
autonomy, anchored to physically assistive robots operated by persons with motor
impairments, and human-to-robot instruction, anchored to robotic arm behavior
demonstration. This work holds the potential to innovate human-machine
interactions by mining and modeling information already imprinted upon human-
issued control signals, and in doing so achieve a higher level of human-machine
symbiosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.