* 2208803
* Exploiting the LHC Precision Era: Run 3 and HL-LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Mark Adams, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kaushik De
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,540,000.00

This program of research aims to better understand the Universe at the smallest
scales by probing nature's basic symmetries and their relation to the origin of
mass. The 2012 discovery of a Higgs boson with mass close to 125 GeV represents
both the crowning achievement of the Standard Model of particle physics and a
hint beyond it - how can a light Higgs boson possibly survive huge,
destabilizing quantum effects without new, undiscovered physics? Further, dark
matter is known to exist from astronomical observations; however, the particle
properties of dark matter remain shrouded in mystery. The combined activities of
the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) group address such basic questions
puzzling science - the origin of mass and the particle nature of dark matter -
and have the potential for surprising discoveries that may change the way we
understand our physical world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide
support for the UIC group's work on the CMS experiment at the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) at CERN, a particle physics laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland.
The group will be studying precision measurements of the properties of the Higgs
boson; studies of the top quark including searches for resonant as well as non-
resonant top pair-production up to the very highest Lorentz boosts and offering
a unique view on the naturalness of the broken electroweak sector; and search
for evidence of Supersymmetry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the group has
been a long-term contributor to both the Silicon Tracker and Trigger systems for
CMS and is currently playing leading roles in upgrades to the Pixel Tracking
Detector, essential to the reconstruction of events and particularly those
containing heavy quarks, and to the Level-1 Trigger, which is critical to the
recording of the rare events of special interest to the CMS program of discovery
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mature QuarkNet outreach program of the UIC
group fosters collaboration between high school teachers and the UIC group
members, strengthening teaching and learning in Chicago-area high schools. As
these high schools serve predominantly minority students, this project aims to
increase the number of students from historically underrepresented groups that
major in STEM disciplines. Additionally, UIC's student body reflects the ethnic
and racial diversity of Chicago, making it one of the important minority-serving
Research 1 institutions. The diversity of the UIC undergraduate population gives
the institution and the UIC group a unique opportunity to increase the number of
minority students that choose to pursue an academic and research career. As a
central element of its program, the UIC group will initiate a new broader
impacts component, aimed at increasing the retention and graduation rates of
minority physics majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.