* 2208351
* SBIR Phase I:  Security Gateway Processing Software for an Inclusive Public-Facing, Limited-Purpose Destination System
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Joshua Povsner, NATIONAL CURRENCY TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/29/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to help enable safe and inclusive internet
interfaces with the worldwide public for limited purposes, starting with the
purpose of providing a ledger system for digital currency. The inclusive aspect
of the internet interface allows intermediaries and the worldwide public to use
varied mechanisms to send communications, as long as the communications received
at the internet interface comply with the uniform format. As an enabling
technology for implementing digital currency, this project will reduce reliance
on current mechanisms for cash transactions including automatic teller machines
(ATMs), checks, and services that require fees for sending money.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to enable a ledger
system to operate without requiring the provider to rely on any particular
intermediary, and conceivably to accept and safely process packets from
unrecognized sources. Two problems at the heart of this project are the lack of
trust in giving third party institutions special access or privileges in
interfacing with a digital currency ledger, and the need to increase access so
individuals do not need a smartphone with a preapproved application in order to
interface with the digital currency ledger. The research objectives ensure that
a specific format pushed out for a security gateway for a digital currency
ledger can be inspected to ensure a variety of threats are not present. The
project will program different cores of a multicore processor with different
security checks and synchronize performance of the security checks as a safety
protocol that quickly and efficiently processes large volumes of packets for
compliance with the required format.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.