* 2208036
* Novel Phases of Confined Cold Atomic Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Daniel Sheehy, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

For many years, cold atomic physics experiments have pursued the detection and
study of correlated phases of matter, analogous to those in condensed matter
systems. To develop future technology and better understand nature, it is
essential to discern and control the behavior of matter and light on the
smallest length scales. In this quantum realm, the collective properties of
atoms are often counterintuitive, as seen in recent experiments that have
studied gases of atoms at ultracold temperatures, confined by exquisitely
controllable traps made of light. This theoretical work will develop new
predictions for the possible collective states of matter of trapped cold atomic
gases, which can shed light on interesting emergent phenomena such as
superfluidity and magnetism. The PI has a strong history of training
undergraduate and graduate students, particularly those from traditionally
underrepresented groups, in the exciting field of correlated cold atomic gases.
The proposed work continues this research training and also includes concrete
ideas for improving undergraduate education at LSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
theoretical research team at LSU will study the implications of the most
exciting recent experimental developments, including the realization of novel
trapping potentials that have the form of a "box" shape, instead of the slowly
varying harmonic potential in earlier cold atom experiments. These box-shaped
traps, which are analogous to nanoscale electronic materials, allow the study of
the effect of confinement and geometry on collective quantum properties such as
superfluidity. The team will also study the behavior of atoms in optical
potentials that realize the Kagome and Lieb lattices. Atom motion in such
lattices exhibits the phenomenon of frustration, where competing effects can
lead to unusual phases of matter. A third research direction for the team
concerns the possibility of a cold-atom realization of the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev
model, which connects non-Fermi liquid behavior of fermions to the physics of
black holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.