* 2208831
* Reprogramming redox-controlled innate and adaptive immune responses by antioxidant polymer microvesicles
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Richard Dluhy, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2025
* USD 623,700.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research to the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB)
is to develop vesicular biomaterials as an antioxidant therapy for the treatment
of diabetes. Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an autoimmune disease resulting in
oxidative stress, inflammation, and pancreatic beta-cell destruction. Current
antioxidant therapies are hindered by limitations of antioxidant effectiveness,
including low ability to target reactive oxygen species (ROS) sites (e.g.
mitochondria) and selectivity for immune cells. The proposed research develops a
new class of nanostructured antioxidant vesicular biomaterials that promote our
understanding of immune regulation in T1D. This vesicular platform can be
adapted for enhanced functionalities, providing transformative knowledge for
developing antioxidant materials for the treatment of a broad spectrum of
immune-mediated disorders. The benefits to the biomaterials community are a
better understanding of antioxidant material properties for immune suppression.
Scientific problems that can be addressed by the knowledge obtained in this
project may also include understanding the immune responses in T1D. The
educational objective of the project is to expand a discovery-driven
multidisciplinary biomaterials science program at UAB and to promote diversity
from high school, undergraduate-, graduate-, and post-graduate levels. Students
and scholars will be trained in materials and immunological aspects of
biomaterials science and will participate in intensive, multidisciplinary
collaborations. The collaborative efforts will expand interdisciplinary research
and provide awareness of the biomedical research community at UAB toward a need
for antioxidant polymer-based biomaterials. The educational and outreach
activities of this project will enhance science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) participation of women and underrepresented minorities and
STEM education, increase public awareness and engagement with science through
knowledge dissemination, and increase partnerships with industry to increase
economic competitiveness in the USA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a microvesicular biomaterial,
giant unilamellar vesicles (GUVs), with controlled antioxidant activity and to
determine the physicochemical and antioxidant effects of these microvesicles on
innate and adaptive immune responses to restore immune tolerance in T1D. The
GUVs will be designed through self-assemblies of degradable amphiphilic triblock
copolymers with antioxidants integrated within the vesicle interior, while
antigens anchored to the vesicle outer surface will promote antigen presentation
by antigen-presenting cells (APCs) to target autoreactive T cells. The specific
aims of the proposed study are as follows: (1) Synthesize GUVs modified with T1D
autoantigens and study the microvesicle uptake by APCs. (2) Investigate the
effects of antioxidant microvesicles on ROS synthesis and redox-dependent
signaling pathways in APCs. (3) Determine the effects of antioxidant
microvesicles on polarization of macrophage and dendritic cells and the
activation of autoreactive T cells. The complementary studies outlined in our
proposal will test hypotheses that effective control of redox signaling pathways
and, subsequently, decreasing innate and adaptive immune responses can be
achieved by rationally designing antioxidant GUVs. The specific impact of the
proposed study is in: (a) developing a series of synthetic routes to new types
of antioxidant polymer self-assembled vesicles; (b) bringing knowledge on the
effects of GUV structure and antioxidant type on the GUV antioxidant activity;
(c) understanding the impact of microvesicle size, rigidity, and antigen-
modification on interactions with immune cells; (d) obtaining fundamental
insights into the selective APC targeting with antigen mirovesicles to regulate
proinflammatory responses of innate and adaptive immune cells; and (e)
understating the role of antioxidant GUVs on modulation of redox-regulated
pathways involved in immune cell activation and proinflammatory
chemokine/cytokine synthesis. Our results will impact the development of polymer
self-assembled vesicles with a broad range of antioxidant activity and will
provide a fundamental understanding of materials' physical, chemical, and
immunomodulatory properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.