* 2208925
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Fitness effects of a chromosomal rearrangement in the Pacific pocket mouse (Perognathus longimembris pacificus)
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Erik Funk, Funk, Erik R
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

Fellow's name: Erik Funk&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
2208925&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research title: Fitness effects of a chromosomal
rearrangement in the Pacific pocket mouse (Perognathus longimembris
pacificus)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sponsoring scientist(s) and host institution(s):
Aryn Wilder, San Diego Zoo Wildlife Alliance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action
funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2022,
Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing Interactions
Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of Rules of Life in
innovative ways. While different versions of a gene can produce differences in
the way a trait looks, variation can also arise due to differences in the way a
genome is structured. For example, different populations within a species might
possess different numbers of chromosomes. When individuals from different
populations reproduce, this difference in genome structure might result in lower
survival and lower reproduction of offspring. Over time these incompatibilities
can lead to the accumulation of differences between populations and possibly
lead to the formation of new species. This project studies how aspects of the
environment and the genome influence survival and reproduction when chromosome
numbers differ. This research focuses on the endangered Pacific pocket mouse,
and will help inform the adaptive management of this species. Overall, this work
will broaden our understanding of how and when differences in genome structure
lead to populations becoming distinct, and possibly different species.
Additionally, the DNA sequences generated by this project provide opportunities
for students from diverse backgrounds to develop skills in DNA analysis through
project based learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines lab and
field techniques to understand the influence of a chromosomal rearrangement on
fitness using the Pacific pocket mouse (Perognathus longimembris pacificus) as a
model. The Pacific pocket mouse occurs in three isolated populations that have
each become fixed for one of two different chromosome numbers following a
chromosomal fission or fusion event. This research (1) assesses the frequency of
the chromosomal rearrangement over time using historical and contemporary
samples, (2) measures the fitness effects of outbreeding and identifies
associated genomic regions, and (3) models and tests for associations between
genotype and the environment. This project provides unique training
opportunities to incorporate diverse datasets including fitness measures,
genomic data, and habitat modeling. The data generated by this work also
provides ample data for smaller research questions, ideal for independent
research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.