* 2208081
* Quantifying and modeling the transmission dynamics of bivalve transmissible neoplasia
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Jose Fernandez-Robledo, Pacific Northwest Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,997,443.00

Cancer is not normally thought of as an infectious disease. However, several
transmissible cancers have recently been found in the wild, in which the cancer
cells themselves jump from animal to animal as an infectious agent, causing
significant mortality on land and in the marine environment. Marine bivalves
appear to be particularly susceptible. At least nine lineages of lethal
transmissible cancer have been identified in eight bivalve species worldwide
since they were first recognized as an infectious cancer by members of this team
less than a decade ago. It is known that whole cancer cells transfer from one
animal to another, but it is unclear how this infectious disease spreads at the
individual level, within a single population, or between populations in the
environment. The interdisciplinary team is combining sensitive field surveys of
disease prevalence, laboratory inoculation, and in vitro experiments together
with quantitative modeling to understand how this unique class of infectious
disease spreads in nature. The team will continue to communicate the results of
this project through scientific publications and meetings with commercial
aquaculture and local Native American communities, including research partners
in multiple Coast Salish Tribes. Understanding the disease transmission
principles may help develop strategies to control this disease, which would
directly help these communities. The team members are also training
undergraduate students during summer research experiences at Pacific Northwest
Research Institute, Western Washington University, and Bigelow Laboratory for
Ocean Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand the basic principles of the
spread of bivalve transmissible cancer, the team studies two separate lineages
in geographically separated species: soft-shell clams (Mya arenaria) on the
Atlantic Coast of North America, the first bivalve transmissible cancer
identified; and basket cockles (Clinocardium nuttallii), a species on the
Pacific Coast of North America, in which the team has just recently identified
bivalve transmissible cancer. The team is developing two quantitative models,
one for the spread of disease within a population over time, and a second to
model the spread of cancer lineages between different populations. They are
testing these models with regular disease prevalence data from wild populations
from multiple sites. Laboratory work on disease progression and transmission
supports development and refinement of these models by providing critical
parameter values and testing whether environmental variables (such as
temperature) or genetic variables (such as the relatedness of cancer and host)
affect the susceptibility and timing of disease progression. This project aims
to develop a quantitative understanding of disease dynamics in soft-shell clams
and basket cockles. Ultimately, it will provide general principles that underlie
the spread of this recently discovered class of infectious
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was funded by the Division of
Environmental Biology and the Division of Ocean
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.