* 2208562
* CAS-Climate: Understanding the Changing Climatology, Organizing Patterns and Source Attribution of Hazards of Floods over the Southcentral and Southeast US
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sankarasubraman Arumugam, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Boyer
* 08/31/2025
* USD 673,418.00

Floods often lead to significant loss of life and property. This project will
focus on understanding how watershed conditions and atmospheric and oceanic
conditions cause monthly flooding over the Southcentral and Southeast US region
(SESC) as the region is vulnerable to flooding throughout the year. Given the
increasing strength and frequency of tropical storms (2020 set a record with 30
named storms in the Atlantic and 12 making landfall in the SESC), this project
will enhance the scientific understanding of flood hazards and will also better
inform the wider community of forecasters and decision makers. For instance,
five recent major hurricanes – Matthew (2016), Harvey (2017), Irma (2017),
Florence (2018), and Ida (2021) – led to catastrophic flooding over the SESC
causing major challenges in preparedness and recovery for local, state and
federal agencies. The project team will engage with climate offices, National
Environmental Modeling and Analysis Center (NEMAC) at UNC, Asheville and
National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI). The project team will
also collaborate with faculty and graduate students from minority-serving
institutions as part of the summer internship program at NC State University.
Results from the project will be disseminated through peer reviewed
publications, seminars and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
proposal is to improve understanding of monthly flood dynamics over the SESC US
by (a) quantifying the shift in climatology, (b) identifying their moisture
delivery pathways, and (c) attributing the sources (land surface, atmosphere and
ocean) that modulate their spatiotemporal variability. The project team will
examine the shift in climatology and interannual variability of monthly
daily/3-day maximum streamflow in Hydroclimatic Data Network (HCDN) basins over
the SESC. The principal investigators will also use a variety of observed and
reanalysis data, climatic indices, as well as statistical and physical
(numerical weather prediction) models. The shift in climatology will be
quantified using optimal climate normal and “hinge fit” methodologies, and the
organizational and moisture delivery patterns will be analyzed using multiple
Lagrangian particle tracking models. Attribution of sources related to monthly
flood climatology will be quantified using rigorous statistical techniques
(e.g., random forest, hinge fit) and through physical modeling. A Bayesian
Hierarchical Model (BHM) will combine the contribution from five identified
sources – 1) shift in climatology and sources of moisture transport, 2)
teleconnections, 3) atmospheric rivers (ARs), 4) tropical cyclones (TCs), and 5)
initial land-surface conditions – that influence flood processes over multiple
spatial scales for explaining the observed monthly flood variability in the SESC
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.