* 2208393
* Reevaluating the Experimental Foundation for the Rheology of Crust-Forming Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Jun Korenaga, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 12/31/2024
* USD 140,967.00

The Earth's crust is constantly deforming in response to applied forces, and at
depths where temperatures and pressures are high (typically about ten miles or
more below the surface), rocks slowly flow (or "creep") rather than breaking as
they do at shallower depths. The mathematical relationship describing this creep
is called a "flow law", and it depends on the flow laws of the rock's component
minerals. Many experiments have been done to define mineral flow laws, but they
all have one drawback: the experiments have to be completed within months rather
than millions of years, so samples must be deformed ten billion times faster
than in the Earth. To get around this problem, the equations derived from
laboratory experiments have to be as precise as possible. Korenaga will address
this issue by applying sophisticated statistical methods to obtain new mineral
flow laws from experimental deformation data that has been produced over the
years by other scientists. He will recruit a group of undergraduate students to
do this analysis for a wide range of minerals, which will give them valuable
research and data science experience. Using these new flow laws, geophysicists
will be able to more confidently apply their numerical models to understanding
plate tectonics and how slow deformation deep in the Earth leads to
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Incorporating realistic rock mechanics via
ductile flow laws has become increasingly common in geophysical modeling, as
seen in recent studies on the dynamics of continental lithosphere. However,
considerable extrapolation is involved when using experimentally-derived
rheology in numerical modeling. Strain rates attained in laboratories are
usually on the order of 10-5 s-1, which is ten orders of magnitude faster than
geological strain rates (10-15 s-1). When estimating a flow law from rock
deformation data, therefore, it becomes essential to conduct a rigorous
statistical analysis, by considering all experimental uncertainties, so that a
flow law can be trusted for extrapolation over ten orders of magnitude. This
project plans to conduct a series of reanalysis of published deformation data
for crust-forming minerals, capitalizing on the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
inversion method that has been developed over the last decade to investigate the
rheology of olivine The project is based on the two-fold potential of the MCMC-
based reanalysis of published deformation data. First, a short-term project
using MCMC inversion has a definite appeal for physics undergraduates who
already have familiarity with the technique, and a reanalysis project can serve
as their entry point for earth sciences. The use of MCMC in data analysis is now
part of standard data science, so this practical aspect also helps to attract
undergraduates with solid quantitative skills. Second, producing a series of
reanalysis results, through multiple summer intern projects, will build a
collection of case studies for the deformation of different minerals and rocks.
The aim of building a collection of case studies is to provide a “critical mass”
so that the community of crustal dynamics, including numerical modelers, rock
mechanicists, and field geologists and geophysicists, will recognize the
importance of the rigorous analysis of rock deformation
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.