* 2208881
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Climate adaptation in the willow flycatcher
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Sheela Turbek, Turbek, Sheela
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

Fellow's name: Sheela Phansalkar Turbek&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
2208881&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research title: Integrating genotype, phenotype,
and environmental data to assess evolutionary response to climate change in a
migratory bird&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sponsoring scientist(s) and host
institution(s): Kristen Ruegg, Colorado State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules
of Life Governing Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The
fellowship supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to
the area of Rules of Life in innovative ways. Climate change is disrupting the
seasonal behavior and reproductive activities of many species, driving some
organisms to the brink of extinction. Species may respond to a changing climate
by shifting their distribution to escape warming temperatures or remaining in
place and adapting to altered environmental conditions. This study takes
advantage of modern and historical specimens of the willow flycatcher (Empidonax
traillii), a threatened migratory bird, to study how populations have adapted at
a genetic level to warming conditions since the early 1900s and whether the
extent of past adaptation to climate change could explain recent population
declines. This project will improve the ability of researchers to accurately
predict species responses to environmental change and incorporate this
information into management decisions to mitigate widespread population
declines. To increase the impact of this research, the fellow will conduct local
outreach with Title I schools in Colorado, develop bilingual, open-source
evolution teaching materials, and assist with international genomics workshops
in Latin America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will combine relative abundance
information and genomic sequencing data from contemporary and historical willow
flycatchers to investigate the relationships among genetic variation in fitness-
related traits (i.e., a speciesâ€™ adaptive potential), climate adaptation, and
population trajectories over the last century. The fellow will first use
emerging methods in environmental, phenotypic, and genomic data analysis to
identify regions of the genome that are associated with climate adaptation and
climate-linked traits (body and bill size). Next, the fellow will track whether
allele frequencies at climate- and phenotype-associated genomic regions have
tracked shifts in climate over the past century. Finally, the fellow will
evaluate whether the extent of past climate tracking through shifts in allele
frequencies predicts patterns of relative abundance over time. The fellow will
receive training from experts in conservation genomics and curriculum
development at Colorado State University to effectively communicate scientific
findings and engage students from underrepresented backgrounds in the scientific
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.