* 2208821
* WiGRAPH: Women in Graphics Research
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Adriana Schulz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2024
* USD 49,600.00

WiGRAPHâ€™s mission is to increase the number of women pursuing cutting-edge
research in computer graphics, which despite some progress in recent years,
remains distressingly low. To this end, the group creates online resources for
women in the field through the wigraph.org website and social media (e.g.,
online discussion forums). In addition, it hosts events during the main computer
graphics conferences that provide environments where women researchers can
interact with one another and seek role models, mentorship, and encouragement.
In 2022 the plan is to host three such networking events at the premier graphics
conferences: SIGGRAPH, SIGGRAPH ASIA, and the Symposium on Geometry Processing
(SGP), and also to launch a new Rising Stars in Computer Graphics program whose
goal is to provide mentorship at a time when students have sufficient research
maturity, but are still making decisions about future career directions. WiGRAPH
activities are always centered around issues relating to research, such as
sharing advice about how to pick research topics, pursue research questions, and
navigate the industry/academic markets. Statistics are gathered from event
registrations and participant testimonials to help generate clear demographic
data about the population being served by and to evaluate the impact of
sponsored events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although all the organization work is
done with volunteered time, the events program comes at a substantial cost. Due
to COVID-19, all 2020 and 2021 events were held online and therefore required
only minimal funding, but moving forward it is estimated that the basic program
will cost roughly $49,600 for 2022, as described in detail in the proposal, and
the organizers hope to augment the program, for example by increasing the number
of participants, if they are able to raise additional funds with industry
sponsorship. HCC PDs discussed this proposal and agreed that the goals are both
laudable and timely, and that the planned activities are likely to have broad
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.