* 2208218
* A Novel Approach to Mitigating Power System Communication Failures
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Kevin Tomsovic, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2025
* USD 400,664.00

Electric utilities face the challenge of providing dependable power to end-
users, which requires a reliable communication network. This project
investigates approaches to deal with time-varying delays in the communication
network. The intellectual merit of the project is based on introducing a novel
mathematical approach for controllers operating in a power system network, which
are designed to limit energy expenditures while reducing the actuation effort
and relaxing communication requirements. The approach is applied to wide-area
power system damping controls that are robust to failure in measurements and
communications without degrading the stability and performance of the system.
The broader impacts of the project include contributions to the science of
networked systems and reliability of large network control systems. Moreover,
the project has characteristics that undergraduate and pre-college students
should find attractive: stability and control of critical infrastructures,
state-of-the-art computer applications, and high relevance to societal
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a novel
approach to ensure the reliability and resiliency of power systems in the
presence of communication failures that introduce time-varying delays in control
signal delivery. Time-scale theory is introduced for the first time by the PIs
to solve the problem of intermittent information transmission, which shows
promise for providing less conservative requirements on the communication
system. The information in the power system network is transmitted between
network resources (substations, control centers, generators, actuators, sensors,
and so on) at deterministic and random time intervals due to communication
unreliability or capability limits of actuators. The aim is to estimate the
maximum allowable value of the duration of interruption of information
transmission that does not violate the stability of the system. We formulate the
problem as continuous/discrete switched system on a non-uniform time domain such
that the system switches between a continuous-time subsystem (when the
communication occurs without any interruption) and a discrete-time subsystem
(when the communication fails and the control is held on and not evolving), by
introducing deterministic and stochastic time scales theory. This theory will
investigate event-triggered controls through communication channels in the
context of sensor/actuator networks where the triggering times are not
equidistant and may be deterministic or stochastic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.