* 2208024
* PM: Development Towards a Tabletop Experiment with Unprecedented Sensitivity to Hadronic CP Violation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* David DeMille, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2025
* USD 649,435.00

Our understanding of fundamental physics still leaves many mysteries unsolved,
such as the disappearance of antimatter after the big bang (when it was created
in equal amounts with matter), and what yet-undiscovered new particles and
forces may exist. Certain room-scale experiments are able to explore these
questions in ways complementary to studies at large particle accelerators. The
research under this grant aims to develop a new approach to such a small
experiment, which would search for a tiny deformation in the distribution of
electric charge in a nucleus, known as a Schiff Moment, that can only be caused
by new particles carrying forces that could explain the cosmological matter-
antimatter asymmetry. This new method promises to increase the sensitivity to
this deformation by a factor of 1000 beyond the state of the art, and would
probe the existence of certain particles hundreds of times heavier than any that
could be produced at even the world's largest particle colliders today. Under
this grant the group aims to perform two major steps needed to implement this
method: create an ultracold gas of silver atoms, and develop a continuous source
of francium-223 atoms. The grant will support training of two Ph.D. students in
quantum science; it will also enable new initiatives to convey the excitement
and accessibility of optical and quantum physics to underprivileged students on
Chicago’s South Side.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed new measurement will
use an optically-trapped, ultracold gas of the polar molecule 223FrAg to search
for the Schiff Moment of francium-223. This approach combines many advantageous
features at once, relying almost entirely on proven techniques. The 223Fr
nucleus is pear-shaped, which enhances its Schiff Moment by a factor of nearly
1000. The FrAg molecule forms a strong polar bond that enhances the measurable
signal by another factor of about 10,000. The simple structure of both Fr and Ag
atoms has allowed them to be laser-cooled and trapped before. When trapped
together, pairs of each atom can be assembled into FrAg molecules without
heating, using methods applied to many other, similar atom pairs. The
measurement precision relies on a long coherence time of a nuclear spin
superposition, which has also been demonstrated in similar molecules under
similar conditions. Creating this trapped sample of ultracold 223FrAg molecules
will require forming a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) of both atoms, which in
turn requires measuring the unknown ultracold scattering properties of both
atoms. The group will make these measurements for silver atoms, then form the
first BEC of silver. Because 223Fr has a short half-life, the group will in
parallel develop a high-flux, continuous source of 223Fr atoms that will later
be used to perform analogous steps for francium. To achieve the broader impacts
in the community, the group will expand the existing SMART program of outreach
to local schools, in part by initiating regular “lunch with a scientist”
gatherings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.