* 2208062
* Modern Homotopical Obstruction Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Tyler Lawson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2025
* USD 350,000.00

The mathematical field of algebraic topology begins by taking complicated
geometric shapes and qualitatively distinguishing them using simpler data:
algebraic invariants. One of the great successes of the subject is called
obstruction theory, and it has largely made this procedure reversible. Starting
with algebraic invariants associated to geometric shapes, obstruction theory
gives information regarding objects that could or would have these invariants.
Since its development, the basic techniques of obstruction theory have been
applied in a wide variety of settings and been at the heart of several major
developments in many areas of mathematics. The goal of this project is to
develop the lessons learned in these separate branches into a modern, reusable
library that is general enough to apply within the array of subjects where
obstruction theory is found today, and more. Additionally, the PI is planning a
series of workshops on mathematical writing, as well as regular "write-ins":
shared, common writing time with peers and faculty hosts to provide Ph.D.
students and early-career researchers tools for effective mathematical writing
and sustainable practices for writing productively. The PI is also committed to
establishing a supportive culture inside and outside the Ph.D. program and
organizing discussion groups on mental health issues in the mathematical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon recent developments in
multiplicative obstruction theory to address new and old questions in the
subject. By applying these techniques to adjacent fields, such as algebraic
geometry and geometric topology, the PI aims to provide new solutions to
interesting problems in those areas and also develop interface points for
outside researchers hoping to make use of techniques and tools in higher
algebra. Specific goals include: the study of multiplication for ring spectra
and ring spaces; commutativity in equivariant homotopy theory; monoidality in
the May spectral sequence; "tame" versions of the commutative algebras in
K(n)-local homotopy theory; and construction of homotopy-theoretic topological
quantum field theories for application to knot invariants. Tying these
individual problems together would facilitate the development of a modern and
flexible framework for obstruction theory that unites the developments and
lessons from several of its branches. In particular, the PI aims to combine the
synthetic approach of Hopkins-Lurie and Pstragowski with more classical
resolution-theoretic calculational techniques due to Robinson and developed
further by Goerss-Hopkins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.