* 2208349
* Design and characterization of biofilm-inspired amyloid biomaterials.
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* SARAH MORGAN, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 07/31/2025
* USD 536,673.00

This project is jointly funded by the Biomaterials program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BMAT:
Design and characterization of biofilm-inspired amyloid
biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nature produces materials with extraordinary
properties, be it high strength spiderweb made of the protein silk fibroin or
robust protective coat of a biofilm by fibers of the bacterial protein Curli.
One of the strongest and most stable biological materials is the ‘amyloid’,
which is formed from the self-association of proteins that produces densely
packed, orderly protein molecules with high stability and robust material
properties. The unique self-assembly processes, mechanical robustness, thermal
and biocompatibility of amyloid proteins provide a rich platform for potential
exploitation of bio-inspired synthetic amyloid materials for various
applications. However, the relationship between protein amino acid sequence and
material properties of amyloid fibers is lacking. This project brings together
an interdisciplinary team with expertise in molecular biophysics, synthetic
chemistry, and materials science to establish the relationships between
structure, function, processing, and properties in a series of de novo peptides
designed to mimic specific sequences of Curli amyloids. The fundamental
understanding of structure-property relationships in the novel amyloid materials
generated will serve as a platform for the development of functional
biomaterials for biotechnological and pharmacological applications. As a part of
this project, graduate and undergraduate students will be engaged in the
research and cross-trained in faculty laboratories. Outreach efforts will be
designed to engage the full diversity of Mississippi’s population, which is
among the poorest in the nation and represents the highest African American
population as a percentage of total population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although amyloids are linked to many pathologies,
it is becoming abundantly clear that they also play functional roles required
for cellular processes in bacteria, fungi, insects, invertebrates, and humans.
In bacteria, the protein CsgA Curli forms amyloid fibers that are important
components of extracellular biofilms, coatings under which bacterial colonies
thrive evading various environmental insults. Curli amyloids are structurally
conserved cross-β-sheet structures that accommodate tightly packed interactions
to provide robust material characteristics for biofilms. We hypothesize that
based on the CsgA sequence as a template, ¬¬effective variant amyloid
antimicrobial materials can be designed through sequence-morphology-bioactivity
correlations. The proposed research will test this hypothesis and will address
the question of how type and positional biases of amino acid in the sequence
correlate to biochemical, morphology, and mechanical properties of the
aggregates. These will be accomplished with two specific aims: The first aim
will focus on the rational design, synthesis and biophysical characterization of
peptides and peptide mimics along with their cellular and anti-microbial
activities from cues derived from Curli. The second aim will focus on material
properties such as morphology and nanomechanical stability, porosity, and
ability to form hydrogels. Together, the proposed iterative approach will lay a
foundation for designing amyloid materials inspired by Curli, based on sequence,
structure, morphology, and microbial activity. This will enhance our current
understanding of de novo amyloids in fundamental cellular processes and
facilitate the development of biomaterials for pharmaceutical and biotechnology
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.