* 2208953
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: Examining molecular mechanisms of migratory behavior
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Katrina Phillips, Phillips, Katrina
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Many animals migrate long distances across the
land, sea, or sky. These migrations are usually seasonal and relate to finding
food or mates. Despite our familiarity with migratory species like caribou,
whales, and birds, we know very little about how these animals know when and
where to migrate. This knowledge gap limits our ability to predict how climate
change and changing habitats will impact migratory species. The objective of
this research is to investigate whether patterns in an animalâ€™s genetic code
relate to its migratory behavior and uses sea turtles as a study system. The
fellow will connect with local middle school and high school students to broaden
participation in science by collaboratively developing lesson plans that meet
science standards with activities that are exciting and engaging. A clearer
understanding of the mechanisms of migration will shed light on the ability of
migratory species to adapt to rapid environmental change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research integrates the disciplines of genomics,
foraging ecology, stable isotope analysis, and satellite telemetry to examine
the molecular mechanisms of migratory behavior. The fellow will gather and
catalogue existing tissue samples from loggerhead sea turtles with known
migratory patterns in the North Atlantic as identified by collaborators via
previous satellite telemetry and stable isotope studies. From these samples, the
fellow will prepare whole genome resequencing libraries and bioinformatics
pipelines to examine genomic variation associated with migratory phenotypes. By
aligning reads to a high-quality reference genome, this research will identify
candidate genes correlated with any outliers detected. This research will
evaluate whether variation in the genome is associated with the timing and
destination of migration along with environmental variables at migratory sites.
Finally, the fellow will use a comparative genomics framework to study the genes
associated with migratory phenotype across marine, freshwater, and terrestrial
turtle species to examine the evolutionary history of long-distance migration.
The fellow will gain training in cutting-edge genomic methods and bioinformatics
that offer great potential for answering long-standing questions related to
migratory behavior across taxa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.