* 2208366
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Noise Amplifier Running Fast At Ultra-low Currents (pp # 00035239)
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Ali Far, AI LINEAR INC.
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 252,830.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Phase I project is the
development of a fundamental electronic building block (i.e., smart amplifier)
situated near sensors in Internet of Things (IoT) applications, thereby enabling
ultra-portable, ultra-low power integrated circuit (IC) uses in medical
(including wearables), industrial, defense, and environmental applications.
Existing amplifier ICs (fabricated in low-cost conventional fabrication) are not
smart and cannot simultaneously alter noise, power, gain, and speed performance
in response to different input conditions. The proposed innovation enables new,
commercially viable, impactful products at the intersection of machine learning,
IoT, and sensors. Applications employing such a building block include: (1)
battery operated necklaces with always-on sound sensors and smart amplifiers,
plus localized machine learning to detect and warn of asthma attacks; (2)
multiple always-on ultra-low power, low-noise smart amplifiers near denture or
filling-implanted sensors that simultaneously read levels of sugar, salt,
acidity, and temperature, with harvested energy from chewing; and (3) “always-
on” toxicity sensors having thermo-resistors whose resistivity changes upon
detecting toxic chemicals or gasses. The innovation enables fast response times
by delivering sufficient output sink-source current to continuously drive the
thermo-resistors between low and high toxicity
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an integrated circuit (IC) smart
amplifier that intelligently alters its performance in response to input
conditions. Anticipated technical results include: ultra-low-power, low-noise,
high-speed, near-zero input-current, high-gain, high power-supply-rejection-
ratio, high common-mode-rejection-ratio, unconditional stability, rail-to-rail
input and output voltage swings, and an output buffer having source and sink
load capability performance, all in one tiny silicon amplifier. The proposed
smart amplifier is capable of providing all of these parameters in a single IC.
In this Phase I project, the company will develop this IC amplifier based on a
novel circuit design that intelligently alters its speed, noise, and gain in
response to small signals and large signals applied to its inputs. As a
fundamental building block, the resulting smart amplifier will be manufacturable
using conventional, low cost, 65 nanometer IC fabrication processes, and will
enable many emerging ultra-portable, ultra-low power “always-on” IoT, smart
sensors, and localized tiny machine learning applications situated at the edge
of the cloud, without the need for continuous internet
connectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.