* 2208731
* Pedagogical Tools for Formal Methods
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Shriram Krishnamurthi, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 05/31/2025
* USD 499,999.00

In computer science, formal methods refer to mathematical approaches to make
predictions about a software or hardware system. Formal methods play an
increasingly vital role in developing secure and reliable systems. However,
formal methods tend to be abstract and use methods and notations that are not
part of many computing curricula. As a result, there is a need to research and
develop approaches to effectively train cybersecurity students to use formal
methods. The current proposal focuses on creating pedagogical tools centered
around programming environments. The approach will be evaluated across a broad
population, from college students to industrial programmers, to ensure the
results will be as broadly applicable as possible. In addition, all products
will be made freely available to other educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary objective of this project is to have subjects engage with formal methods
tools to create, explore, reason about, and verify models. The focus will be on
models related to security, such as cryptographic protocols, configuration,
authentication, and access control. The project team proposes creating a series
of graduated levels of formal languages to match a learning progression and
reduce the learning load. This approach will enable students to use domain-
specific notations to adopt formal methods within the context of domains they
already study. Finally, it will enable students to create domain-specific custom
visualizations that greatly reduce the cognitive gap between the output of a
generic tool and the problems students want to solve. All these topics will be
studied experimentally and evaluated to learn about what approaches are
effective and what are not.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds proposals that
address cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case specifically cybersecurity
education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and
Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect
and preserve the growing social and economic benefits of cyber systems while
ensuring security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.