* 2208267
* Collaborative Research: Adaptive Mixed-Dimensional Modeling and Simulation of Porous Media
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* James Adler, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2025
* USD 139,165.00

The overall goal of this research project is to develop, analyze, and implement
stable numerical methods for the simulation of flow in fractured porous media,
based on mixed-dimensional modeling. Fractured porous media flow is multi-
physics and multi-scale, and the development of robust and effective numerical
tools for such systems represents a class of important challenges in
computational mathematics. For example, in many practical applications fractures
or other features, such as capillaries in the brain, are lower-dimensional and
interact in a complex way through the three-dimensional domains encapsulating
them. Important applications of fractured porous media include hydraulic
fracturing, waste deposition, and models from biomechanics. The project aims to
provide new computational paradigms, promote the usage of mixed-dimensional
modeling in these and related fields, and alleviate current limitations in
computer simulations. The techniques will be implemented in an open-source
software package and will be made available to the scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, three important aspects of mixed-
dimensional modeling and simulation will be investigated. The first research
objective is to design advanced stable discretizations, which couple stabilized
schemes for linear elasticity with structure-preserving discretizations for
Darcy flow in a mixed-dimensional setting. Stability and mass conservation will
be achieved using a minimal number of degrees of freedom. The second objective
is adaptive approximations in the mixed-dimensional framework. Space-time
adaptivity will be developed and implemented to improve accuracy with solid
theoretical foundations. The third objective is to study robust linear solvers
for the resulting discrete linear systems. Based on physical and mathematical
properties of the mixed-dimensional models and their numerical discretizations,
new block preconditioners and monolithic multigrid methods will be developed.
Robustness with respect to physical and discretization parameters will be
justified both theoretically and numerically. The main application of this
project is linear poromechanics in fractured porous media, but possible
generalizations to nonlinear formulations will also be investigated, including
several applications in physics and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.