* 2208928
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: C.R.I.C.K.E.T.S. – Circadian Rhythms In Crickets: linKing Evolution, Timing, and Selection
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Mary Westwood, Westwood, Mary Lynn
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2026
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research centers around circadian rhythms
(i.e., daily, biological rhythms). Circadian rhythms are found everywhere in
nature – from the most widely recognized circadian systems (e.g., the sleep-wake
cycle) to the unanticipated and surprising (e.g., circadian clocks in some
bacteria) – all life on Earth has evolved to cope with day and night. Circadian
rhythms are governed by cellular pacemakers, and a key feature is that these
pacemakers allow organisms to anticipate environmental change. This is important
because it allows organisms to schedule their behavior and physiology to peak
and trough at times of day that maximize survival and fitness. For example,
plants prepare to do photosynthesis in preparation of sunlight. Sea urchins
forage at night and retreat to shelter prior to the onset of predator activity.
The goal of this work is to determine how circadian rhythms (one of the most
fundamental rules of life) affect the process of adaptation to environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will investigate these questions using
the acoustically advertising Pacific field cricket (Teleogryllus oceanicus),
which is parasitised by a lethal, eavesdropping parasitoid fly (Ormia ochracea).
Acoustic advertisement (in e.g., orthopterans and anurans) is a vital, often
circadian-controlled, component of achieving fitness. Since advertisement also
places the signaler at risk of parasitism and/or predation, individuals must
simultaneously balance the fitness benefits and survival costs of signaling.
Thus, while the timing of a rhythm may be advantageous in one environment,
changes in environmental pressures may disrupt this evolutionary balance. The
fellow will uncover how circadian rhythms shape some of the most common
ecological interactions: those between males and females, competing males, and
hosts and parasites. Specifically, the fellow will combine machine learning,
behavioural assays, and genetic analysis to answer questions related to three
topics: (1) how circadian rhythms in females promote or constrain the adaptive
evolution of circadian rhythms in males. (2) how circadian rhythms affect male-
male competition in the context of rapid evolution. (3) How host immune rhythms
mediate infection risk and parasite offense. The fellow will receive training
from world experts in their field of study and co-coordinate a free summer camp
for minoritized and low-income female-identifying middle schoolers each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.