* 2208864
* EAGER: CoFedAI: Cost-sensitive Federated AI for Smart Manufacturing Data-Sharing
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Ismini Lourentzou, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 01/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will
investigate a cost-sensitive data-sharing paradigm that integrates manufacturing
data from multiple manufacturers to improve supervised learning in smart
manufacturing. This effort addresses a critical problem in the implementation of
Artificial Intelligence (AI) in US manufacturing, since AI methods benefit from
training on large datasets and manufacturers typically keep their data secret.
The investigators will research methods for preserving the privacy of that data,
with the goal of enabling a future manufacturing service infrastructure to
aggregate, manage and reuse data from multiple manufacturers. Such an
infrastructure can benefit manufacturing by establishing a data-sharing
marketplace that enables domestic partnerships and accelerates the adoption of
AI technologies, thus enhancing the international market share of the United
States. Aspects of this work will also be incorporated into the courses taught
by the PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project lays the foundation for a
manufacturing data-sharing ecosystem by creating task-specific similarity
metrics and a methodology to differentiate the contributions from multiple
manufacturing data owners. The selection of suitable data sources for data
aggregation depends on the categorization of the data derived from the various
sources for similarity in data distribution and variable relationship. The Cost-
sensitive Federated AI (CoFedAI) framework will facilitate data exchange to
unlock the value of knowledge transfer for AI in manufacturing by employing a
cost-sensitive multi-armed bandit data-sharing framework that requests data from
multiple stakeholders. The hierarchical framework will extend the multi-armed
bandit to multiple data sources and decompose similarity into two interconnected
elements: manufacturer similarity and data similarity. In addition, the
framework will assess and differentiate the contributions from multiple data
owners in manufacturing based on the similarity metrics. In subsequent work, the
PIs will extend the envisioned ecosystem to facilitate natural language queries,
integration of manufacturer constraints, and novel data-sharing
incentives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.