* 2208620
* Manticores and Giant Tigers: Phylogeny and biogeography of the tiger beetle tribe Manticorini (Coleoptera: Cicindelidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Grey Gustafson, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2025
* USD 690,347.00

Members of the tribe Manticorini are among the most poorly known tiger beetles
in the United States. Estimates of the number of species in one genus ranges
from as few as five to over a hundred. All manticorine tiger beetles are large,
nocturnal, and flightless, yet they are found on three different continents. How
did large, flightless beetles come to occur on continents separated by an ocean?
In the American Southwest, a similar pattern exists among populations of the
Montane Giant Tiger Beetle. Individuals are found only at mid-elevations on
isolated mountains in the Sonoran and Chihuahuan deserts, but none of the
intervening low desert. However, this latter distribution pattern likely emerged
more recently in Earth’s history than the former involving multiple continents.
This project will investigate species diversity and the origins of the
distributions of manticorine tiger beetles. Understanding the number of species
in this group and their ranges will aid conservation efforts. This project will
use museum specimens to assess whether current molecular tools can incorporate
long-dead individuals into studies of evolutionary history. These results will
aid in determining how best to use museum specimens from extinct or endangered
populations in future studies. Community science and public outreach will be
employed to collect specimens from across species’ ranges, which will increase
regional scientific literacy. This project will mentor graduate and
undergraduate students in modern systematics methods. The results of this
research will be used to enrich teaching materials for biology courses taught at
a Hispanic Serving Institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve
fieldwork to sample populations of manticorine tiger beetles from across the
ranges of currently proposed species and subspecies within the U.S. Sampling
will include attempts to re-collecting populations known from museum specimens.
A targeted capture and enrichment approach to high-throughput DNA sequencing
will be employed using an ultraconserved element probe set. This probe set was
designed specifically for use in the beetle suborder to which manticorine tiger
beetles belong. Using the resultant data, phylogenetic trees will be constructed
in order to delimit species boundaries, reconstruct ancestral ranges, and assess
phylogenetic placement of museum specimens. These results will be used to revise
the taxonomy of U.S. manticorines and reconstruct their historical biogeography.
Once species-level taxa have been identified, they will be included in a
phylogenomic and biogeographic analysis of the entire tribe
Manticorini.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.