* 2208040
* Strong Field Physics with A Twist
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Alexandra Landsman, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 06/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Light-matter interaction is a core subject in physics and its applications. The
specific case of the interaction of a single atom with an intense (or "strong")
electromagnetic field has driven a huge amount of research in atomic, molecular,
and optical physics. Furthermore, it has powerful applications to other areas of
physics and technology. This broad and deep impact was recognized with the 2018
Nobel Prize in Physics. The continued expansion of experimental regimes for
strong field interactions, for table-top experiments as well as major facilities
like X-ray Free Electron Lasers (XFELs) recently constructed worldwide, has huge
long-term potential just beginning to be realized today. For instance, vortex
beams have applications to optical communication and imaging, by dynamic control
of magnetic properties of materials, and spintronics. Ultimately, they will
allow manipulation of atoms, molecules, and localized manipulation of magnetic
properties of solids, the way optical vortices are routinely used in optical
tweezers to manipulate cells. The interdisciplinary nature of this area is ideal
not only for applications to technology, but also for training of both
undergraduate and graduate students for future careers in academic physics or
related ultrafast sciences, in national laboratories and emerging XFEL
facilities, or in private industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrafast laser-matter
interaction has rapidly expanded into new very promising experimental regimes,
where old theoretical assumptions, which already were debatable, clearly break
down. In particular, for beams carrying Orbital Angular Momentum (also known as
vortex beams), the widely used dipole approximation is not applicable, adding
significant complexity. The team will develop semiclassical methods to address
open problems involving strong field ionization. This semiclassical approach
will treat the initial ionization step quantum mechanically, followed by
classical propagation of electron trajectories in the continuum, with final
results directly comparable to experimental data. The theory will first be
tested in well-known experimental regimes of non-adiabatic strong field
ionization with infrared light, where it will also be used to resolve
outstanding debate about which theoretical description of wavepacket post-
ionization is valid. Properly developed theory here will then address some of
the high profile dispute about ionization delays and tunelling time. Likewise, a
new theory for vortex beams, along with a semi-classical framework, will be very
impactful. For strong field interactions with vortex beams, the theory would
suggest a first proof-of-principle experiment. Applications include controlling
magnetic, topological, and quantum excitations on the attosecond time and
nanometer length scales and time-resolved electron diffraction experiments with
twisted electrons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.