* 2208426
* Collaborative Research: Physics-Preserving Adaptive Finite Element Methods for Thermo-Poroelasticity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Son-Young Yi, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2025
* USD 250,518.00

Geothermal energy is one of the most promising renewable energy sources and has
proven to be reliable, clean, and safe. When designing enhanced geothermal
systems (EGS), it is necessary to understand the multiscale, multiphysics,
thermal-hydraulic-mechanical (THM) processes that impact the EGS dynamics and
productivity. This project aims to gain a fundamental understanding of key
mechanisms controlling the dynamics in EGS (solid displacement, fluid flow, and
heat transfer) and sustainability of EGS reservoirs through numerical
simulations. A novel numerical simulation framework to be built through this
project will allow for designing, managing, and optimizing energy production
from EGS.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The THM processes in EGS can be described by
Biotâ€™s thermo-poroelasticity model, a coupled system of nonlinear partial
differential equations. Any desirable numerical methods for THM systems should
preserve the underlying physical laws, such as mass and energy conservation, and
present no numerical instabilities for a wide range of physical and simulation
parameters. This project seeks to develop a unified numerical modeling framework
based on adaptive enriched Galerkin (EG) methods to provide robust and physics-
preserving numerical methods whose numerical analysis is feasible. The proposed
EG schemes are mass conservative and free of numerical instabilities commonly
present in poroelasticity and coupled flow-transport problems. The mass
conservation property, stability, and convergence behaviors of the proposed
methods will be studied mathematically and confirmed numerically. Moreover,
residual-based a posteriori error estimators will be derived and utilized for
designing dynamic mesh adaptivity techniques. The developed EG algorithms will
be implemented within finite element software packages to verify the theoretical
results and validate the new numerical model's capabilities to capture the EGS
dynamics. The performance of the new EG methods will be compared with that of
state-of-the-art numerical methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.