* 2208959
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Integrating Phenotypic and Genomic Data across Multiple Hybrid Zones to Understand the Evolution of Reproductive Isolation in Snakes
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Justin Bernstein, Bernstein, Justin Matthew
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 07/31/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The field of evolutionary biology has become
instrumental in advancing our understanding of the mechanisms that generate and
maintain the diversity of life on the planet. This research will use
rattlesnakes as a study system to understand the process of speciation by
studying the mechanisms that promote lineage divergence early in this process.
The project focuses on understanding how hybridizing species maintain partial
reproductive isolation, and the roles of various evolutionary processes in
shaping reproductive isolation. Understanding these mechanisms is important for
expanding current knowledge of how species arise in nature, and how the roles of
distinct evolutionary processes may shift as the speciation process proceeds.
Additionally, the Fellow will be involved in training undergraduates from
underrepresented groups in methods and theory related to this research. Genomes
and related datasets will be published and made freely available to others in
order to enhance public outreach to diverse audiences as well as advancing
future investigations by the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use whole genome and RNA sequencing from species of the Western
Rattlesnake species complex to understand the roles of various evolutionary
mechanisms that contribute to reproductive isolation by comparing multiple
hybrid zones and thereby investigating broad “rules of life” that may govern the
process of speciation. The Fellow will test hypotheses for the roles of genomic
incompatibilities and other processes in driving reproductive isolation, and
test if discovered patterns are predictable across multiple, distinct hybrid
zones. The Fellow will also test the hypothesis that similar barrier traits and
their underlying genomic loci impact hybrid fitness in distinct hybrid zones by
integrating genomic, gene expression, phenotypic, and environmental data. These
integrated analyses will be used to understand the relationships between traits
and the loci that underlie them, and the roles that traits and underlying loci
play in hybrid fitness and reproductive isolation. This project will involve
specific training of the Fellow in bioinformatics and speciation theory, and the
organization of public outreach events and research symposia; these activities
include involvement of students from groups underrepresented in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.