* 2208090
* RUI: Investigating Ice Formation on Optical Surfaces and Material Properties for Cryogenic Gravitational Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Svenja Fleischer, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2025
* USD 209,988.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. A few
years ago, and a century after the existence of gravitational waves was
predicted by Einstein's theory of general relativity, the NSF-funded Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) achieved the first
detection of such distortions of spacetime caused by merging black holes or
neutron stars. This discovery opened a new window into the universe and gave
rise to the new field of gravitational wave astronomy. To help deliver on the
promise of this new field, this award will support the development of new
detectors with extended reach and sensitivity using optics cooled to very low
temperatures. Specifically, it will fund research to better understand and
overcome problems arising when ice layers form on the surfaces of cold optics
and change their carefully designed properties. By providing research
opportunities to undergraduate students at Western Washington University, a
primarily undergraduate institution, the project will allow them to acquire
transferable skills in preparation for future careers both in and outside of
academia. The award will deepen our understanding of the universe by supporting
new discoveries in gravitational wave astronomy, and it will contribute to a
globally competitive workforce in the STEM (science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics) field, both by training students and through outreach efforts
to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund instrument science
research at Western Washington University to support the development of next-
generation gravitational wave detectors with increased reach and sensitivity.
Specifically, it will address the problem of ice formation on cold mirrors in
cryogenic gravitational wave detectors. This issue has emerged as a significant
challenge for KAGRA, and it has the potential to be even more problematic in
proposed future cryogenic gravitational wave detectors like LIGO Voyager or the
Einstein Telescope. Students and the PI will develop a modular optical cryostat
suitable for measurements at 120K, the planned operating temperature of LIGO
Voyager. The group will use this cryostat to study cryogenic ice layers on cold
optical surfaces, with the aim of better understanding their properties, their
impact on cryogenic gravitational wave detectors, and possible mitigation
strategies. The instrument to be built will also enable further follow-up
projects related to optical materials for cryogenic gravitational wave
detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.