* 2208863
* CREST-PRF: Exploring the dynamics of strongly coupled spin-photon systems
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Gabriel Lopez-Morales, Lopez-Morales, Gabriel Ivan
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

With support from the Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology
(CREST) Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (PRF), this project aims at exploring
strong light-matter interactions on well-known color centers in diamond by
interfacing engineered diamond membranes with photonic cavities. These
interactions bring further tunability to the overall optoelectronic properties
of color centers, forming a hybridized half-light half-matter system with
potential applications in the areas of neural networks and enhanced nanoscale
sensing. The current efforts within the community have been directed towards
strong coupling of individual color centers in solids, which is challenging in
fundamental ways. Instead, this project aims at reaching strong light-matter
coupling with dense color center ensembles to explore collective phenomena and
emergent properties of these hybrid states. Such collective behavior is expected
to enhance nanoscale sensing and provide a platform for next generation
computation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the project are oriented
towards reaching the so-called ‘strong-coupling regime’ with nitrogen-vacancy
and silicon-divacancy color centers in diamond. In this regime, the light/matter
components are not independent anymore, and collectively describe what would be
a defect-excitation-cavity-photon hybrid state. In realizing such goal, it is
important to assess the physical requirements for the diamond samples such as
thickness and defect densities, as well as optimal photonic-cavity designs. To
elucidate these details a priori, analytical, and numerical methods will be used
to ‘inverse-design’ the hybrid diamond-cavity systems. Such designs could be
based on light-matter coupling strengths that can be reliably measured in
experiments, by Fourier-space imaging, and time-resolved spectroscopy methods.
These approaches will help understand the photophysical dynamics of strongly
coupled color centers, as well as assessing their potential tunability and
integration via photonic interactions. The CREST PRF awards provide research
experience and training for early career scientists at active CREST
Centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.