* 2208581
* Symmetric Tensors in Discrete Exterior Calculus and Linearized Elasticity in the Plane
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Anil Hirani, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 03/31/2024
* USD 132,981.00

Many problems in science and engineering require calculus for their solution and
for most of these one must rely on a computer. For this purpose, for decades the
techniques of calculus have been approximated to make them suitable for use in
computer algorithms. The more advanced techniques and mathematical structures of
calculus are part of a field of mathematics called exterior calculus. This
advanced form of calculus allows the techniques of calculus to be easily applied
in situations where the space is curved, such as the surface of earth. Exterior
calculus framework also allows the use of calculus in more dimensions than the
familiar three dimensional world. Examples of this appear in physics, in
engineering, and in many problems in data science. Discrete exterior calculus
(DEC) is a computational framework for exterior calculus suitable for computer
programs. The principle investigator (PI) will enrich the DEC framework by
creating mathematical objects that are critical for many applications but are
missing from DEC. Specifically, the PI will develop the mathematical techniques
and algorithms needed to create approximations of objects called symmetric
tensors, and calculus operations related to these objects. In order to test the
validity of these constructions, the approximations will be developed in
conjunction with solving equations for modeling elastic solids. While exterior
calculus often requires graduate training in mathematics, one benefit of DEC is
the simplicity of the final product. The resulting objects and operations can be
explained in an elementary manner and this will be leveraged to introduce these
topics in an undergraduate computer programing course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI proposes to create discrete symmetric tensors such as the stress tensor and
differential operators such as the curl curl, hessianand symmetric gradient in
the DEC framework. The PI will carry out this discretization of symmetric
tensors and related differential operators by using the Bernstein-Gelfand-
Gelfand (BGG) construction, a tool from geometry. New DEC spaces and operators
needed to carry out this construction will be developed as part of the project.
The BGG construction can be used to combine differential complexes and in the
process create symmetric tensors and higher order differential operators. The PI
will use biharmonic equation and linearized elasticity in the plane as model
problems to gauge the success of the BGG construction for
DEC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.