* 2208433
* SBIR Phase I: Cryogenic probe development and testing for post-lumpectomy margin ablation treatment
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Sean Carroll, SENOGUARD, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 255,731.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a novel cryoablation treatment for improving
the outcomes for patients undergoing a lumpectomy procedure. The system aims to
provide a significantly more effective treatment for treating breast cancer
following surgical intervention, enabling more rapid healing and fewer side
effects than current radiation treatments. The technology aims to serve as a
standard of care in the lumpectomy market projected to reach $7.5 billion in
2027 and address a leading cause of female morbidity and mortality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project seeks to explore the feasibility of the companyâ€™s proprietary
cryoablation system to kill breast cancer cells with high (&gt;99%) accuracy in
preclinical testing. This project will validate the design using an accepted
animal cellular model of tumors. The project aims to design and de-risk the
probe design to ensure optimal contact and thermal transmissivity with the tumor
cells in a fixed experimental setting in vitro. The project will be designed to
ensure clinical usability in under an hour at the time of cancer removal. The
results may serve as the foundation for furthering preclinical product research
and development prior to human use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.