* 2208883
* RUI: Studies of Relativistic Heavy Ions Collisions in ALICE at the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Edmundo Garcia-Solis, Chicago State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2025
* USD 419,568.00

Recruiting, retaining, and educating science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics students and teachers has been identified as the cornerstone to
improving scientific literacy, maintaining economic growth, and providing the
platform for relevant scientific discoveries. This award addresses these issues
by supporting CSU's high-energy experimental nuclear physics program. This
project is centered on a research program to study heavy ion collisions at the
European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) with the ALICE experiment. It
also includes a component on detector R&amp;D for the Electron-Ion Collider
(EIC), and thereby provides opportunities for the involvement of undergraduate
students in hardware projects. The project aligns with what other undergraduate
institutions have identified for successful research projects for similar
disciplines. Because of the make-up of the CSU student population, the location
of the university, and the current outreach programs of the department, this
program has the potential to promote underrepresented inner-city students into
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is centered on a research program
to study heavy ion collisions at CERN with the ALICE experiment in three areas
of interest: the jet physics capabilities of ALICE, an R&amp;D component to
contribute to the integration of the Fast Interaction Trigger (FIT), and the
Forward Calorimeter (FoCal). It also includes an R&amp;D component to advance
the high-resolution Zero Degree Calorimeter (ZDC) for the EIC. The focus of the
heavy ion program at CERN is to understand the behavior of matter at very high
density, corresponding to conditions a fraction of a second after the Big Bang,
when a hot, dense medium of quarks and gluons existed. The goal is to recreate
these conditions via colliding nuclei at very high energies. Chicago State
University will contribute to this effort by working on the physics analysis of
J/psi jets. A program includes measurements to investigate the production
mechanism of quarkonia in proton-proton collisions and the response of the
quark-gluon medium to jet energy deposition in lead-lead
collisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.