* 2208609
* STTR Phase I:  Recombinant BCG as a novel immunoadjuvant for viral infections
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Todd Wallach, ONCOSTING LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 05/31/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project improves treatment of viral conditions, starting
with influenza. Each year seasonal influenza infects 9–35 million individuals,
causes 56,000 deaths in the U.S., and costs $87.1 billion. The proposed
technology has the potential to produce more rapid protection, expand
pathogen/variant coverage, and extend the longevity of protection afforded by
influenza vaccination and other vaccines. This added protection will reduce the
high healthcare costs and productivity losses due to mortality/morbidity. This
technology has the potential to serve as a rapidly deployable prophylactic or
vaccine adjuvant to enhance protection and reduce the necessary vaccine dose,
expanding access and providing a timelier response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project advances a next-generation
vaccine adjuvant platform. While vaccines represent a major medical success,
several diseases have proven difficult to address, including seasonal and
pandemic influenza, tuberculosis (TB), malaria, hepatitis C virus (HCV), and
HIV. One way to improve the efficacy of vaccines for these diseases is to use an
adjuvant to strengthen the immune response to the antigen presented via
vaccination. The proposed technology has the potential to enhance the efficacy
of vaccines against a wide range of infections directly and via heterologous
immunity because the addition of “Stimulator of Interferon Genes” (STING)
agonist overproduction to Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) serves a dual purpose:
it enhances the elevated trained immunity of macrophages already known to be
conferred by BCG and promotes critical antiviral IFN-I responses. The key
objectives for this project are: 1) Optimize media and lyophilization for
manufacturing of BCG-STING; 2) Evaluate the immunological effects of BCG-STING
as an adjuvant for H1N1 influenza vaccination; and 3) Assess the protective
effects of BCG-STING as an adjuvant for H1N1 vaccination. This will provide
proof of concept for proceeding with the development of this novel recombinant
BCG as an efficacy-boosting adjuvant that also offers intrinsic antiviral
immunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.