* 2208825
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Effects of Temporal Variation on Genomic Architecture and Phenotype in a Classic Hybrid Zone
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Thomas Firneno, Firneno, Thomas J
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 06/30/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The research component of this fellowship
investigates the repeatability and predictability of evolutionary processes
across whole genomes in hybrid zones. Hybrid zones offer a unique opportunity to
examine how selection acts on various axes in natural populations. Through an
integrative genotype-phenotype approach, this research will inspire new avenues
of research in speciation, hybridization, and evolutionary biology; it will also
hopefully answer a decades-old question: How predictable are evolutionary
outcomes? Through this project, the Fellow will provide (1) critical training
and mentoring to undergraduates (both in the laboratory and through the
development of a course-based undergraduate research experience); (2) meaningful
outreach opportunities to increase public engagement with, and appreciation for,
nature and science; and (3) an opportunity for individuals underrepresented in
STEM disciplines, including LGBTQ+ researchers, to present research findings and
discuss their professional journeys.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
proposal is to test the hypothesis that selection on recombinant genomes is
repeatable over different temporal scales. To do so, the proposed research
integrates field-based collections, natural history, classic and cutting-edge
genomic methods, genotype-phenotype associations, and computational biology. The
Fellow will use historic and contemporary sampling, as well as replicate
sampling across the hybrid zone that came in contact at different times between
North American field crickets in order to understand variation in selection on
genomic and phenotypic variables across temporal scales. Key scientific outcomes
will include (1) the integration of the genomic and phenotypic patterns of
temporal variation in selection and (2) a test of the repeatability of selection
on recombinant genomes. More broadly, the Fellow will broadly engage academic
students and the public in science, critical thinking, and an appreciation for
nature; this includes increasing the visibility and involvement of LGBTQ+
researchers and others who are underrepresented in STEM fields. The Fellow will
also receive critical new scientific training that will add skill sets in
genomic, molecular, and computational laboratory
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.