* 2208085
* Optical Properties of Cold Dense Electron-Positron Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Allen Mills, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 241,798.00

A neutral plasma is a gas composed of equal numbers of particles with positive
and negative charges. This project addresses a frontier in plasma physics
research in which the two charges, negative electrons and positive positrons,
are each other’s antiparticles, with exactly equal masses and opposite charges.
The simpler behavior of this type of system will be of great value in the
understanding and control of the non-equal mass plasmas required for power
generation using future fusion energy technologies. The equal mass electron-
positron plasma will be examined under various conditions of density and
temperature to verify its predicted greater stability compared to the non-equal
mass plasmas. This research will occur at a federally-designated Hispanic
Serving Institution and over time will create opportunities for undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral training, thus supporting the education and diversity
goals of the campus and the Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
exploratory project is to demonstrate the trapping of polarized electron-
positron plasmas in cavities of various sizes from 1 mm to 50 micron embedded in
a solid such as diamond. Short, 10 nanosecond, bursts of ~107 positrons will be
delivered to the cavities through a thin window. The positrons will be repelled
by the chemical potential of the solid, and they will attract an equal number of
“hot” electrons released during the implantation. A neutral electron-positron
plasma will build up in the cavity and rapidly equilibrate at a common
temperature. The plasma polarization, temperature, and density will be deduced
from the annihilation rate and from plasma oscillations induced by pulsed
excitation. Being devoid of the instabilities that come from unequal mass, the
equal mass plasma is the ideal system to explore other instabilities that might
be associated with cavity geometry or impedance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.