* 2208464
* Measuring Real Contact Area and Its Consequences on Adhesion and Friction in Dry and Wet Conditions
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Ali Dhinojwala, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2026
* USD 299,755.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adhesives and friction play
important roles in engineering and biology, and the global market for adhesives
is valued in the tens of billions of dollars. Many research efforts, such as
improving the fuel efficiency of tires, require an understanding of friction and
adhesion, which have important consequences in terms of energy savings. There is
also a strong need for improving adhesion in wet environments for biomedical
applications such as bandages, tissue adhesives, and health monitoring devices.
The main challenge in these applications is understanding how roughness can
affect adhesion and friction. This research project is focused on measuring the
actual area of contact between a soft polymer that has elastic properties (such
as rubber) and a rough surface, as this measure is critical for gaining insight
on the magnitude of the forces of friction and adhesion. The project will
involve the use of sophisticated optical instruments and the further development
of techniques to directly probe the contact area between the elastomer and the
surface during sliding under both dry conditions and under water. These direct
measurements of the contact area will help in developing a fundamental
understanding of the velocity dependence of friction and adhesion and will be
useful in testing the current theoretical models in this field. Two graduate
students will be trained during this project, and research experiences will be
provided to undergraduate and high school students as part of the outreach
activities. The project will also leverage the Biomimicry Center (BRIC) at the
University of Akron to improve the diversity of students engaged in science
projects and increase participation of students from inner-city schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It was first highlighted by David Tabor and
colleagues that both adhesion and friction are related to the real contact area
and the strength of interfacial adhesion. In the last two decades, new
analytical models have been developed to predict how the real contact area is
influenced by roughness, elastic modulus, and the sliding velocity. Recently, it
has been shown that these models are inadequate for predicting changes in
friction due to roughness or changes in the sliding velocity for soft
elastomers. Resolving the discrepancy between theory and experiments will
require a direct measurement of the real contact area, particularly during
sliding. The proposed research will leverage recent developments in surface-
sensitive sum frequency generation spectroscopy (SFG) to directly measure the
shift in the surface -OH peak, which can be related to the strength of the
interfacial interactions. SFG will be coupled with an oscillatory friction cell
(with a velocity in the range of 10-7 to 0.2 m/s) to directly measure the
contact area during sliding. These measurements will be conducted in both dry
conditions and underwater to understand the influence of hydrodynamics in the
boundary lubrication regime. The direct measurement of the contact area will
help in developing a fundamental understanding of the velocity dependence of
friction and adhesion and will be useful in testing the current theoretical
models in this field.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.