* 2208079
* RUI: Investigations of Mirror Thermal Noise  for Gravitational Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Steven Penn, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 60,000.00

In 2015 NSF's LIGO (Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory)
launched the field of gravitational wave astronomy with the first direct
detection of gravitational waves. LIGO detects gravitational waves, the ripples
in spacetime, using an “L”-shaped detector, known as an interferometer, with 4
km long arms. Gravitational waves cause tiny differential stretching in the
arms, which is measured by reflecting laser light off mirrors at the end of each
arm and comparing the reflected beams. One of the main limits to LIGO’s
sensitivity is that the mirror surfaces move as a result of thermally-induced
vibrations. Known as thermal noise, these vibrations mask the gravitational wave
signal. This research project will investigate a means for reducing this
“coating thermal noise” by using a mirror coating formed from layers of
crystalline semiconductor materials. Initial measurements indicate that this
crystalline coating will lower the coating thermal noise by a factor of ten. As
a result LIGO will be able to see several times farther out in the universe,
with a dramatic increase in its rate of observing black holes and neutron stars.
This rapidly growing catalogue of observations will inform current models of the
composition, formation, and evolution of our universe. Answering the fundamental
questions about the universe are ideas that excite, unite, and inspire all of
humankind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research program is the
continued development of the GaAs/AlGaAs crystalline coating for use in the next
major upgrade of the LIGO detectors. In addition to having excellent optical
properties (scatter &lt; 10 ppm, absorption &lt; 1 ppm), these coatings have
demonstrated an extremely low elastic loss. The dominant source of coating
thermal noise (CTN) for crystalline GaAs/AlGaAs is thermo-optic (TO) noise,
which is the combination of thermo-elastic (TE) and thermo-refractive (TR)
noises. Using TO optimization, one can adjust the coating layer thicknesses so
that the TE and TR effects are cancelling. These TO-optimized coatings have
demonstrated a 10× lower CTN than the current LIGO coatings. While these results
are extremely encouraging, a great deal of work remains to be able to realize
these gains in LIGO mirrors. The measurements, to date, have been performed on
small (≤ 75 mm) samples. This project oversees the development of these
crystalline coatings to 20- and eventually 30-cm diameters, which are suitable
for LIGO. The PI is working with the LIGO Lab to test the surface uniformity and
optical properties at increasing sizes. The PI is collaborating with the
Syracuse University group on tests of possible electro-optic noise and on the
development of a new arm-locking system using 2 µm lasers. The PI is developing
a finite element model of the coating to accurately predict the CTN. In parallel
he is working with the MIT LIGO Lab group to improve the sensitivity of their
CTN experiment so that it is capable of measuring the low CTN observed in
GaAs/AlGaAs crystalline coating . The PI is collaborating with colleagues at
Embry-Riddle, American, and Stanford to test possible birefringence noise.
Finally the PI is exploring interferometer designs that could utilize the
currently available 20-cm GaAs/AlGaAs coatings, rather than waiting to deploy
these coatings after the 3+ year manufacturing process for 30-cm
coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.