* 2208229
* Petrologic consequences of non-hydrostatic stress during subduction zone metamorphism
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jay Ague, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2025
* USD 350,531.00

Rocks deep below Earth’s surface are subjected to high temperatures and intense
pressures. The chemical compositions of the minerals in rocks can record the
temperature–pressure conditions under which the rocks form. Different geologic
environments are characterized by distinct temperature–pressure regimes.
Consequently, geoscientists can use the chemical histories preserved in minerals
to reveal geologic environments of rock formation, such as within a subduction
zone or mountain belt. The traditional approach to reading the
temperature–pressure record is to assume that the pressure on a rock was equal
in all directions when it formed. However, emerging research demonstrates that
pressure (or stress) on a rock may vary considerably with direction. For
example, earthquakes and the existence of mountains that stand high above sea
level are settings where directional stresses play an essential role by exerting
fundamental controls on the reactions that take place among minerals. These
include reactions that release water (dehydration reactions). This water can
weaken rocks and facilitate seismic activity, or drive the rock melting that
produces dangerous volcanoes such as Mt. Rainier as well as many of the world’s
great ore deposits. The natural hazards are particularly acute in and around
Earth’s subduction zones, regions where one tectonic plate descends beneath
another (for example, in Oregon, Washington State, and Alaska). In summary, to
obtain a better understanding of the rock record, we must be able to
quantitatively assess the impact of unequal stresses on geologic processes. This
study will entail Ph.D. and undergraduate student research as well as public
outreach programs through the Yale University Peabody Museum of Natural
History.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four key interrelated concepts relevant for
metamorphic rocks in subduction zones will be tested. (1) Solid solution mineral
compositions and crystallographic orientations record stress fields. (2) Stress
variations at the grain scale can produce compositional zoning in minerals. (3)
Diffusion within minerals can generate stresses that affect diffusion profile
shapes and thus diffusion-based estimates for the timescales of metamorphic and
tectonic processes. (4) Normal stress can trigger dehydration reactions, rock
weakening, and potential seismic moment release. These tests will involve
theoretical development of the thermodynamic and kinetic equations needed to
quantitatively describe unequal stress in minerals, together with applications
to natural samples from exhumed subduction complexes in the Alps, Germany,
Greece, and Norway. The landmark contributions of materials scientists F. C.
Larché and J. W. Cahn will be the basis for the theoretical development. Field
work and sample collection will be done in the Bergen Arcs, Norway; samples from
the other localities are already in the petrologic collections of Yale
University. A wide array of laboratory techniques will be used, including thin
section petrography, electron backscatter diffraction analysis of mineral
crystallographic orientations, and electron-probe microanalysis of mineral
chemistry. Ultimately, the research will evaluate the impact of non-hy¬drostatic
stress on mineral interface stability, solid solution mineral compositions, and
intracrystalline diffusion rates. This, in turn, will have broad implications
for diffusion-based time¬scale estimation, reconstructing deformation, cooling,
and exhumation histories, and fluid generation in subduction
zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.