* 2208814
* Expanding Access and Storage for the Borderland Biological Collections at the University of Texas at El Paso
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Eli Greenbaum, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 374,934.00

The University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) Biodiversity Collection houses natural
history specimens of global significance representing the Chihuahuan Desert, and
one of the largest collections in the western hemisphere of amphibian and
reptile specimens from Central Africa. The data associated with the UTEP
Biodiversity Collection informs policy, education, and scientific research
addressing pressing societal issues, such as emerging diseases, climate change,
and conservation. The proper stewardship of biological collections is critical
for ensuring access to these important research and educational materials for a
global audience. This project will replace deteriorating cabinets with new
storage systems to improve access, specimen conditions, and enable expansion.
The project will preserve the biodiversity heritage of several important
regions, including the Chihuahuan Desert, Central Africa, and Southwestern
Australia. In addition, training opportunities to undergraduate and graduate
students, at a major Hispanic serving institution, who will assist with the
transfer and reorganization of these collections, gaining skills in museum
science, systematics, and science communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
capacity improvement project will address space limitation in the herbarium,
housing more than 82,000 specimens, and the herpetology collections, with more
than 21,000 specimens, to make new specimen processing possible. Compactor
systems will be installed for these collections, which will be reorganized
following current taxonomic knowledge and best practices. Specimens will be re-
curated to improve the storage and specimen conditions as they are transferred.
An object tracking system, independent of taxonomy, will be implemented to
facilitate specimen monitoring, process loan requests more quickly, and increase
accessibility for both research and education. The project will also improve lab
space and facilitate access to the collections for additional faculty in a
rapidly growing biology department. Finally, a museum exhibit and outreach
displays will celebrate the completion of this project by focusing on showcasing
collection strengths in several biodiversity hotspots (Madrean Pine-Oak
Woodlands, Eastern Afromontane, and Southwest
Australia).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.