* 2208488
* Thermal mapping of current density in filamentary switching devices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Marek Skowronski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2025
* USD 475,609.00

Nontechnical description: &lt;br/&gt;Storing the information in semiconductor
memory devices and transferring it to and from the processing unit are the two
major roadblocks in continued increase of information processing speed and
efficiency. One of the most promising ways to address these roadblocks is to
employ memristors i.e., resistors with memory. It is generally agreed that
resistance change is caused by redistribution of ions in the device material.
This project is focused on answering fundamental questions concerning the
driving forces of ion motion, the speed of motion, and the temperature necessary
for it. A secondary goal of the project is the development of experimental
technique to measure the temperature distribution in nanoscale devices under
bias. The project provides opportunities for training of undergraduate and
graduate students in areas of processing of thin films and electronic devices
and contributes to education of the workforce in an important area of the
national economy. Outreach activities target high school students to encourage
them to pursue careers in semiconductor
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;The project
targets identification of the operating mechanisms in two types of resistive
switching structures: threshold and memory switches. Both device types form a
small diameter conducting filament that is either volatile or non-volatile. Two
models have been proposed for formation of the filament in resistive switches
(i) based on lateral motion induced by thermophoresis and (ii) vertical motion
and exchange of oxygen ions with the anode. The proposed mechanisms for
threshold switches include carrier injection, local heating of the material,
creating of hot carriers, and nucleation of a secondary metallic phase. The
Carnegie Mellon team is going to use Scanning Thermal Microscopy and Scanning
Joule Expansion Microscopy to measure the temperature distribution in structures
with applied voltage, extract the filament size, and its changes with biasing
conditions and map the local changes of composition by High Angle Annular Dark
Field and X-Ray Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy. Since the temperature
distribution is the distinguishing characteristics of different models, the
results will identify the operating mechanism. The final goal of the project is
building a predictive and quantitative model of processes involved the
resistance change. Results are expected to form fundamental underpinnings of the
important new electronic device technology that potentially can revolutionize
the field of non-volatile high-density memories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.