* 2208944
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Kevin Bird, Bird, Kevin A
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2022. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Kevin Bird is "The reciprocal interaction of genetic variation and network
topology in trait evolution" The host institution for the fellowship is the
University of California-Davis and the sponsoring scientists are Dr. Daniel
Kliebenstein and Dr. J. Grey Monroe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For living things to
survive they must appropriately respond to changes in the environment or the
appearance of genetic mutations. This is especially true for plants, where
physically moving away from environmental stresses is not always possible. Being
able to maintain vital functions in the face of mutations or environmental
change is called robustness. Organisms must also be able to adapt to changing
environments through natural selection and to do this, mutations need to produce
a heritable change in phenotype. How organisms can be both robust to mutations
and able to adaptively evolve to new environments has been difficult to answer.
This project focuses on how interactions among genes change the effect of a
mutation, sometimes preventing harmful effects and other times producing a
change that may help adapt to a new environment. It also explores how mutations
can change the way genes interact with each other.The PI will use the latest
technologies, including genomic sequencing and CRISPR gene editing, to study how
interactions among genes change between wild plants in the model species
Arabidopsis thaliana, the crop plant Brassica oleracea (broccoli, cauliflower,
cabbage) and the biofuel crop Camelina sativa. These results will help us
understand more about the processes of evolution so we can harness this
knowledge for plant breeding and conservation efforts to respond to rapidly
changing climates. The PI will also use knowledge from this work and his past
research to contribute to ongoing projects to create biology curricula that
reduce racial prejudice and bias among students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organisms
respond to their environments by integrating external stimuli across genetic
networks to produce necessary biological responses. Theory predicts that to
ensure fitness during harsh conditions, optimal genetic networks must be robust,
i.e. maintain function in the face of perturbations incurred from mutations. In
robust networks, the phenotypic effects of single-gene knockouts are often
masked. Organisms, however, cannot be too robust otherwise their phenotype will
be too rigid to genetically adapt to pressures from a changing environment. An
emerging model of gene network evolution emphasizes that networks are composed
of subcomponents that are interconnected and interactive. Under this model,
changes to any number of genes can modulate gene networks, and a mutation’s
propensity to cause phenotypic change depends on its context within the network.
Using natural Arabidopsis accessions, the PI will analyze variation among
accession-specific gene coexpression networks and identify network topology
features associated with adaptive alleles. The PI will extend these results
using new pangenomes for five Brassicaceae species, including both cultivated
and wild species, and will test predictions of associated network features with
targeted CRISPR knockouts in Arabidopsis. The results will shed light on how
evolution and network topology interact to produce complex traits and pave the
way to use the knowledge gained to predict epistatic interactions that can
inform future plant breeding and conservation efforts. As part of this project,
the PI will also build on ongoing work to design genetics curricula that reduce
racial prejudice and bias in students by addressing students’ pre-existing
beliefs in genetic essentialism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.