* 2208894
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology: Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Biodiversity–Disease Relationships
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Neil Gilbert, Gilbert, Neil
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This project will advance scientific
understanding of disease risk dynamics. Wildlife diseases are common in nature
and occasionally “spill over” from wildlife to human populations. Despite this
link to human well-being, scientists lack a comprehensive understanding of the
environmental attributes associated with the emergence and spread of wildlife
diseases. In particular, the relationship between biodiversity and disease risk
(e.g., whether biodiversity amplifies or dilutes disease risk) is poorly
understood, and it is unclear how this relationship might be altered with
ongoing global change. Therefore, the project will apply state-of-the-art
modeling approaches to understand the dynamic relationship between biodiversity
and disease risk. By seeking generalities in biodiversity–disease relationships
and documenting their context dependence, the project will enhance future
predictions of threats to human health posed by wildlife diseases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will characterize spatiotemporal variation in
biodiversity–disease relationships using data from the National Ecological
Observatory Network (NEON) on rodent–tick (Lyme disease) and bird–mosquito (West
Nile virus) systems. In particular, the fellow will investigate 1) whether
biodiversity–disease relationships from the two systems scale similarly over
space, 2) the sensitivity of these relationships to biodiversity change, and 3)
the influence of seasonality and climate on temporal dynamics of
biodiversity–disease relationships. The fellow will develop multiscale,
integrated models, which allow multiple datasets (i.e., data on hosts as well as
vectors) to be combined into a cohesive whole. The integrated model—applied in a
Bayesian framework—will accomplish this linkage by estimating host biodiversity
metrics in a host submodel and then using these quantities as predictors in a
disease submodel. Integrated models are gaining prominence in biological
disciplines due to their effectiveness in understanding complex phenomena, and
this project will inform future investigations that combine datasets to tackle
problems in disease ecology. In addition to the research, the fellow will
undertake career training activities (e.g., statistical workshops) and engage in
activities to broaden participation in science, including mentoring an
undergraduate student in summer research and leading a training module on using
NEON data in a graduate ecology course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.