* 2208260
* Collaborative Research: Measurement, Simulation, and Theory of Molecular Connectivity Effects on Nanoscale Interfacial Rheology of Glass-Forming Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Rodney Priestley, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2025
* USD 355,000.00

If you zoomed into many of the modern materials that empower energy storage,
enable water purification, or even make up the tires on your car, you would find
that their essential structures are only hundreds of atoms across, and at the
same time are chemically connected in vast spaghetti-like strands. These
“polymeric nanomaterials” open the door to new technologies that can transform
our life, economy, and national defense. A major reason for their promise is
also their greatest challenge: mysteriously, the interfaces that pervade these
polymeric nanomaterials cause them to behave dramatically differently than
traditional materials. This award aims to solve a key piece of this mystery: why
do these materials deform very differently in the vicinity of these microscopic
interfaces? How can we design them to control this deformation behavior and thus
fabricate them more economically, further improve their properties, and
ultimately enable new technological advances? These questions will be answered
via experiments that zoom in to the nanometer scale to observe how these
materials flow and deform. At the same time, supercomputer simulations will
visualize how molecules’ movements underlie this deformation. Ultimately, these
results will drive the development of a theory that explains these materials’
behavior and empowers material engineers to improve their design and drive new
technological advances. The effort will be integrated with a joint Princeton and
University of South Florida outreach program exposing diverse high school
students to experimental and computational research on
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will establish a predictive
theoretical understanding of nanoscale gradients in rheological response at
interfaces in glass-forming fluids. These gradients emanate at least in part
from the presence of a glass transition temperature gradient at interfaces.
However, when this gradient is spanned by large molecules, particularly in the
presence of surface adsorption, it is not clear how it controls alterations in
rheological response. Work aims to (1) establish a theory of alterations in
linear rheology in the nanoscale vicinity of free surfaces, (2) extend this
theory to treat buried interfaces relevant to composites and multi-phase fluids,
and (3) establish a new strategy for altering near-interface rheological
response. To support new theory development, an experimental metrology to
measure time-resolved nanocreep will be combined with simulations probing
gradients in rheology and chain dynamics. Predictive understanding established
by this work will transform the understanding, prediction, and design of flow of
interfacially-rich fluids, such as nanoparticle-laden fluids, thin films, and
nanostructured multiphase fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.