* 2208982
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: How Overwintering Life-Stage Affects Vulnerability to Winter Warming in Butterflies
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Kevin Roberts, Roberts, Kevin T
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Climate change is profoundly altering
environments across the planet, and while previous research has focused on the
impacts of warm seasons, some of the most dramatic changes are in winter
climate. To understand the impacts of changing climate on organisms, it is
therefore critical to study how temperature-dependent processes will be altered
in response to increasing winter temperatures as well. In insects, energy use
rates are determined by temperature, and during winter these effects are vital
in determining survival and post-winter investment. Post-winter energetic
investment is determined by the overwintering life stage with larvae investing
in growth, adults into reproduction, and pupae into both. This research
therefore aims to identify how an insect's overwintering life stage impacts its
vulnerability to energy depletion caused by warming winters. The Fellow will
also provide outreach to diverse audiences that include an international
workshop and the general public through the dissemination of the study’s
findings.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While the importance of the impacts of changing
winters on organisms is starting to be understood, there is little understanding
of how key life history characteristics impact the susceptibility of different
species. This research aims to establish a generalizable framework that predicts
vulnerability to winter energy drain based on overwintering life stage by
pairing laboratory experiments with ecophysiological models. First, energy use
rates will be measured in nine species of butterflies that overwinter as adults,
larvae, or pupae. Then winter energy use will be linked to reproduction in the
laboratory by measuring reproductive output after cold, mild, and warm winter
conditions. Energy use rates and associated reproductive outputs for each
species will then be used in an ecophysiological model to predict the energetic
and reproductive consequences of climate change under several possible scenarios
and across geographic ranges. This will allow for the identification of species
and populations that will be especially vulnerable to changing winters. The PI
will gain opportunities to learn new experimentation and modeling protocols.
Finally, this project aims to develop a modeling workshop that will both teach
methods required for scaling physiological data to landscapes and foster
international collaboration through the interaction of students at different
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.