* 2208857
* The geographic footprint of host-symbiont mutualism
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Thomas Miller, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2026
* USD 921,044.00

Every species on Earth has limits to its geographic distribution – places on the
planet where it cannot live. Studying how range limits arise is important
because it helps people understand where species such as pests or disease
vectors are likely or unlikely to be found, and whether species might be able to
migrate as environments change. It is generally accepted that, approaching the
edges of a species’ distribution, stress from harshness of the environment
eventually causes the death rate to exceed the birth rate, so that populations
cannot sustain themselves. This generates a range edge. However, many plants and
animals harbor a rich array of microbes that live inside of themselves, and
these microbes (collectively called the microbiome) may help to ameliorate
stress. This leads to the hypothesis that, by helping hosts deal with stress,
microbes may alter the limits of a species’ distribution. The proposed research
will test this hypothesis using plants that live symbiotically with microscopic
fungi. The fungi are known elsewhere to help the plants cope with drought
stress. The researchers will remove fungal symbionts from some plants and leave
them in others, then place both plant types out into experimental plots that
span the wet core to the dry edge of the plant species’ distributions. They will
do this experiment for three grass species important to rangeland productivity.
Data from this experiment will be used to build mathematical models that reveal
how the fungal microbes affect the balance of birth and death rates in the host
plants near and away from their range edges. This will help us understand the
importance of plant-microbe symbioses as climate changes. Fungal symbionts are
passed from adult plants through seeds. The researchers will thus visit
herbaria, which are museums of stored plant collections, to extract fungi from
seeds of stored grasses over the last 100 years to test how the plant-fungal
interactions have changed through time. The project is designed to build
connections between the study of plant microbiomes and the study of species’
distributions, which historically have had little cross-talk.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the processes that generate limits on
species’ geographic distributions is a classic problem in ecology that takes on
urgency in the face of rapid environmental change. There is wide recognition
that species interactions, together with abiotic forcing, may play a key role in
shaping geographic distributions. However, current theory and data
overwhelmingly focus on antagonistic interactions like consumption and
competition. This project will test the influence of mutualism between host
organisms and their microbial symbionts on the geographic distributions of both
partners under current and future climate scenarios. Using a generalizable model
system with a well-developed toolkit (cool-season grasses and their vertically-
transmitted fungal endophytes), this project will combine geographically
distributed symbiont removal experiments, demographic range modeling, climate
change forecasting, collections-based surveys, and genetic profiling of
symbionts to measure, for the first time, the geographic footprint of host-
symbiont mutualism. Experiments will focus on three eastern North American grass
species that meet their western limits along the dramatic aridity gradient of
the south-central US, which is shifting under climate change. First, the
research team will test competing hypotheses for the effect of symbiosis on host
range limits, which depends on how symbionts influence host responses to abiotic
(aridity) and biotic (herbivory) stress from range-core to range-edge.
Mechanistic range models built with experimental data will quantify how
symbionts modify host range limits via these two types of protection. Second,
the team will quantify how context-dependent fitness effects scale up to
influence clines in symbiont prevalence, which determine the symbiont geographic
distribution. Finally, the research team will pursue greater spatial, temporal,
and taxonomic coverage by sampling nine host species from herbarium specimens.
Herbarium work will reconstruct geographic and temporal trends in the prevalence
and fitness effects of endophytes across the central US to test how host-
symbiont interactions have responded to rapid environmental change.
Collectively, this work will advance mechanistic understanding of the origins of
range limits and enhance the ability to forecast how species’ ranges will
respond to future environmental change – among the most urgent priorities in
population and community ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.