* 2208834
* Solution-processed laser diodes utilizing colloidal quantum wells
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Mikhail Zamkov, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2025
* USD 364,697.00

The prospect of printing laser diodes from nanoparticle inks has been regarded
as a breakthrough paradigm in fields of medical imaging, flexible substrate
photonics, and optical communications. Nanoparticle-based lasers are
considerably less expensive than traditional solid-state counterparts and offer
a far broader range of accessible colors. A notorious problem of printable
lasers concerns a sharp decline in the optical output of semiconductor
nanoparticles with increasing laser power. This issue negatively affects both
the longevity and the efficiency of these devices. The proposed project aims to
address this problem by developing a novel class of semiconductor nanoparticles,
which is designed to withstand high-power conditions of a lasing element. The
proposed innovation will rely on a spherically-layered nanoparticle geometry
(colloidal quantum wells) to achieve an optimal redistribution of an incident
power, thus preventing optical energy losses and thermal damage. The project
will investigate how to interface these nanoparticles with electrodes and how to
ensure an efficient light propagation in the laser assembly. The successful
demonstration of colloidal quantum-well laser diodes will allow photonic
circuits to be fabricated at lower costs, offer an on-demand tunable emission
colors, and exhibit an excellent compatibility with a wide variety of
substrates. As an integral part of this project, the PI will lead a multi-
faceted educational effort that will involve: (i) – fostering an inclusive
undergraduate research, (ii) – developing a new, upper-level nanophotonics
course, recently approved by the university administration, (iii) – hosting an
annual research experience program for undergraduates, and (iv) - providing an
interdisciplinary training of graduate students, facilitated by the
collaborative nature of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;Lasers diodes processed from solutions of semiconductor
quantum dots (QD) can potentially evolve as an economical and color-tunable
alternative to conventional epitaxial lasers. The main obstacle facing the
development of QD laser technology concerns a sharp decline in the efficiency of
stimulated emission when more than one electron-hole pair (exciton) per particle
is created. Multiple excitons trapped within a small volume of a QD undergo fast
Auger recombination, causing an efficiently roll-off with increasing electrical
pumping. The proposed project aims to address this issue by replacing
traditional semiconductor quantum dots with spherical quantum wells, which
geometry is optimized for suppressing Auger decay of multiple excitons through
their mutual repulsion. Along these lines, the project will focus on chemical
synthesis of colloidal quantum wells and address all aspects of device design,
including solution-processing of the light-emitting layer, optimizing electrical
interfaces, and fabricating the resonant laser cavity. It is expected that a
strong suppression of Auger recombination in colloidal quantum wells will enable
a significant reduction in the current densities needed for light amplification
in solution-processed lasers. Meanwhile, low-dimensional nature of quantum wells
will allow tuning the laser emission continuously throughout visible and
infrared (telecom) spectral windows. Ultimately, this investigation will seek to
demonstrate competitive solution-processed laser diodes for integration with
printable photonic circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.