* 2208004
* A Program in Ultralow-Temperature Atomic Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Wolfgang Ketterle, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,545,000.00

The goal of this program is to study the properties of molecules and materials
at a fundamental level. The result is new insights into the principles of
chemistry and materials properties. The experimental program employs methods
developed in atomic physics to control the motion of atoms with unprecedented
precision. These well controlled building blocks can now be assembled into
molecules or new materials like Lego pieces. This method has the advantage that
the building blocks and their interactions are well known, and therefore also
the basic equations describing their behavior. This together leads to a platform
where both theoretical methods (analyzing these equations) and experimental
methods (using the precision of atomic physics) can be combined to obtain a
deeper understanding of these systems. This research program has two major
directions: (1) Properties of magnetic materials (2) Quantum control of
chemistry, studied in collisions of sodium lithium molecules, either with
themselves, or with sodium atoms. This research is fundamental in its immediate
impact, but in the long run it should lead to devices and advanced materials
with yet unknown properties, and open new possibilities and applications.
Besides promoting the progress of science; this program educates students and
postdocs and prepares them for a career in areas of advanced technology. Results
of this research will be used for public outreach through popular talks and
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetism or spin physics will be pursued on
three different platforms which are complementary, but synergetic: rubidium,
lithium, dysprosium. These three atoms have different properties, which allow
the realization of different spin Hamiltonians. Lithium is the lightest atom and
operates on a faster time scale. Dysprosium features dipolar interactions, and,
together with rubidium, has a strong vector AC Stark shift which will be
exploited for spin-dependent potentials. This approach should lead to major
progress in realizing and characterizing new magnetic phases and understanding
their dynamics. A major goal is the development of techniques to realize quantum
phases with non-trivial topological properties such as the Haldane phase. The
work on ultracold sodium lithium molecules realizes quantum control of chemistry
by identifying and analyzing resonances in reactive and inelastic collisions. It
will provide novel insight into collision complexes which form during molecular
reactions. The work on sodium lithium molecules is also a step towards matter
composed of more complicated building blocks: molecules instead of atoms. This
research addresses important questions at the frontier of many-body physics and
cold chemistry. Its ambitious goal is to advance cold atoms and molecules as a
design tool for new materials in the form of quantum
simulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.