* 2208915
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Exploring Cell-type Regulatory Dynamics of CAM and C4 Photosynthesis in Portulaca
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Ian Gilman, Gilman, Ian S
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/28/2026
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2022. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Dr. Ian S. Gilman is “Exploring Cell-type Regulatory Dynamics of CAM and C4
Photosynthesis in Portulaca”. The host institution for the fellowship is
Michigan State University and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Robert
VanBuren.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C4 photosynthesis and Crassulacean Acid
Metabolism (CAM) are plant adaptations that increase the efficiency of
photosynthesis. Many of the world’s most important crops use C4 photosynthesis,
including maize, sugarcane, and millet, which allows them to quickly grow in low
nutrient and high light environments. CAM greatly increases the efficiency of
plants’ water use and is therefore commonly found in plants in water-scarce
environments, such as the cacti of North American deserts. It was once thought
that plants could use either C4 photosynthesis or CAM, but not both because they
would compete for use of the same necessary enzymes and metabolites. However,
the Purslanes (Portulaca)—common weeds across the globe—were discovered to
combine C4 photosynthesis and CAM, which allows them to grow extremely fast in
low nutrient and low water habitats like sidewalk cracks. Understanding how C4
photosynthesis and CAM can be combined will provide new ways to improve the
drought tolerance of crops with C4 photosynthesis and shed light on fundamental
questions of how genes are regulated for multiple roles. Broader impacts from
this project will enhance engagement with the local community, both on and off
campus, to highlight connections between botany and computer science,
demonstrate how common weeds could revolutionize agriculture, and discuss the
benefits of genetic engineering. Training objectives include obtaining expertise
in horticulture, systems biology, molecular and computational methods
development, and data integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C4 photosynthesis (C4)
and Crassulacean Acid Metabolism (CAM) are carbon concentrating mechanisms
(CCMs) that have evolved as plant responses to the low CO2 world of the past 30
million years. Both CCMs have co-opted the same set of ancient metabolic modules
to boost the concentration of CO2 needed for photosynthesis, but have deployed
these modules in contrasting ways. C4 concentrates CO2 spatially through a two-
cell CO2 pump, while CAM accomplishes CO2 concentration with temporally
coordinated carbon storage and re-release. These adaptations confer C4 species
with the highest rates of plant photosynthesis, characterized by maize and
sugarcane, and CAM plants with extremely high water use efficiencies, emblematic
of cacti, aloes, and agaves. Although C4 and CAM have evolved independently in
hundreds of lineages and share many biochemical components, only two land plant
lineages are known to use both C4 and CAM (C4+CAM): Portulaca and Trianthema, C4
plants that facultatively exhibit CAM in response to abiotic stress. Portulaca,
with multiple independent origins of C4+CAM, offers unique insights into how
multiple CCMs can be integrated to increase the drought tolerance of highly
productive C4 crops. This project will leverage systems and computational
biology to identify the genetic elements controlling the temporal and spatial
coordination of CAM and C4 in Portulaca at the cell-type level. The first goal
of the project is to capture expression dynamics of individual cells using
single cell RNAseq and identify CCM-related cis-regulatory elements using assay
for transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing (ATACseq). Machine
learning based methods will use these data to construct gene regulatory networks
that distinguish cis-elements and regulatory dynamics governing C4 and CAM.
Finally, regulatory networks will be compared between species to identify shared
and unique elements underlying the evolution of CCMs in Portulaca. Data
generated for this project will be made available to the public though NCBI's
Short Read Archive (SRA) and DataDryad (https://datadryad.org), and step-by-step
walkthroughs of analyses will be hosted on GitHub
(https://github.com).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: gene regulatory networks,
single-cell sequencing, C4 photosynthesis, Crassulacean Acid Metabolism,
ATACseq, transcriptomics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.