* 2208225
* The 2022 Graduate Student Topology and Geometry Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Jennifer Hom, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 04/30/2024
* USD 30,000.00

This award supports the 19th annual Graduate Student Topology and Geometry
Conference, to be held April 1-3, 2022, at Georgia Institute of Technology in
Atlanta, Georgia. It is a conference for graduate students interested in
topology and geometry. The presentations will be given by graduate student
participants with additional lectures from plenary and early-career faculty
speakers. Participants will represent a diverse range of institutions and
geographic regions. This will be the an opportunity for the participants to
network and speak with experts in their field whether in-person or in the online
format. This is one of the few conferences in topology and geometry that is
dedicated to graduate students. Geometry and topology are fundamental
mathematical fields with deep connections to many other areas of research, such
as dynamics, physics, computer science, and mathematical biology. The conference
enables graduate students at all years of their study to engage in and
communicate current research in geometry and topology while in a safe and
welcoming environment. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Talks will range in various
subfields of topology and geometry including the following: equivariant homotopy
theory, contact and symplectic topology, Heegaard Floer homology, Khovanov
homology, 4 manifold topology, Riemannian geometry, hyperbolic geometry, mapping
class groups, and quantum topology. Plenary speakers include Bruce Kleiner
(Courant Institute, geometric topology), Kirsten Wickelgren (Duke University,
homotopy theory and arithmetic geometry), and Ian Zemke (Princeton University,
symplectic geometry). Early career faculty speakers include Roger Casals (UC
Davis, contact geometry), Tyrone Ghaswala (UQAM, mapping class groups), Christy
Hazel (UCLA, equivariant homotopy theory), Aaron Mazel-Gee (CalTech,
factorization homology), Maggie Miller (Stanford, low dimensional topology), and
Jiayin Pan (Fields Institute, global Riemannian geometry). The conference
website is https://gstgc22.math.gatech.edu/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.