* 2208922
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Drivers of variability in metal and salt content across plant species
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Luis Santiago-Rosario, Santiago-Rosario, Luis Y
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 02/28/2026
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Underneath the
homogenous green exterior of plants lies a hidden world of complex chemical
diversity. Variation in the chemical diversity of plants has significant
ecological and evolutionary consequences, especially in a world shaped by human
activity. Moreover, urbanization has radically changed the chemical environment
experienced by plants due to pollution, agriculture, and land use. This research
seeks to measure the effect of urbanization on the concentration of heavy metals
and salts taken up by plants across urban-rural gradients in North and South
America. Variation in plant chemical composition impacts food webs, especially
interactions with herbivores and pollinators. Therefore, this research will
elucidate how urban environments impact the chemical composition of local plant
species and how they respond to urban pollutants. Additionally, this work will
enhance basic plant knowledge as humans rely on plants for food, shade, and
other ecosystem functions. The fellow is dedicated to training the next
generation of underrepresented scientists through workshops, classes, and active
recruitment and by bridging the gaps Latin American/Hispanic communities
encounter in scientific literacy within and across the United States and
Chile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to better understand how heavy
metals and salts are distributed in plants across urban and rural areas and
provide mechanistic insights into plant strategies for tolerating these
elements. The fellow will tackle these goals by (1) performing a spatial and
temporal sampling of plants found across urban-rural gradients, as well as using
herbarium specimens found across historical urban gradients in the United States
and Chile, and (2) examining whether plants with annual and perennial life
cycles differ in their heavy metal and salt accumulation, regulation, and
tolerance strategies using a common garden approach. This study will be the
first to examine the spatial and temporal variation of heavy metals and salts in
plants across urban gradients. It will serve as a foundation for linking plant
chemistry to other ecological levels, including
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.