* 2208130
* Ultraviolet-light induced Frontal Polymerization in Additive Manufacturing and Repairing of Thermoset Polymer Composite - Understanding the Role of Fiber Reinforcement Phases
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Yeqing Wang, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 10/31/2025
* USD 464,424.00

Ultraviolet (UV) light induced frontal polymerization, a self-sustaining
exothermic chemical reaction, is a promising technique for additive
manufacturing of thermoset polymers, potentially applicable to fiber-reinforced
thermoset composites. However, the role of fiber phases in frontal
polymerization remain elusive, particularly, how it determines curing and
resultant mechanical performance is not fully understood. This award supports
fundamental research to study and understand the mechanisms governing fiber-
phase behavior in frontal polymerization through an integrated approach of
experimental investigations and computational modeling. The new knowledge
acquired is expected to not only promote scientific advancement in additive
manufacturing and polymer processing, but also benefit U.S. industries in a
broad range of applications such as airframes, flexible biosensors, wind turbine
blades and marine structures, etc. This project will also integrate composites
additive manufacturing into course materials. Additionally, the team will
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in STEM through summer
research opportunities to the pool of Native Indian undergraduates and to high
school students from a school district, where most local Native Indian students
attend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to understand how
fiber reinforcement phases influence UV-induced frontal polymerization
processing of thermoset composites, including curing kinetics, part
microstructures and mechanical performance. The presence of fibers in thermoset
resins will complicate heat-transfer rates and gradients, which may alter UV
energy required to activate polymerization and shape the front propagation. To
tackle this fundamental challenge, fiber composites of different configurations,
e.g., varying weight fractions of initiators, will be investigated into frontal
polymerization at varying UV energy levels. Curing performance, such as the
speed and degree of the cure, along with the resultant microstructural and
mechanical characteristics, such as porosity and tensile properties, will be
experimentally characterized using in-situ thermal imaging and post-cure
material analysis and mechanical testing. In addition, physics-based reaction-
diffusion models, complemented by neural network machine learning algorithms
will be developed to understand the behavior of processing phenomena and be
validated by experimental results. Furthermore, experiments of additive
manufacturing and repairing will be conducted by integrating frontal
polymerization into an automated fiber placement 3D printer to evaluate curing
and mechanical performance of fiber reinforced thermoset composites with
different configurations. The fundamental understanding gained is expected to
establish the quantitative relationship between curing and mechanical
performance of fiber-reinforced thermoset composites and the interplay of the
fiber configurations, UV-light energy and curing kinetics of thermoset
resins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.