* 2208556
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Cost Bipolar Plate for a Proton-Exchange Membrane Fuel Cell
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Jay Dandrea, ELEKTRODA, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/29/2024
* USD 253,773.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the high cost of proton-exchange
membrane (PEM) fuel cells. As the world transitions from internal combustion
engine vehicles to electric vehicles, the market for fuel cells is expected to
increase substantially. Fuel cell electric vehicles (FCEVs) have a number of
advantages, such as high durability, long range, and fast refueling over battery
electric vehicles (BEVs). Additionally, fuel cells are less susceptible to the
supply chain issues that lithium-ion batteries are beginning to suffer from.
However, FCEVs are currently at a significant disadvantage to BEVs in terms of
cost. Reducing the cost of the fuel cell stack will help to make FCEVs cost
competitive with BEVs and will accelerate their adoption into the
marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to reduce
the cost of PEM fuel cells by reducing the cost of the bipolar plate component.
Bipolar plates currently account for approximately 30% of the full fuel cell
stack cost. Current bipolar plates are made from either metal foils or molded
carbon composites. Metal plates can be produced by high-speed, low-cost forming
techniques, but must be made from expensive, corrosion resistant materials.
Carbon bipolar plates are made from inexpensive precursors but are manufactured
by processes which scale poorly. This project aims to demonstrate that a bipolar
plate can be produced from a novel, low-cost, carbon-based sheet utilizing
forming techniques analogous to those used for producing metallic bipolar
plates. The effort focuses on optimizing the carbon sheet for low hydrogen
permeability, demonstrating that flow channels can be stamped into the sheets,
and quantifying functionality and durability by testing in small scale fuel
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.