* 2208390
* Synergizing Enzyme and Encapsulation Engineering to Develop Superoptimal Biocatalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Nikhil Nair, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2025
* USD 583,993.00

Enzymes are proteins that promote chemical reactions. They can produce biofuels,
chemicals, and medicines. They can be designed to perform well under unnatural
conditions. Design efforts usually result in trade-offs between properties. For
example, increasing enzyme stability often results in reduced activity. A
primary objective of the project is to evaluate a new design strategy. This
strategy might improve certain properties without degrading others. The strategy
combines a computational approach with a novel starting material. This work will
also support recruitment and engagement of undergraduate researchers and
underrepresented groups through hands-on research, workshops, and
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this work is to develop a
“super-optimal” biocatalytic system where enzymes can operate beyond their
characterized optimal temperatures, turnover frequency (TOF, kcat), and
conversion. Achieving this requires enzyme engineering to directly modify their
catalytic properties and encapsulation to alter stability and substrate and
product transport rates and partitioning. The project will use a
4-methylideneimidazole-5-one (MIO)-containing amino acid ammonia-lyases (XAL) as
a model enzyme. Three different hypotheses will be tested. The first is that
novel enzyme activity can be achieved by relaxing stability criteria during
engineering. The second is that MIO-containing XAL enzymes can accept non-
aromatic substrates. The third is that an engineered encapsulation system can
enhance enzyme stability, reaction rates, and conversion. A directed evolution
workflow will identify XAL variants with high activity. Stability requirements
will be relaxed during directed evolution. Identifying variants with activity on
non-cognate amino acid substrates will be another objective. XAL enzymes have
never previously been engineered to act on non-aromatic substrates. The enzyme
engineering work will use a deep mutational scanning (DMS)-guided experimental
workflow as well as computational modeling. Encapsulations for enzymes to
enhance their stability, reaction rate, and product yield will be designed and
evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.