* 2208775
* SBIR Phase II:  Preventing Pneumothorax During Lung Biopsy Using a Novel Hydrogel
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* James Wilkie, PNEUMONIX MEDICAL INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve patient outcomes, and reduce the
morbidity and costs associated with lung collapse (pneumothorax) during computed
tomography (CT)-lung biopsies used for screening lung cancer. Over 400,000 CT-
guided lung biopsies are performed in the US, and more than 1.2 million
worldwide. Management and treatment of symptomatic pneumothorax often requires
multi-day hospital stays and costs on average of $15,000 per patient and $1.3
billion yearly worldwide. Preventing pneumothorax may increase access to lung
cancer screenings by de-risking CT-guided lung biopsies and allowing smaller
ambulatory surgery centers in remote geographies to perform the screening
procedure. Currently, physicians collect limited biopsy samples due to the
increased risk of pneumothorax with multiple biopsy passes. Preventing
pneumothorax may allow physicians to collect a greater number of biopsy samples
and provide sufficient tissue to personalize the cancer treatment and improve
patient outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project is developing a novel biosealant that will reduce or
eliminate pneumothorax. Pneumothorax — a collapsed lung - is the most common
complication of computed tomography (CT)-guided lung biopsies, occurring in
20-40% of all CT-guided lung biopsies. The focus of the current investigation is
to evaluate and demonstrate the possibility of using a biosealant and delivery
device to seal needle tracts to prevent pneumothorax before it occurs, thereby
filling a large gap in today’s solutions. Phase I data supports an injectable
hydrogel formulation that successfully prevented pneumothorax in animal studies.
In this Phase II project, the team seeks to refine the formulation for improved
surgical performance and validate it with an animal model to demonstrate both
efficacy and safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.