* 2208779
* SBIR Phase I:  Grid-Scale Marine Renewable Energy Technology Unlocked by Cost Reduction Innovations
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Rodrigo Griesi, NEPTUNYA OCEAN POWER LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2023
* USD 255,052.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a novel mixed-mode (wind, wave,
current) ocean energy converter that aims to be an improvement over the state-
of-the-art offshore wind turbine design. This project will clarify design
specifications to target a low-cost product with production scalability. Markets
with the largest opportunity to benefit from this solution include US grid
power, remote US islands (Puerto Rico, Guam, Hawaii, US Virgin Islands), other
remote islands in the Pacific and Caribbean, and dispatchable power sources for
emergency power generation like the Department of Defense. The environmental
benefit of advancing the design of renewable energy converters and reducing the
initial investments required by offshore clean energy may positively impact both
the scope and the timeline for adoption of ocean renewables in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will develop an efficient
energy converter that drastically lowers the cost per installed unit through
reduced weight of product components, onshore assembly, simplified installation,
a lower center of gravity, and by achieving a storm rating. When coupled with
offshore energy storage, this technology has the potential to unlock energy
capture in ocean sites further offshore than is presently feasible. This project
builds upon initial concept modeling and a 1/20 scale prototype construction,
which validates the weight/power ratio, device stability, and comprehensive
analytical evidence for commercial feasibility. Keeping the final cost-to-
kilowatt low, while optimizing the overall design will be the major technical
focus of the work plan, along with mitigating strategies for the risk of severe
weather survivability. The proposed research will approach the design of each
component individually with a focus on reducing cost and weight, while
optimizing strength and output. Through the construction and testing of a
proposed prototype, the team will conduct detailed analyses on scalability,
performance, and cost factors that are critical for
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.