* 2208042
* Conference: 2022 Intrinsically Disordered Proteins GRS
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Alexander Chin, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 12/31/2022
* USD 6,000.00

The 2022 Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Intrinsically Disordered Proteins
(IDPs) in Les Diablerets, Switzerland on June 25-26, 2022. This will be the
fourth of a series of biannual conferences primarily attended by a diverse group
of graduate students and postdocs. This seminar will bring together trainees
from a wide range of disciplines to discuss current directions in the IDP field,
as well as examine the interdisciplinary experimental and conceptual demands of
contemporary IDP research. The GRS provides an ideal setting to facilitate
international and interdisciplinary collaboration. It will also provide key
networking opportunities, as well as allowing a range of different perspectives
to be discussed and compared - a key aspect for such a broad and diverse field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2022 IDP GRS is focused on understanding how life
harnesses disorder with the overarching theme of investigating emergent
phenomena of intrinsically disordered proteins in living systems, and the ways
that new insights in their biological functions have enabled their study and
technological exploitation. The program will feature ten oral presentations
accompanied by informal and formal discussions, as well as two poster sessions
in which all participants are expected to participate. The meeting will feature
a small number of attendees (up to 60 participants). The presentations will be
divided into four sessions. The first session (IDPs from theory to design) will
focus on current theory and theory-driven advances in understanding IDPs,
including experimental approaches whose hypotheses are motivated by computation
or simulation driven insight. The second session (IDPs and biological order
across length scales) will focus on the emergent self-organizing properties of
IDPs, including their ability to form materials such as non-membrane-bound
biomolecular condensates. The third session (IDPs across the tree of life) will
highlight the breadth of IDPs function from diverse clades, focusing on their
evolution and variety of functional milieus. The final session will consist of a
career panel focusing on careers in academic science designed to help trainees
become informed on scientific careers external to traditional academic
positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.