* 2208809
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: The Microbiome as a Facilitator of Adaptive Plasticity under Rapid Environmental Change
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Samantha Fontaine, Fontaine, Samantha S
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 01/31/2026
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Given the threat of global climate change, it
is important to understand how animals respond and evolve when faced with rapid
changes in their environments. Phenotypic plasticity, which occurs when an
individual adjusts its physiology in response to environmental conditions, can
help animals deal with increasing temperatures. When animals face a high degree
or variable amount of environmental change, they may evolve an increased
capability for plasticity. Further, microbial communities (bacteria, fungi,
etc.) that live in animal gastrointestinal tracts can influence animal
physiology and could impact their hostâ€™s ability to respond to changing
environments. In this project, the Fellow will monitor evolution in heat
tolerance plasticity of anole lizards after recent and rapid increases to the
temperature of their environment. Additionally, the Fellow will determine if
microbial communities in the gut have facilitated aspects of this adaptation.
This research will help elucidate how interactions between hosts and microbes
shape organismal responses to changing climates, which may help protect
vulnerable species. The Fellow will also work to disseminate scientific findings
to the public while mentoring undergraduate students from backgrounds
underrepresented in STEM disciplines on independent research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage an ongoing field
evolution experiment in which Panamanian slender anole lizards have been
transplanted from cool, mainland environments, to island environments which are
often significantly warmer than the mainland, ancestral population. In this
system, the Fellow will determine whether lizards in the warmest and most
thermally variable island environments have evolved a greater capacity for heat
tolerance plasticity compared to lizards in cooler environments. Further, the
Fellow will determine if bacterial taxa in the gut are associated with increased
host heat tolerance plasticity and if probiotic inoculations of these bacteria
increase lizard plasticity and fitness in warm island environments. As a result
of this project, the Fellow will gain expertise in field-based evolutionary and
ecological experiments, physiology, microbiology, and computational biology. The
Fellow will also mentor undergraduate researchers in the United States and
Panama while assisting them in presenting their work on a popular live-action
science show which is viewed by a large and diverse international
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.