* 2208470
* Efficient Solver Algorithms for Graphical Processing Units
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Timothy Warburton, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2025
* USD 278,632.00

The extensive use of graphical processing units (GPUs) for computer simulations
is transforming large-scale simulations. With algorithms that run at a good
fraction of peak performance, simulations that recently were only within reach
for large multinational companies and national labs are now available even to
small start-up companies. Unfortunately, it is not easy to write algorithms that
can exploit the peak performance of GPUs. This project focuses on linear
solvers, which generally account for a very large fraction of simulation time,
with the goal of improving efficiency on GPU-based architectures. More
specifically, the project aims to combine a range of techniques to reduce memory
usage and data movement (which is time-consuming on GPUs), better initial
guesses and better stopping criteria (to halt intermediate computations earlier
at an appropriate precision), and dynamic updates to solver parameters to
improve efficiency. Applications targeted in this project are primarily in
computational fluid dynamics, but also include inverse problems and large-scale
topology optimization. The latter plays a fundamental role in the development of
new micro-structure/meta materials, their use in the design of optimal
structures, and their manufacturing. The project will involve a graduate
research assistant and a postdoc. The project will also develop a new graduate
course that combines elements of numerical linear algebra, numerical ordinary
and partial differential equations, and GPU computing, all with a focus on high
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves developing iterative
solvers for large-scale problems suitable for graphics processing unit (GPU)
based architectures. The work aims to thoroughly reevaluate solver architecture
to ensure that every part is optimized for GPUs, exposing massive fine grain
parallelism in every component, maximizing throughput at every level of the GPU
memory hierarchy, and minimizing data movement. This project focuses on
algorithmic development that combines and analyzes three key strategies: mixed
precision variants and inexact matrix-vector products and smoothers; computing
better initial guesses and more effective stopping criteria and indicators; and
dynamic solver optimization and flexible preconditioning strategies. The results
will be tested on benchmarks developed by the Department of Energy's Center for
Efficient Exascale Discretizations and similar benchmarks to be developed during
this project. The theoretical underpinnings from this project will allow these
solver strategies to have substantial impact beyond the immediate goals of this
project. The open-source algorithms and software developed for this project will
be made freely available to a wide group of potential
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.