* 2208999
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: Rules and Strategies of Plant Microbiomes Under Global Change
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Alonso Favela, Favela, Alonso
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Global environmental change widely affects a
broad number of species, from individual cells to entire ecosystems.
Environmental disruptions such as warming, drought, and nutrient pollution can
trigger changes in both plants and microbes. However, how global change might
alter the interaction between these different life forms is not well studied. To
fill that knowledge gap, this project will test new theory on plant-microbe
associations and use the information from this study to make better predictions
about ecosystems experiencing climate change. To broaden participation in
science, the fellow will lead workshops to empower diverse communities with the
tools to understand global change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will
investigate microbial yield, resource acquisition, stress tolerance, and
interaction traits in a tradeoff framework as a Rule of Life, and will apply
this tradeoff theory to predict microbial assembly and function across several
plant-associated environmental contexts at the Loma Ridge Global Change
Experiment in Irvine, CA. Using a combination of theoretical and experimental
approaches, the research will address whether trait tradeoffs exist at the
microbial genomic level, if microbiome assembly is determined by environmental
selection on traits, and if life history strategies predict ecological
functioning in a changing environment. This type of molecular-theoretical-
modeling approach could be applied across systems from humans to soil
microbiomes. This approach can reveal how underlying microbial genomic
information and ecology relate to microbiome assembly and function. This
integrated research bridges theory, molecular data, and ecosystem processes to
generate results with practical value for climate change mitigation and
adaptation. Training objectives include building expertise in global change
ecology, developing computational and theoretical skills, and practicing
inclusive teaching and mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.