* 2208816
* Conference: The 38th Annual Interdisciplinary Plant Group Symposium:  Enhancing the Resilience of Plant Systems to Climate Change
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2023
* David Braun, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/28/2023
* USD 14,820.00

Plants sustain life on Earth, but are threatened by global environmental change.
Increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere have caused
rapid changes in climate. Understanding how plants respond to the combination of
elevated carbon dioxide, warming temperatures, and more variable precipitation
is crucial towards developing more resilient crops, more efficient agricultural
systems, and determining how natural ecosystems will cope with rapidly evolving
environmental conditions to aid in conservation efforts. Developing pathways for
mitigating and adapting to climate change is a grand challenge facing society,
and for which the plant science community will play a central role to ensure
food, water, and energy security. The purpose of the University of Missouri
Interdisciplinary Plant Group’s 38th Annual Symposium, which has the theme
Enhancing the Resilience of Plant Systems to Climate Change, is to bring
together world-leading experts from diverse disciplines to educate the
scientific community on the opportunities to develop innovative mitigation
strategies to adapt plants to climate change. A major emphasis of the symposium
is the scientific program that fosters the development of early career
scientists (e.g., students and postdoctoral fellows), particularly those from
underrepresented groups, through learning and networking opportunities.
Additionally, the exposure to interdisciplinary research and the interactions
with scientists from diverse research backgrounds will be an invaluable
experience. Instilling the virtues of interdisciplinary collaboration early in
students’ careers will provide broad impacts to society by equipping the next
generation of scientists with the mindset and approach needed to tackle big
societal challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants sustain life on Earth and human
civilization by providing oxygen, food, fiber, fuel, and innumerable ecosystem
services. Climate change poses a grave threat to plants and thus life on Earth.
Enhancing fundamental scientific knowledge of plant environmental responses, and
predictions of how plants will respond to the combination of elevated carbon
dioxide concentrations, warmer temperatures, and more variable precipitation are
critical elements of mitigation and adaptation strategies. The development of
novel plants with enhanced stress tolerance and/or yields is needed to maintain
food security. Moreover, projecting the future climate is dependent on
biosphere-atmosphere interactions, which is highly reliant on accurate
representation of plant environmental responses in models. The scope of the
challenge is large, and magnified by the need for strong interdisciplinary
research efforts. The 38th University of Missouri Interdisciplinary Plant
Group’s Annual Symposium: Enhancing the Resilience of Plant Systems to Climate
Change, will bring together preeminent experts at the intersections of
disciplines and diverse scales ranging from molecules to ecosystems, to educate
the scientific community on the opportunities to develop innovative mitigation
strategies and to adapt plants to climate change. A major goal of the symposium
is creating learning and networking opportunities for students and postdoctoral
fellows, particularly those from underrepresented groups. The exposure to
interdisciplinary research will be an invaluable experience. Furthermore,
instilling the virtues of interdisciplinary collaboration early in students’
careers will provide broader impact to society by equipping the next generation
of scientists with the mindset and approach needed to tackle big societal
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.