* 2208794
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Adaptive, Human-centric Demand-side Flexibility Coordination At-scale in Electric Power Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2022,12/31/2022
* Vijay Gupta, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 12/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

Active user participation in large-scale infrastructure systems, while
presenting unprecedented opportunities, also poses significant challenges for
the operator. One such example is electric power distribution systems, where the
massive integration of distributed energy resources (DERs) and flexible loads
motivates new decision-making paradigms via demand response through user
engagement. This project introduces a novel approach for intelligent decision
making in power distribution systems to efficiently leverage flexible demand
commitments in highly uncertain and stochastic environments. The project goals
are to (1) develop analytics required to enable actionable demand-side
flexibility from several small consumers by adequately representing their
constraints regarding electricity usage and their interactions with the system
and the energy provider; and (2) develop a prototype for demand-side
coordination using an open-source testbed for distribution systems management
and evaluate the proposed algorithms with real-world utility data. Successful
completion of this project will provide solutions to adaptive and smart
infrastructure systems in which passive users turn into active participants. For
the demand response focus here, this project will enable high levels of
penetration of flexible loads and DERs economically through the transformation
of grid operation from load following to supply following. The results from this
project will provide valuable guidance to policymakers and electric utilities in
managing aggregator-driven markets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central aim of
this proposal is to enable the demand-side participation of many small customers
in a distribution grid and solve for an interface between customers and an
energy provider. The proposed architecture follows a two-level structure: a home
energy management system (HEMS) providing a home-level interaction between the
consumer and the HEMS, and a feeder-level interaction between the HEMS and the
demand-response provider. Research along two thrusts will be proposed: (1)
learning-based control to achieve home-level flexibility upon learning and
incorporating customer constraints and preferences into the decision-making
process; and (2) game-theoretic constructs to aggregate and coordinate the home-
level flexibility at the network-level in a constrained environment with unknown
customer utility functions. Technical innovations at the HEMS-customer interface
will include automata learning-based algorithms used by HEMS to learn customersâ€™
temporally evolving energy usage constraints, and reinforcement learning
algorithms to satisfy temporal constraints while optimizing the cost of
electricity consumption. At the provider-HEMS interface, technical innovations
will include a new mean field based model of customers that allows the provider
to interact with only a few customer classes, and a Stackelberg game formulation
that explicitly incorporates network congestion
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.