* 2208029
* PM: Cavity-based Atomic Gravimeter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Holger Mueller, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2027
* USD 312,780.00

Applying the principles of quantum mechanics holds promise to make extremely
precise measurements, beyond the capabilities of more traditional methods.
However, unwanted interactions of the quantum measurement device with the
environment negate the advantages of quantum measurement in a process known as
decoherence. One particularly interesting class of quantum measurement devices
are atom interferometers. To avoid unwanted decoherence, they are usually
performed with particles in free fall, but the available height limits these
setups to time scales below 3 seconds. This project builds on an alternative
approach, suspending atoms in a laser beam that forms a periodic, attractive
potential for the atoms. The aim is to realize coherences for as long as several
minutes, and thereby realize the most sensitive atomic device to measure
gravity. This will then be applied to fundamental research in gravitational
physics. In addition, the research will have broader impacts in contributing to
UC Berkeley's efforts to educate a "quantum workforce" by offering hands-on
training to undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal builds on the previous demonstration of 20-second coherences in a
lattice-hold atom interferometer using an optical lattice formed by a resonant
laser beam inside an optical resonator. Based on the observation that lowering
the atom temperatures strongly increases the coherence, longer coherence times
will be achieved by upgrading the experiment with a Bose-Einstein condensed
(BEC) atomic sample. The next step will be to test whether the strongly reduced
atomic temperature will lead to minutes of coherence time and a sensitivity of
up to 2 nano-g in one second of integration time (where g is the earth's
acceleration of free fall), realizing the worldâ€™s most sensitive atomic
gravimeter. If this is successful, it will form the basis for the proposed test
of the gravitational Aharonov-Bohm effect, in which a miniaturized test mass
will form a "w"-shaped gravitational potential. Atomic wave packets will be
brought to two points at which the potential does not apply forces on the atoms,
and the Aharonov-Bohm induced phase shift will be
recorded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.