* 2208924
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Genomic-Phenomic Convergence of Andean and Himalayan Elevational Migrant Birds
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jessie Williamson, Williamson, Jessie L
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2025
* USD 207,000.00

________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Th
is action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2022,
Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing Interactions
Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of Rules of Life in
innovative ways. Elevational niche-shift migration is an uncommon behavior
involving seasonal elevational shifts of 2,000 meters or more. This behavior,
which has evolved in at least 30 families of birds, illustrates extreme seasonal
physiological flexibility, whereby certain populations can acclimatize to
environments that differ starkly in temperature, pressure, air density, UV
exposure, and communities of interacting species. The fellow will investigate
how parallel evolution of bird genomes, in conjunction with phenotypic
flexibility, may have shaped repeated evolution of elevational niche-shift
migration across the Andes and Himalayas. The fellow will consider the causes
and consequences of elevational niche-shift migration from the perspectives of
ecology, evolution, and physiology, and at various spatial and phylogenetic
scales of comparison. The project will generate valuable museum specimens that
include frozen tissues, as well as detailed data on genomes, physiology, and
migration. This research will provide understanding of how animals can cope with
and adjust to profound environmental change that is experienced during the
lifetime of individuals.&lt;br/&gt;Comparative biology using phylogenies becomes
enormously powerful when genome or transcriptome sequences are combined with
diverse trait and performance data. This approach can reveal mechanisms that
underpin physiology, behavior, and many aspects of biodiversity. The fellow will
sample species from across the avian phylogeny and use whole-genome data to test
for predictable patterns of molecular evolution in bird populations that undergo
elevational niche-shift migration in the Andes and Himalayas, respectively. As a
second comparative test, the fellow will assess the degree to which permanent
high-altitude resident species undergo parallel or anti-parallel evolution with
species that migrate to high altitudes seasonally. In the field, the fellow will
manipulate partial pressure of oxygen to quantify transcriptomic plasticity
among low-altitude residents, high-altitude residents, and elevational migrant
species, and will evaluate whether elevational shifts predict degree of
plasticity. To broaden the impact of the research, the fellow will: 1) mentor
and train undergraduate students from underrepresented groups; 2) teach specimen
preparation workshops to students and researchers in Peru; 3) contribute to
natural history collections growth, infrastructural and procedural upgrades, and
outreach efforts at the Cornell University Museum of Vertebrates and Centro de
Ornitolog√≠a y Biodiversidad; and 4) publish popular articles that improve the
accessibility of complex evolutionary phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.