* 2208904
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Form and Function of a water specialist orb weaver: From Molecules to Biomechanics
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Angela Alicea-Serrano, Alicea-Serrano, Angela M
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 01/31/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Spiders build
webs using different silk types with distinct functionalities, including strong
and tough dragline silk to intercept and stop prey, reusable glue that sticks to
prey, and durable attachment disks that anchor silk to substrates. Despite great
interest in these properties, spider silk performance, especially in the context
of web architecture, is well-studied in few species. Atypical webs in
challenging habitats help to reveal how natural selection has modified silks for
different applications. This project will advance knowledge of the functional
links between silk structure, mechanics and evolutionary ecology, and will
expand the range of possible silk applications from single threads to thread
networks, as well as glues that could even stick to water surfaces. This study
will also prepare the fellow for an independent research career, recruit
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups, and will make spider silk
research widely accessible to public audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Life at
the air-water interface is a fundamental challenge for small animals. The spider
Wendilgarda clara uses an unusual, reduced, horizontal orb web anchored to the
water surface of streams to catch floating prey. Hunting at the water interface
potentially requires the evolution of unique architecture and chemistry for
attachment discs anchoring to water and the evolution of novel proteins to
enable prey capture using single strands of silk in webs. The objectives of this
project are: (1) to determine how Wengilgarda webs attach to water through silk
chemistry, spigot morphology, and behavior; (2) to understand how silk material
properties and web shape interact during prey capture; and (3) to characterize
the structure and evolution of Wendilgarda web silk proteins. The work
integrates cutting-edge molecular and biomechanics tools to link silk
performance from proteins to whole webs in nature. The project broadens
participation by recruiting undergraduates from local universities in
Massachusetts and Ohio, as well as undergraduate and high school students from
public schools in Puerto Rico. Field work, project progress and results will be
disseminated by social media and will also promote biomaterial development,
since attachment disc silk shows great potential for developing strong, robust
superglues that could stick to water surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.