* 2208818
* Conference: Nineteenth Exotic Beam Summer School (EBSS2022)which will be held at  Notre Dame University, Notre Dame, Indiana from June 6 - 10, 2022
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Christopher Wrede, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 05/31/2023
* USD 5,000.00

This award provides support for students to participate in the Nineteenth Summer
School on Exotic Beam (EBSS) Physics at Notre Dame University, June 6 - 10,
2022. The school is designed for graduate students, senior undergraduate
students who are actively involved in research and postdocs (within 2 years of
their degree). The school will consist of morning lectures and hands-on
activities in the afternoons. Students will also have an opportunity to present
their research. The aim of the summer school is to educate the next generation
of scientists who will drive the research at the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams
(FRIB) when it comes online and other existing rare isotope facilities. In years
to come, substantial progress in low-energy nuclear physics will have a broad
impact on society, ranging from our understanding of the origin of the elements
to the enhancement of national security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous sessions
of these summer schools have had broad participation of under-represented
minorities, with approximately 30% of the participants of the previous four
summer schools being female. The organizers of the Eighteenth EBSS will continue
the use of accepted best practices to increase diversity and have an inclusive
summer school&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.