* 2208939
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: Understanding microbiome impact on plant performance in a warming climate.
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Hannah McMillan, McMillan, Hannah Mary
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Stressors such as high temperature, drought,
and salt can lead to reduced crop yields and billions of dollars of crop loss
each year. To feed a growing global population, innovative new agricultural
methods must be developed to improve plant stress tolerance and crop yield. One
emerging method to meet these goals and increase crop performance in a warming
climate is through design and application of climate-selected microbial
communities; however, we currently have little basic understanding of how
existing microbial communities (microbiomes) influence plant performance at
elevated temperature. Through this proposed research, the fellow will
investigate how microbial communities change inside or on the surface of a plant
at elevated temperature, and the impact those changes have on plant health. In
parallel, the fellow will work to improve food security through the Campus
Pantry Collaborative (CPC). The CPC provides a direct outlet to share scientific
findings from this project with a non-scientific audience and an opportunity to
bridge the gap between social and scientific efforts to improve food
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines molecular, multi-omic, and
mathematic modeling approaches to address knowledge gaps in “temperature-
microbiome-plant” triangular interactions and reveal underlying principles of
emergent plant and microbiome function(s) in warming conditions. Previous
research suggests that microbiomes can perform specific functions in defined
abiotic conditions. Separate findings show that plant physiology, development,
and phenotype can be dramatically influenced by abiotic factors, such as
elevated temperature. By simultaneously examining changes in microbial
composition and plant performance at elevated temperature this project has the
potential to reveal new principles of host-microbiome-environment interactions
that could apply even beyond plant systems. Additionally, this research will be
used to improve current predictive models for microbiome changes that can be
directly tested in crop species. Through this project, the fellow will develop a
multidisciplinary research skill set and will gain additional skills in
scientific mentoring and lab management. The fellow will also refine these
skills through involvement with the CPC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.