* 2208201
* SBIR Phase II:  Rapid-scanning Ultrafast Imaging Microscope for Material Inspection
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Eric Martin, MONSTR SENSE TECHNOLOGIES, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will address the
widespread industry challenge of improving yield in compound semiconductor
device production. Compound semiconductors with a wide bandgap are needed for
high power devices in electric vehicles (EVs), high frequency components in 5G
electronics, and energy-efficient displays. The compound semiconductor market,
valued at $36+ billion in 2022, has increased recently with growing consumer
demand for EVs. The annual growth rate of silicon carbide (SiC) semiconductors,
the most prominent devices, is estimated at over 20%. Despite the wide-scale
production of these components in an industry that expects near perfection in
manufacturing, the current yield of power electronic components is less than
50%. Poor yield results largely from an inability to adequately inspect
substrates and epitaxial wafers used for power electronics. Instead, the
industry currently relies on inspection tools with poor defect selectivity or
destructive methods that can only provide statistical information about the
defects in a wafer batch. To increase wafer yield, the team will develop a new
type of optical inspection tool for selectively measuring defects in every
wafer. If successful, this novel inspection technology will enable the industry
to help drive down costs and increase performance of energy-efficient power
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is the
novel way in which technology developed for use in fundamental science is being
applied to rapid semiconductor inspection. The proposed method, called ultrafast
imaging, uses the nonlinear optical response of a semiconductor induced by an
ultrafast laser to isolate defects that measurably impact the electronic
structure of the semiconductor. Though the semiconductor industry has typically
focused on measuring morphology to find defects, measurement of compound
semiconductors requires a tool that is sensitive to the electronic structure.
This project will validate ultrafast imaging through benchmark testing against
industry standards and develop an easy-to-use device for getting this technology
into the hands of manufacturers. Partner manufacturing and inspection companies
will provide inspection data and corresponding wafers, allowing correlation of
ultrafast imaging defect measurements with data provided by other industry
tools. Additionally, the team will develop and demonstrate an easy-to-use
commercial product for user facilities and industrial research and development
facilities, another essential step in the development of a high-throughput
inspection tool. This benchtop product will not only improve current
semiconductor technologies but will also be useful for scientists to
characterize the next generation of semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.