* 2208120
* SBIR Phase I:  Combining Machine Learning with Clinical Expertise to Assess and Mitigate Risk in Healthcare
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* James Levett, PRESAJ, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 05/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will improve health care outcomes associated
with complex procedures. Approximately 1 in 7 major surgical procedures in the
US is associated with a medical complication, totaling more than 4 million
complications and $80 billion in costs per year. Many more complications occur
in non-surgical settings. This project will use machine learning to combine
proven engineering principles with clinical expertise to identify and address
specific risks for each procedure, care facility, and patient (accounting for
high-impact risk factors ranging from diabetes to social determinants of
health). This technology will augment existing standardized, outcome-oriented
quality-improvement tools with cost-effective customized, process-oriented tools
in a novel way, with an envisioned initial application for the ~5,100 community
hospitals in the US. A modest improvement of 1% of complications would annually
reduce costs by nearly $1 billion and will save 4,500+
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project will use a systems-based approach to examine process-level risk in
healthcare. Big data in healthcare is inconsistently structured and not
optimized to directly improve patient outcomes. The large datasets for most
procedures provide only high-level conclusions regarding risk; they do not
pinpoint the specific steps in provider workflow with high risk or the role of
external factors, such as comorbidities or facility age. This project will
determine the feasibility of using machine learning supervised by experienced
clinicians to assess risk using principles from Failure Modes and Effects
Analysis. The project will develop a proof-of-concept machine-learning system
that uses a proprietary risk taxonomy and modifiers to combine national, state,
facility, and actuarial datasets to generate risk priority numbers for each step
for a service line. This system will then be applied to coronary artery bypass
graft surgery to assess its validity and clinical value. Monte Carlo simulations
and clinician focus groups using a Likert scale will determine the significance
of the results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.