* 2208745
* SBIR Phase I:  Additive Manufacturing for Soft Tissue Repair by Three-Dimensional Microfiber Fabrication (3DMF)
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Michael Francis, ASANTE BIO LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project isto improve the outcomes for implant procedures
for soft tissue healing. More than 2 million musculoskeletal repair surgeries
are performed in the U.S. each year, representing a $5 B market. Instead of
conventional 3D printing that completely melts or fuses synthetic biopolymers
into solid and rigid objects, this project will develop a novel 3D microfiber
printing process project to rapidly and economically produce clinical-grade
printed implants with better performance. This technology will offer a
significant reduction in the cost of goods and a faster product development
cycle. The novel implants will be available in markets wherein existing products
are prohibitively expensive, including ambulatory surgical centers, wherein most
of these surgical procedures are performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will progress the design and
engineering for a novel 3D microfiber printer that can assemble clinically
relevant synthetic biopolymer filaments into fibrous, flexible, high
void/porosity implants to promote soft tissue healing. This approach offers
improvements in quality, cost, speed, and manufacturability. This project will
explore the material strength, cytocompatibility, and biocompatibility using
industry-standard testing. Expected technical results include quantitative
measures for a controlled fibrous 3D printing method compatible with diverse
synthetic biopolymers and across clinical indications. This project will
optimize the hardware engineering, polymer, and print
configuration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.