* 2208387
* NSF-BSF: Saturation and Quantum Coherence: Gearing up for EIC
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Alexander Kovner, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2025
* USD 314,030.00

Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) is the theory describing the fundamental
interactions between quarks and gluons, the fundamental constituents of the
atomic nucleus. In the QCD framework, nuclear physicists are studying the
behavior of matter under extreme conditions of temperature, pressure, and
density using highly energetic collisions between particles accelerated at high-
energy. The latter is the focus of intense experimental research using high-
energy particle beams at leading particle physics collider facilities such as
the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN and the future Electron Ion Collider
(EIC). Detailed comparison between theoretical predictions and experimental
observations are critical for the success of those scientific programs. In this
context, the PI and his collaborators will study the saturation of the gluonic
density in hadrons at high energy that is being investigated experimentally
using Ultra Peripheral Collisions (UPC) at the LHC and will be studied using
Deeply Inelastic Scattering (DIS) on nuclei at the future EIC. This project will
provide training opportunities for students. The PI will also organize a summer
school for intermediate and advanced graduate students on physics topics
specific to this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to study
correlations in hadronic wave function at high energy using extension of the
methods currently available to the community. In particular by adapting the
quantum mechanical Born-Oppenheimer approximation to systems with continuum of
time scales, one should be able to improve on the understanding as well as
accuracy of the high energy evolution. Practical implementation of such a
procedure is one of the goals of the current project. Another interesting
question is dependence of correlated particle production on the virtuality of
the photon starting from UPC to highly virtual DIS. Probing the transition
between the regime dominated by quantum coherence effects to the dominance of
classical color domains is a goal of this project. A study of the relation
between the entanglement in the hadronic wave function and possible Eigenstate
thermalization behavior after a high energy collision, described by a quench is
also our goal. The focus here will be on the behavior of semi hard modes which
have quasi thermal distribution already in the precollision projectile wave
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.