* 2208411
* Evaluating the resilience of semi-arid vegetation and ecosystem function during the late Holocene in the south-central Andes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jose Capriles Flores, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 544,487.00

Over 30% of the Earthâ€™s surface is classified as arid lands. Arid lands are
vulnerable to small changes in precipitation. People that rely on arid lands are
also vulnerable to changes in precipitation amount and timing. The Andes
Mountains of South America contain arid lands that are one of the most extreme
environments in the world. The region is expected to experience more frequent
severe droughts in the coming decades, causing concern about the impacts on
available natural resources and livelihoods. The goal of this project is to
investigate the climatic and human controls on ecosystems in the arid lands of
the Andes beyond the historical record. This research aims to improve our
ability to predict changes in these ecosystems in the future because of climate
change and land-use pressure. This project is providing training opportunities
for early career scientists to conduct research as well as through training
workshops. This project is also developing an international collaboration to
connect scientists with Indigenous groups and park rangers at the Sajama
National Park in Bolivia. Data generated from this project are archived at the
Neotoma Paleoecology Database and the Global Charcoal
Database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates the resilience of
Andean drylands to climate, fire, and human land-use through the analysis of
fossil plant material recovered from rodent middens and peatland sediment cores.
The resulting data are used to test the hypothesis that human disturbance
coupled with changing climate leads to reduced stability and longer recovery
times of natural ecosystems. Combining paleoecological information from middens
and cores as well as anthropogenic indicators directly derived from the
archaeological record allows reconstruction of ecosystem dynamics. Two sites in
the southcentral Bolivian Andes are studied. Vegetation reconstructions are
combined with fecal biomarkers and human demographic reconstructions to assess
the ecological legacies of past changes to human-land use. This project helps
determine the relationships between climate variability and human activities as
well as the resilience of arid lands over the last few thousand
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.