* 2208895
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Evolution of Increased Parasite Transmission Dispersion
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Hannelore MacDonald, MacDonald, Hannelore A
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2025
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research aims to explain the phenomenon
in epidemics known as transmission dispersion, where most new infections are
transmitted from relatively few infected individuals. For example, roughly 10%
of COVID-19 cases cause 80% of new COVID-19 cases. This variation could be due
to differences among hosts, for example, in how much infected people cough. Most
research to date has focused on variability in host responses to infections.
However, the pathogen itself (e.g., SARS-CoV-2 virus) can also impact
transmission dispersion. For example, distinct strains of pathogens can drive
different numbers of new infections. Increases in the number of new hosts that
pathogens transmit to is commonly a result of adaptive evolution (e.g., new
SARS-CoV-2 variants). The Fellow hypothesizes that evolution can also increase
transmission dispersion when pathogens adapt to variable host populations.
Specifically, pathogens could adapt to specialize on highly infectious hosts.
However, this might come at the cost of transmitting less effectively from the
larger but less-infectious host group. In this way, pathogen adaptation could
further skew transmission events so that most new infections are transmitted
from a minority of infectious hosts. The study’s results will help to predict
when host variability drives the adaptation of pathogens with highly dispersed
transmission; this will help to improve the accuracy of models that predict the
course of epidemics. In addition, the Fellow will develop and teach educational
modules on pathogen ecology and evolution to Philadelphia School System students
with the aim of increasing students’ sense of belonging and confidence in their
abilities in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will determine whether
parasite adaptation increases transmission dispersion by (1) developing
mathematical models to generate theoretical predictions and (2) testing
predictions using an experimental system based on the bacterium E. coli and its
viral pathogen, phage lambda. Through this training, the Fellow will gain
essential skills to establish a combined theoretical and experimental research
program focused on parasite evolutionary ecology and epidemiological dynamics.
Further, the Fellow’s outreach skills will improve by developing and teaching
educational modules on pathogen ecology and evolution to K-12 students that will
increase their confidence in doing science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.