* 2208458
* EAGER: DCL: SaTC: Enabling Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Space Cybersecurity, Policy, and Risks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Patrick Lin, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,538.00

Outer space assets are critical to modern life, such as for GPS positioning,
financial-services connectivity, surveillance of disaster areas, and global
communications. Their strategic importance and physical distance from Earth make
them particularly vulnerable to cyberattacks. This threat increases over time
with technological advances and the accelerating pace of space activities. Much
of these activities are conducted without public comment on cybersecurity risks.
The stakes become even higher given that more space debris could be created by
cyberattacks, either deliberately or unintentionally. These attacks could
threaten safe orbits and launches. Thus, understanding these risk scenarios,
from technical and policy perspectives, is essential to understand and mitigate
cyber vulnerabilities in space. In doing so, the project is a contribution to
national security, economic stability, and public safety.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project offers a broad set of scenarios and taxonomy on how
cyberattacks could occur with space technologies, including novel or rare
threats. Because space law is still under-developed, the study includes an
analysis of the ethical, legal, and policy issues and gaps that arise from
multiple risk scenarios. With a team of ethicists and technologists, the project
is interdisciplinary. The project is also guided through a workshop for
additional domain expertise in space systems architecture, space law, and cyber
law. The goal is to deliver a public report, citizen outreach, and student
learning about space cybersecurity, ethics, and policy. Through this effort, the
project aims to protect the vital space domain from the damage of cyberattacks
that have plagued other domains important to human
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.