* 2208908
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Rachael DeTar, DeTar, Rachael Ann
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2022. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Rachael DeTar is "Plant Organelle RNA Secondary Structure and Post-
Transcriptional Modification". The host institution for the fellowship is the
Colorado State University Biology Department and the sponsoring scientist is Dr.
Daniel Sloan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNAs are often described as intermediary
sets of instructions copied from the genome (DNA) and ferried to the cellular
machinery which produces proteins. However, RNA is more than just a mobile mimic
of genomic DNA - one unique property of RNA is that it is typically single-
stranded, which allows it to fold upon itself into specific 3-D structures based
on the sequence. The structures that RNAs adopt can influence if and how they
are used by the cell to make proteins. RNA folding is often also influenced by
environmental conditions, especially temperature. Thus, RNA folding could be a
built-in switch for changing cell activities in response to the environment. In
some systems such as plant chloroplasts and mitochondria, RNAs can also be
edited so that their sequence reads differently than the genomic DNA. Thus, this
research aims to answer two questions: 1) Does RNA editing affect the secondary
structure of plant mitochondria and chloroplast RNAs? 2) How do changes in RNA
editing, and structure influence a plant’s ability to survive under stressful
conditions? This PGRP fellowship project will investigate these questions using
computational modeling techniques and Next-Generation sequencing in a diverse
array of plants, including crop species. This research is important for society
because it will provide insights into how plants cope with temperature stress on
the molecular level, which will inform the breeding of stress-tolerant crops. In
the short term, this project will have broader impacts on undergraduate
education by initiating an internship program for students with disabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research is to test the
hypothesis that the relationship between post-transcriptional modifications and
RNA secondary structure has fundamentally shaped plant organelle gene expression
and adaptability to abiotic stress. Many RNA editing events in plant organelle
transcriptomes result in non-synonymous changes to transcript codons and revert
amino acid sequence. Yet, it is unclear if these edits would also meaningfully
influence RNA secondary structure. The first experiment will be to run a large-
scale analysis of RNA editing and secondary structure in diverse plant and green
algal lineages to predict if editing events result in conserved RNA secondary
structure in non-coding sequences and at synonymous sites. This will be
accomplished by first cataloging organelle RNA editing sites using preexisting
annotations and publicly available genome and transcriptome data. Then, an array
of structure prediction tools will determine if putative editing events reliably
result in the conserved secondary structure of transcripts across lineages. Next
up, the link between RNA editing, structure, and stress adaptation will be
addressed empirically using secondary structure mapping via DMS-MaPseq on
organelle RNA. This experiment will compare the “editome” and “structurome” of
Arabidopsis thaliana and related extremophiles cold-tolerant Eutrema salsuginum
and heat-tolerant Anastatica hierochuntica grown over a range of temperatures.
Research deliverables including high-resolution organelle transcriptomes and new
computational and empirical methods for RNA secondary structure prediction will
be uploaded to the NCBI Sequence Read Archive or be deposited on the public
science database Zenodo. Keywords: plant organelle, RNA editing, RNA secondary
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.