* 2208962
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: From Genes to Ecosystems: The Genetic Underpinnings and Evolutionary and Ecological Consequences of Alternative Reproductive Tactics
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Madilyn Gamble, Gamble, Madilyn Marisa
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

Fellow's name: Madilyn Gamble&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
2208962&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research title: From genes to ecosystems: the
genetic underpinnings and evolutionary and ecological consequences of
alternative reproductive tactics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sponsoring scientist(s)
and host institution(s): Suzanne Alonzo (University of California, Santa Cruz),
Eric Palkovacs (University of California, Santa Cruz), John Carlos Garza
(National Marine Fisheries Service)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action funds an
NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2022, Integrative
Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing Interactions Between Genomes,
Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship supports research and training of the
fellow that will contribute to the area of Rules of Life in innovative ways. It
is common for animals of the same species to look and act differently from one
another. This is surprising because members of the same species share most of
their genes. Scientists seek to understand how genes and the environment affect
this variation. However, few studies have focused on how genes can affect trait
variation, population dynamics, and ecosystem processes all at once. This
project aims to understand how variation in genes in male Steelhead trout
affects female evolution, population growth, and ecosystem processes. The
results will affect salmon conservation. The project will also broaden
participation in science through the Fellowâ€™s mentorship in programs serving
first-generation and Hispanic undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
research goals of this project are to (1) quantify how the genetic architecture
underlying male alternative reproductive tactics (ARTs) in Steelhead trout
affects female life history, fecundity, and fitness, (2) determine the degree to
which sex-specific effects of ART genotypes resolve intralocus conflict over
length and age at maturity, (3) model how selection on male ARTs might affect
female evolution and population growth rate, and (4) project how selection on
ARTs and the resulting changes in genetic variation, body size, and population
growth alter freshwater ecosystem processes such as nutrient transfer and
sediment transport. Together, these objectives will comprise a model for
predicting how genes underlying a trait with sex-specific variation can affect
the evolution of the other sex, as well as population dynamics and ecosystem
function. The model will be applicable to other salmonid systems and, more
broadly, to any species with genetic variation for sex-specific ARTs. Career
development activities for the Fellow will include attending conferences to
present findings, writing and publishing scientific manuscripts, and mentoring
undergraduate and graduate students through the Center to Advance Mentored,
Inquiry-Based Opportunities (CAMINO) and Doris Duke Scholars programs at the
University of California, Santa Cruz. These programs share a goal of broadening
participation in the fields of ecology, evolutionary biology, and conservation
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.