* 2208903
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Molecular Mechanisms of Immune Programming In Utero
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Enrico Barrozo, Barrozo, Enrico Rey
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This project
reaches beyond the question of whether microbe exposures occur during mammalian
development, and towards advancing the understanding of how microbes prepare a
developing organism for the outside world. Innovative approaches will be used to
test the hypothesis that maternal microbial exposures during development promote
tolerance for beneficial microbes and protect against pathogens. This proposal
fosters the Fellow’s interests in single-cell biology and involves training in
immune system development. This research will generate hypotheses warranting
further investigation, fueling the launch of an independent research career, and
supporting the Fellow’s activities to diversify the
professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central to this research is understanding
the “rules” governing the early immune system by analyzing immune cell
activation and expansion during development. The research utilizes (i) single-
cell technologies to profile immune cells from different compartments, (ii)
spatial transcriptomics to detail microenvironments of tolerance or
inflammation, and (iii) will assess the functionality of distinct immune
programs following an immune challenge. Along with advancing basic scientific
understandings of how the immune system develops, this work may also identify
stages where immunity could be engineered or repaired. The Fellow’s vocation
aligns with the goals of the NSF in increasing minority participation at the
postdoctoral level. Along with mentorship roles, the fellow’s primary avenue for
achieving this is through an elected leadership role as the Engagement Committee
Chair for an institutional Postdoctoral Association. This postdoc-led
organization works towards the mission of creating a feeling of self-belonging,
representing postdocs at the Institution level, and serving the Houston
community. The Fellow leads postdoc community engagement events, which are
paramount to showcasing what today’s scientists look like and what their
scientific investigations entail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.