* 2208237
* Electron and Neutrino Scattering from Light Nuclei
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sabine Jeschonnek, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2025
* USD 94,518.00

The structure of nuclei and of the nucleons which form them is a fascinating
area of basic research with important implications for other areas of science,
e.g. understanding the nature of neutrinos, astrophysics, and for more applied
areas like homeland security. Scattering electron beams from light nuclei
enables us to learn about the structure of nuclei and nucleons, and the strong
interaction which binds the nucleons into nuclei. A major new investment of the
science community is the planned new Electron Ion Collider at the Brookhaven
National Laboratory. Colliding electrons with nuclei has the advantage that
higher energies are reached, and thus more detail can be resolved, than for
fixed target accelerators. Theoretical calculations, however, are more difficult
to perform for a collider experiment. The PI and her collaborators have
developed a framework for an easy way to perform calculations in any frame, and
they are using this to identify the best conditions for various experiments at
the future collider. This project will support both electron and neutrino
scattering experiments performed in the US. The PI will continue to do outreach
in rural northwestern Ohio, and involve interested undergraduate students in
this research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron scattering from light
nuclei has given us many insights on the structure of the nuclear ground state.
High precision experiments performed at Jefferson Lab require an equally high
precision theory. The PI has developed a fully relativistic description of the
D(e,e'p) reaction, including spin-dependent final state interactions. Neutrino
scattering from light nuclei requires many of the same elements used to describe
the electron scattering reactions. In the future, the Electron-Ion Collider will
allow us to explore nuclei at an even larger range of energy and momentum
transfers. The necessary formalism to relate theory calculations performed in
the rest frame through the invariant responses to observables in the collider
frame has been developed by the PI and her collaborators. This formalism is
applied towards the design and analysis of future experiments at Jefferson Lab
and the Electron Ion Collider. Exclusive electron scattering from Helium-3 in a
simple model is investigated to establish the feasibility of these experiments
in a collider and more refined calculations are performed for kinematic regions
that have been identified as promising. In support of Jefferson Lab’s
experimental program, the tensor asymmetry for inclusive electron scattering
from the deuteron is investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.