* 2208383
* STTR Phase I:  An Integrated Biomedical Platform and Custom Algorithm to Optimize Feeding Protocols for Preterm Infants
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Caryn Bradley, BRADLEY, CARYN
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2023
* USD 275,990.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project improves outcomes for preterm infants in
neonatal intensive care units (NICUs). On average 518,000 preterm infants are
born in the US each year and 49% experience difficulty feeding after discharge.
Preterm infants who cannot successfully feed are at increased risk of hospital
readmission. In the US, there are 22,721 NICU beds and the average length of
stay for an infant born less than 32 weeks gestation is 13.2 days. The current
practice is for babies to remain longer in the NICU at an average cost of $7,000
per day and a national cost of more than $26 billion a year. This project
advances a new feeding monitoring system. An estimated 2-day reduction in length
of stay with this device will lower the financial cost of overall neonatal
healthcare expenditure by $8.9 billion annually and will reduce the need for
future medical interventions because infants are discharged with a stronger
early-stage health baseline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project advances NICU care. For infants
admitted to the NICU, successful oral feeding is a prerequisite for discharge
home, but preterm infants often struggle with oral feeding skills, due to
problems coordinating swallowing with breathing. Achieving safe and efficient
oral feeding in preterm infants is challenging because of these
neurodevelopmental immaturities. Feeding progress is therefore limited by
difficulties in maintaining cardiorespiratory stability. The proposed biomedical
platform and clinical algorithm interface uses big data describing breathing
patterns to quantify the synchronization of breathing and swallowing. A precise
method of measuring infant breathing patterns during feeding gives clinicians a
diagnostic tool to better inform decisions related to feeding advancement. This
device provides objective metrics of feeding success and discharge readiness. It
will result in decreased readmissions for failure to thrive, substantially
reducing healthcare utilizations and post-discharge
expenditures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.