* 2208348
* SBIR Phase I: Reactive Cyclic Induction Marine Diesel Emissions Reduction Monitoring and Delivery System Project
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* WALTER SCHULZ, STEC TECHNOLOGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 12/31/2023
* USD 242,890.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is the potential reduction of toxic nitrogen oxides (NOx) and harmful
carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from marine diesel engines. There are
approximately 4 million diesel-powered craft in use globally, emitting
approximately one billion tons of CO2 and 100 million tons of NOx annually. This
project seeks to remove at least 80% of the NOx and 30% of the CO2 from marine
diesel exhaust, contributing to a reduction in both greenhouse gas emissions and
in air pollution that creates health hazards in coastal cities. There is no
alternative, commercially-viable product that reduces CO2 and NOx emissions from
marine diesel engines. The proposed concept seeks to overcome the disadvantages
of competing technologies that are unworkable due to heat and space restraints
in a confined boat engine room. The project may enable boat manufacturers to
meet new international maritime regulations on engine emissions and may
contribute new knowledge related to the engineering of monitoring and delivery
systems for marine and land/vehicle emissions reduction systems. In addition to
environmental benefits, the technology meets a global commercial demand and
creates good paying jobs for an export-oriented US
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a low
thermal electro-emulsification solution to reduce emissions in marine diesel
exhaust, specifically nitrogen oxides (NOx) by 80% to meet the new International
Maritime Organization (IMO) regulations and carbon dioxide (CO2) by 30%. The
technology will be incorporated into a fuel processing system that can be
integrated into existing diesel engines on marine boats. This system will
precisely inject reaction-altering chemicals at the proper time in the
combustion cycle to reach the desired reduction of CO2 and NOx. The system will
also monitor the exhaust stream to ensure no harmful byproducts are discharged
into the marine environment. This work will further develop the understanding of
diesel emissions reduction and may be transferable to other vehicle and land-
based applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.