* 2208289
* Dual Finite Element Methods for Challenging Computations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* JaEun Ku, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2025
* USD 188,904.00

This research project develops a new finite element method(FEM) for the
approximation solutions of partial differential equations. FEMs are powerful
tools in scientific computing and their applications include biomedical
engineering, environmental engineering, material and manufacturing, structural
engineering, and more. While current methods are successfully used for many
problems in these applications, there are plenty of numerically challenging
problems such as interface problems arising from multiphysics and biological
systems, and sign changing problems from the transmission problems with
metamaterials. In addition to advancing knowledge within the field of
computational mathematics, this project will provide new efficient tools for the
problems which current methods have difficulties calculating accurate and
efficient approximations. The success of this project will lead to new
computational methods with a wide variety of applications. This project will
also support education by training graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to develop a new
finite element method for accurate and efficient approximations of dual
variables. For accurate approximations of the dual variables, traditional
numerical methods such as least-squares or mixed FEMs increase the degrees of
freedom significantly, and the resulting algebraic equations could be
indefinite. The proposed research develops a new method that approximates only
the dual variables without approximating the primary variable. This results in a
smaller problem size and the resulting algebraic equations have symmetric and
positive definite matrices. Various error estimates will be developed, including
a posteriori error estimates for adaptive procedures. This dual based FEM shows
superior performance when it is applied to singularly perturbed problems. This
project will address the application of this approach to numerically challenging
problems such as discontinuous coefficient, sign changing problems, linear
elasticity, and Stokes equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.