* 2208573
* SHF: Small: A Chip of Happiness: Device-to-System Developments of Affective Computing for Human-in-the-loop Computer System
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jie Gu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

While the recent technology advancements in artificial intelligence (AI) and
low-power wearable electronics have created tremendous improvements to people’s
lives, there is still a missing element in existing computer systems, namely, a
deep cooperation between user’s personal feeling and the hardware operation of
computing devices. As current developments of AI technology are trending towards
“human-centric computing”, it is time to reshape the role of computing devices
by bringing human’s perception into the loop of the operations. Recently,
research on so-called “affective computing” or emotional AI has shown a
promising new computing paradigm in which the knowledge of users’ affects, e.g.
emotion, are utilized to significantly enhance the quality of service to the
users. Unfortunately, as of today, the support and engagement to human’s real-
time feelings at the hardware level is very little. This project aims at
developing a new class of affective-computing hardware technology where human
affects, e.g. mood, emotions, etc., are being real-time tracked by advanced
microelectronic devices and further incorporated into the operations of modern
computing systems, leading to unprecedented support to people’s daily activities
and enhanced efficiency of computing devices. By linking the advanced computing
hardware with users’ real-time affects, a new generation of intelligent human-
machine interface can be created allowing human to stay at the center of modern
wearable electronic devices. This project will create broad impacts to human
services such as online business, social media, e-learning, healthcare, etc. By
creating advanced lectures, workshops and seminars, significant educational and
training opportunities will also be delivered from this project to college
students and the broader audience. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will take
a big step towards closing the gap between human’s real-time feelings and
operation of modern wearable computing devices. Cross-layer methodology and
techniques will be developed to enable affective computing at the hardware
level, ranging from design of microelectronic devices to data management, from
advanced computing models to system-level software and hardware integration.
More specifically, at the device level, leveraging the recent boom of silicon-
based neural-processor techniques (novel "happiness accelerators") will be
developed enabling real-time affect inference on highly constrained low-power
wearable devices. At the algorithm level, this project will develop advanced
machine-learning models to not only improve the accuracy of affect
classification and related cognition tasks but also enable efficient deployment
of affective computing at ultra-low-power edge devices. Furthermore, at the
architecture level, this project will develop a series of novel affect-based
memory, data and power management techniques to enhance the energy efficiency of
modern computing devices. As a demonstration, this project will use fabricated
silicon chips and compact wearable devices to create advanced affect-driven
computing system providing a new level of human assistance for real-life
applications such as online services, Augmented/Virtual Reality(AR/VR) and
classroom learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.