* 2208182
* Collaborative Research: Modeling and Control of Non-Passive Networks with Distributed Time-Delays: Application in Epidemic Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Milad Siami, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2025
* USD 706,254.00

This research seeks to develop a comprehensive framework for data-driven control
of large-scale networks where time delays and the corresponding complex behavior
play a substantial role. An example of this situation is the ongoing COVID-19
pandemic, where these effects lead to ``reflective" spreading waves, resulting
in hard to predict/control multiple phases of infection spread. To enhance
pandemic preparedness and make healthcare systems and governments ready to
optimally respond to potential future airborne epidemic disease, it is
imperative to generate accurate network models of our connected society and
disease spread. Using such realistic models, optimal control strategies can be
synthesized that take into account the complex behavior caused by time delays in
the network. This project will address this unmet need, which will have a
significant social impact and can help stakeholders design strategies to manage
a pandemic situation. Education is proactively integrated into this project at
all levels, from outreach to pre-college students to graduate training. The
strategy to broaden participation will leverage PIs’ connections to
institutional resources and programs to help recruit students from
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective mitigation of pandemics
spreading over networks requires: (a) unveiling the topology, dynamics and
delays of the underlying network from experimental data; (b) use of this
information to design networks that can robustly minimize the systemic effects
of localized infection foci, while respecting overall minimum traffic
constraints; and (c) synthesizing real-time optimal control laws that adjust
local parameters to prevent the onset of delay-induced echoing waves of pandemic
spread. This research seeks to achieve these objectives by embedding the problem
into a more general one: data-driven control synthesis for networked systems in
the presence of delay-induced non-minimum phase/non-passive behavior, in
scenarios where the interconnection structure of the system may not be perfectly
known a priori. This embedding allows for exploiting a rich knowledge base,
ranging from non-linear identification and semi-algebraic optimization to
passivity-based control of networks, leading to a computationally tractable
framework. Topology identification will be accomplished through an atomic norm
framework. Network synthesis will combine ideas from network control and
occupation measures to design and maintain optimal topologies at a slow time
scale. Real-time optimal control laws will use event-triggered passivation to
prevent delay-induced instabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.