* 2208152
* REM: Biomaterials and Bioprinting Summer (BBS) School
* ENG,EFMA
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Syam Nukavarapu, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 02/29/2024
* USD 109,940.00

This award will enable the Principal Investigator (PI) to support a Biomaterials
and Bioprinting Summer (BBS) school research and mentoring program for
underrepresented minorities students in STEM. The summer school is designed to
provide high school students and undergraduates with hands-on research
experience and focused training and mentoring in the emerging field of tissue
engineering. The hierarchy-based learning environment involves the principle
investigator, graduate students and undergraduates along with new recruits to
develop strategies to design biomaterial structures, create tissues and tissue
interfaces. Participants will be provided with a tool kit of elementary working
knowledge on biomaterials, bioprinting and cells with an intention to build
engineered tissue prototypes and technology. During the summer, the participants
will implement new designs and strategies to develop tissue-based biomaterials
and bio-inks that can be used to develop engineered tissue
prototypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on promoting diversity
in engineering, science and technology and will use a mentorship approach that
involves providing research experience as well as mentoring participants in
professional development, scientific writing, and communications skills
development. The PI and graduate student mentors will co-ordinate the research
and mentoring plans for the participants that will be individually tailored to
each participantâ€™s academic level and skills. Participants of this project will
bring new knowledge and demos of prototypes to the classroom that will serve as
a tool to create awareness in science and engineering technologies. The
immediate benefits would include promotion of STEM careers and address long-term
workforce diversity issues in the biomedical science/ engineering related areas.
This award seeks to implement a successful mentoring program and create
laboratory mentoring demonstrations to attract minority/women students in STEM
careers, with a focus on focus on introducing the many career paths that come
under the broad area of Biomedical Sciences, Engineering, and technology
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.