* 2208848
* Collaborative Research: Compositional and Atomic-Scale Ordering Effects on Aqueous Passivation of Binary BCC and FCC Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Karl Sieradzki, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2025
* USD 424,916.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike stainless steels, many other
metals undergo severe corrosion in wet environments. Corrosion is a destructive
electrochemical reaction that can impose significant human and financial loss in
the aerospace industry and in infrastructure repair (e.g., buildings, bridges,
potable water pipelines, nuclear/conventional power generation and nuclear waste
storage). Corrosion can even limit the lifetime of biomedical implants. When
corrosion resistant metallic alloys are exposed to corrosive agents occurring in
water, they naturally evolve a thin protective surface film only a few
nanometers thick called an oxide. The corresponding corrosion rate, as a result
of metal loss, is less than one micrometer per year resulting in exceptionally
long service lifetimes. The goal of this collaborative research project is to
use simulations and experiments to develop an atomic scale understanding of the
oxide formation process that occurs on alloys. This knowledge will be used to
guide models that inform the design of next generation corrosion-resistant
metallic alloys. This project also includes a range of activities to broaden
participation of underrepresented minorities in science while providing an
opportunity for training in materials electrochemistry and corrosion science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
collaborative project is to develop analytical and numerical aqueous passivation
models of binary alloys and validate them using multimodal experiments, first-
principles-based quantum mechanical models, and kinetic Monte Carlo simulations.
Key parameters to disentangle include contributions from alloy crystal
structure, composition, chemical short-range order, and composition of
electrolyte. The scientific question posed in this research is whether short-
range order can be used as a materials processing knob that can be tuned to
enhance corrosion resistance. The project integrates a variety of specialized
techniques including: (i) Electrochemical techniques of linear sweep voltammetry
and chronocoulometry. (ii) Inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy to
monitor oxidative dissolution of alloy components for correlative analysis with
theoretical predictions. (iii) Characterization of short-range order parameters
using synchrotron light sources. (iv) Ultra-high vacuum scanning probe
microscopy for real-space statistical characterization of short-range order on
alloy single crystal surfaces. (v) Density functional theory-derived interatomic
potentials as inputs for both kinetic Monte Carlo simulations of alloy
passivation and large-scale Monte Carlo renormalization group techniques for
determining the effect of short-range order on site percolation thresholds. The
project also addresses workforce supply needs for securing and modernizing
national infrastructure through three efforts. The first involves students in
interdisciplinary research environments with training in thermodynamics of
alloys, computational modeling, electrochemistry, and corrosion. The second
develops new electrochemical materials courses for undergraduate and graduate
students to improve workforce competencies. The third is a STEAM (STEM plus
Arts) “Material Alchemy” weekend program capable of engaging underrepresented
students in K-9.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.