* 2208750
* SBIR Phase I:  A Radio Frequency Quadrupole Stark Decelerator to Identify Isomers and Conformers and Measure their Effective Dipole Moments
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Demitri Balabanov, MOIRES INSTRUMENTS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will lead to a new type of analytical instrument
and associated businesses, specializing in the identification and
characterization of chemical isomers and their different conformational forms
(conformers). Isomers are molecules with the same constituent atoms but arranged
differently. The identification of isomers and their conformational forms is of
critical importance to pharmaceutical and agrochemical industries since the
metabolites of many medications or agrochemical compounds are often isomers of
one another. Since some of these metabolites may be harmful, safety and efficacy
studies require careful analytical “method development” work to quantitate their
presence in clinical samples, soils, and foodstuffs. Unfortunately, current
analytical methods for identifying molecular isomers are cumbersome, slow, and
involve trial and error work – presenting a significant bottleneck to regulatory
approval. The proposed technology seeks to provide a rapid and robust instrument
for isomer analysis, dramatically reducing pharmaceutical and agrochemical
development costs and extending patent exclusivity sales – while enabling the
experimental identification of conformers for the first time. Access to this new
information has the potential to transform agrochemical ($220 billion total
addressable market (TAM) in 2022) and drug discovery ($82 billion TAM 2022)
sectors, while generating new well-paying, high-tech jobs.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a novel mass
spectrometer that works on neutral molecules rather than ions. It uses high
electric fields to manipulate and distinguish molecules, separating them by the
magnitude of their electrical polarity which, in turn, is highly sensitive to
the molecule’s 3D shape. Molecules may be pushed or pulled by the fields
depending on their orientations in the field and the magnitude of their polarity
(“dipole moment”). Since molecular isomers weigh the same, their identification
via mass spectrometry is complicated and typically requires time-consuming
“method development” work. The proposed instrument aims to reduce this work by
using dipole moments to distinguish all isomers and their conformers in a single
spectrum – with an axis labeled by mass-to-dipole-moment ratio, rather than
mass-to-charge ratio. This technology uses microfabrication techniques to
miniaturize and planarize a previously demonstrated quadrupole device described
in the academic literature, creating an array of microscopic quadrupole
channels. The additional patent-pending deceleration feature, coupled with
velocity selective detection, should result in 2-to-3 orders of magnitude higher
isomer/conformer discrimination capabilities over the literature device.
Finally, this universal detection methodology will allow for continuous
throughput, which is ideal for interfacing with standard analytical
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.