* 2208923
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: Innate immunity could buffer extinction risk in genetically compromised populations
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Megan Barela Hudgell, Barela Hudgell, Megan A
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The long term survival of a species is thought
to be associated with the genetic diversity of that species. In fact, current
conservation efforts for endangered and threatened species work to maintain
genetic diversity within populations in the hopes of increasing their chances
for long term survival. However, recent studies have challenged this idea. The
fellow seeks to understand how the loss of genetic diversity affects the
survival of a species by focusing on the immune system, which allows organisms
to fight off disease. The immune system can be viewed as a complex system that
may shield against losses of diversity at specific genes. The work generated
here will contribute to the understanding of how threatened and endangered
species persist in the face of a rapidly changing environment and will help
clarify genetic management plans aimed at their
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will answer the proposed questions
through bioinformatic and lab experiments focused on Gila trout, (Oncorhynchus
gilae), a threatened fish species that has undergone numerous events leading to
significant loss of genetic diversity within its populations. Diversity loss has
impacted the major histocompatibility locus of the Gila trout, potentially
reducing its ability to respond to pathogens via classical adaptive immune
responses. The fellow will use the Gila trout genome, tissue archives, and gene
sequence libraries to identify, annotate, and evaluate the diversity of innate
immune gene families to understand if innate immunity may compensate for reduced
adaptive immune capabilities. This will also establish how these immune genes
are evolving, and the effects of selection acting upon them. Immune challenge
experiments will quantify the magnitude of the overall immune response in Gila
trout and the role of innate immune receptors in this species during infection.
These two approaches will determine whether overall genetic loss can be
compensated via expansion of broadly unspecific arms of the immune system and
allow long-term persistence. The fellow will also perform multiple outreach
projects including presentations on the importance of habitat conservation,
leading undergraduates in museum science programs, and presenting the results of
the fellowâ€™s research to relevant conservation agencies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.