* 2208937
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Evolutionary genomics of rapid adaptation in wild threespine stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus)
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Elizabeth Tapanes, Tapanes, Elizabeth
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Understanding
the speed and likelihood of adaptation to a changing environment in wild
populations is of paramount importance, because adaptation can restore
population growth and forestall extinction. Theoretical and laboratory studies
hypothesize that the source of genomic variation and population factors (for
example, population size) can affect the probability and speed of adaptation.
However, it is still relatively unknown as to how genomic and population factors
contribute to rapid adaptation in the wild. The Fellow will use wild threespine
stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) to test how sources of genomic variation
impact rapid adaptive evolution. This will increase our understanding of the
underlying forces propelling adaptation and help predict whether vulnerable
populations will be able to adapt or require further interventions to prevent
extinction. The project will enable the Fellow, a Latina, to acquire advanced
training in genomics and bioinformatics. The Fellow will also host a seminar
series in Biology for post-docs historically excluded in the sciences to present
their research and network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Threespine sticklebacks are an
excellent system to study rapid adaptive evolution because freshwater
stickleback repeatedly and rapidly diverged (&lt; 12,000 years ago across
multiple locations) from their marine ancestors. Thus, marine and freshwater
stickleback vary in traits that are adaptive and likely play a role in niche use
(for example, plate count, gill raker number). Multiple sources of variation
have contributed to their divergence. But few studies have considered how
crucial genomic and population factors impact the pattern of evolution in the
wild. The Fellow will sample multiple independently derived populations to test
how the source of variation affects the speed and likelihood of adaptation in
the wild, by combining genomics and phenotyping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.