* 2208838
* I-Corps: Nano Drug Enabled Cancer Therapy
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2022
* Nawab Ali, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a platform to understanding of the toxicological properties of
nanoparticles and ultimately allow for the development of better therapeutic
strategies for breast cancer treatment. This work will form a basis for further
understanding of the use of nanoparticles in targeting specific cancer types and
learn about oncogenic transformation. Depending upon cell response to these
formulations in in vivo models, these studies have translational potential and
might form basis for clinical trial. For future studies, we propose to add drugs
that target different pathways or different components of the same pathway and
other hallmarks of cancer such as metabolic reprogramming and immunity.
Additionally, incorporating inhibitors of epigenetic changes linked to
malignancies in our nano-platform would be of greater commercial application.
This project will conduct customer discovery to seek product market fit and
further support the development of strategies for safe and effective cancer
treatment applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of novel nanoparticles and antigens highly expressed on cancer
cells to deliver drugs to inhibit cell proliferative pathway. This platform can
be adapted to treat other cancer types, e.g., pancreatic cancer. The
nanoparticles create a robust, synergistic apoptotic response to AuNRs/Ag-
rapamycin targeting EpCAM or Her2, or both. The platform also uses FDA-approved,
rapamycin, developing nano-formulations that reduce toxic side effects. Future
studies will add drugs that target different pathways or different components of
the same pathway and other hallmarks of cancer such as metabolic reprogramming
and immunity. Additionally, incorporating inhibitors of epigenetic changes
linked to malignancies would be of great commercial
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.