* 2208657
* Collaborative Research: Understanding biophysical drivers of the CH4 source sink transition in Northern Forests
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Hinsby Cadillo-Quiroz, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2025
* USD 479,978.00

Methane is second only to carbon dioxide in its contribution to human-induced
climate change due to its global warming potential, which is 34 times greater
than that of CO2. Microorganisms in wet landscapes tend to release methane,
whereas those in dry ones tend to take up the gas from Earth's atmosphere.
Researchers at the Howland Research Forest in Maine have been measuring methane
fluctuations across this sub-boreal forest since 2012. Their studies have found
that the forest usually serves as a methane "sink" due to microbial consumption,
although occasionally, under extremely wet conditions, the reverse can be true.
This research site provides an ideal opportunity to study the conditions under
which a forest would switch from a net sink to become a source of atmospheric
methane. Under future climate change scenarios, the region is expected to become
warmer and wetter, conditions that may induce a shift from methane sink to
source, with the potential to have an impact on atmospheric methane
concentrations at regional to global scale. This project will examine how forest
soil microbial communities will change in response to climate warming, to
identify the conditions that may lead forests to switch from being a methane
sink to more of a source. The project will also support the cross-disciplinary
training of graduate and undergraduate students and postdoctoral research
scholars, including those from underrepresented groups in science. A series of
public talks will be convened, and short videos and StoryMaps focused on science
outreach will be paired with “scientist in the classroom” visits to local high
schools. The project will host an open house for students and the public at the
Howland Research Forest to learn about this important research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study aims to identify - through the integration of
field observations, laboratory analyses, and modeling - the conditions and
mechanisms driving methane sink vs source activity in forests, using the Howland
Research Forest in Maine as a case study. The project's novel approach focuses
on three key areas to improve understanding of methane in such habitats: 1)
identify the roles and response of soil microbial communities, specifically,
methanogens and methanotrophs (and their functional guilds), in driving methane
flux across environmental gradients; 2) understand and quantify how wet vs dry
landscape microsites, and belowground vs. aboveground components within a forest
contribute to seasonal and annual methane fluxes; and 3) integrate knowledge
gained from field and laboratory analyses to inform and improve ecosystem
process models. A suite of in-situ and lab-based experimental measures of
methane production and oxidation, stable isotopes, and profiles of microbial
community composition and function will be used to understand the mechanisms,
processes, and feedbacks driving methane sink/source activity from site to
landscape levels. At the site level, multi-scale observations of soil and
aboveground methane fluxes, microbial traits, and associated in-situ
environmental conditions will be obtained. To further understand and quantify
methane response, in-situ and laboratory manipulation experiments to identify
the role of functional guild activity, under changing environmental conditions,
in regulating methane production/oxidation and ultimately net methane flux to
and from the atmosphere will be employed. Finally, these data, integrated with
project data-enhanced Microbial Model for Methane Dynamics-Dual Arrhenius
Michaels Menten (M3D-DAMM) and Community Land Model-Microbe (CLM-Microbe)
process models, will allow researchers to identify seasonal and annual methane
sink/source activity at the landscape level within Howland Forest from the
present to 2100. The research will include training at the undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral levels, as well as a variety of outreach activities to
engage high school students and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.