* 2208729
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel biocontrol agent against fungal infection and fungal toxin contamination on food and feed crops
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Anindya Chanda, MYCOLOGICS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
Project is to introduce a cost-effective way of crop protection from fungal
spoilage. Every year, 25% of the food produced by the world is wasted due to
fungal infections and contamination of crops with fungal toxins (mycotoxins).
The combined social, environmental, and economic global annual cost of this food
wastage is &gt;$2T. The proposed innovation is centered on harnessing an
untapped bacterium to bring a new line of affordable antifungals to a broad base
of crop growers across the United States, which are designed to seamlessly
integrate with existing preharvest postharvest treatment protocols. The products
are quick and easy to manufacture without costly purification procedures. They
should be safe for the environment and human health and have a defined mechanism
of action. As a result, billions of dollarsâ€™ worth of crops, energy, and
resources could be saved, leading to increased agricultural sustainability and
economic competitiveness of the United States. It may also advance the health
and welfare of the American public by enhancing food safety. Finally, it can
pave the way for other innovations to combat fungal diseases in plants, animals,
and humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will demonstrate the
feasibility of the innovation by developing the first product, safeguarding corn
crops from fungal spoilage during both preharvest and postharvest. Corn is the
most planted crop in the United States. Every year, the corn industry loses
&gt;$1B due to infection with a fungus (Aspergillus flavus), resulting in
contamination of the crop with a carcinogenic mycotoxin called aflatoxin. The
critical technical objectives during the project period will be to (1) identify
the functional components of the product and demonstrate their mode of action;
(2) assess the amounts of those components that can be produced per unit mass of
bacterial biomass, (3) determine an optimal formulation of the minimal viable
product that can be most effective in preventing fungal infection and aflatoxin
contamination in the corn crop, and (4) conduct an optimal toxicity profiling of
the minimal viable product. Upon completion, the knowledge obtained will provide
valuable insights for effective intellectual protection and regulatory strategy
for the products from the technology and identify any potential challenges
related to scalability, consistency, and product shelf-life, which will
determine the costs and logistics for large-scale manufacturing of the
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.