* 2208837
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Pleiotropic Role and Fitness Consequences of Single Genes in Mexican Cavefish (Astyanax mexicanus)
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Melissa Drown, Drown, Melissa
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/28/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Caves are extreme environments and are often
characterized by low oxygen, limited nutrient availability, and complete
darkness. Mexican tetra (Astyanax mexicanus) exist as surface dwelling and cave
populations that exhibit adaptation to cave living including altered metabolism,
reduced eyesight, sleep duration, and pigmentation. Using surface fish carrying
mutations for candidate genes that impact cave-related traits, the Fellow will
examine the multi-trait impact of single genes and their consequences on
survival in the cave environment. This research will produce a genotype-to-trait
and genotype-to-fitness map for single genes and will inform the role of
pleiotropic genes in adaptation to the extreme cave environment. The Fellow will
leverage undergraduate research activities at the hosting institution (including
a course-based research experience) that benefit students from groups
underrepresented in STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand the
multi-trait impacts of single genes, the Fellow will measure cave-related traits
including sleep architecture, melanophore size and number, metabolism, hypoxia
tolerance, and circadian rhythms in surface fish carrying mutations for three
candidate pleiotropic genes. Traits will be measured under fed and unfed
conditions to examine plasticity in response to food availability, which is
thought to be reduced in the cave environment. Candidate gene fitness impacts
will be examined using a mark-recapture field experiment in a self-contained
man-made cave. Survival and body condition throughout the field experiment will
be used to assess fitness of each mutant. Selection coefficients with predictive
capability for evolutionary modeling will be produced. The Fellow will be
trained in physiological and behavioral assays and gene editing techniques. To
broaden participation in science, the Fellow will 1) train undergraduate
students from diverse backgrounds in research including physiological and
behavioral assays, gene editing techniques, and computational biology, and 2)
implement a tiered mentorship program among postdocs, graduate, and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.