* 2208014
* RUI: Next-Generation Numerical Relativity for Future Gravitational-Wave Observatories
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Geoffrey Lovelace, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2025
* USD 225,832.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
Gravitational waves are ripples of warped spacetime that travel through the
universe at the speed of light. They are emitted by the most cataclysmic events
in the universe, such as colliding black holes and neutron stars. Today's
gravitational-wave observatories have given humanity an entirely new sense to
learn about the universe, but they are only sensitive enough to detect the
loudest gravitational waves. The next generation of gravitational-wave detectors
will reach to the edge of the observable universe and will observe the loudest
gravitational waves with extremely high fidelity. This award will help
scientists recover the most exciting and surprising physics from these high-
fidelity observations. Specifically, this award supports a research program that
uses supercomputer calculations to model gravitational waves from merging black
holes. Through their participation in this project, undergraduate and master's
students at California State University, Fullerton, a Hispanic-serving
institution, will play important roles in gravitational-wave astronomy while
learning research and computational skills that will prepare them for successful
STEM careers. The PI and student researchers will integrate results from this
work into a week-long workshop; the workshop will introduce students from Citrus
College (a local Hispanic-serving community college) to gravitational waves,
high-performance computing, and undergraduate
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award renews support for California State
University, Fullerton's computational gravitational-wave research program. The
PI and students at the undergraduate and master's level, working as members of
the Simulating eXtreme Spacetimes collaboration, will play key roles in
preparing for the application of numerical-relativity modeling to next-
generation gravitational-wave observations. First, they will assess the accuracy
and performance limits of the Spectral Einstein Code (SpEC), a state-of-the-art
numerical-relativity code, to determine how well it can model future detectors'
loudest observations, which will have signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) in the
thousands. Second, they will explore the potential for SpECTRE, a next-
generation, open-source numerical-relativity code, to model high-SNR
observations of merging black holes. They will complete the first assessment of
SpECTRE's accuracy, efficiency, and scaling while contributing toward enabling
SpECTRE's first simulations of binary black holes. The high-accuracy model
gravitational waveforms resulting from this work will help develop improved
analytic approximate models necessary for inferring the properties of
gravitational-wave sources and for testing general relativity under the most
extreme conditions. This work will also reveal the potential of next-generation
techniques to model merging black holes while laying a foundation for using them
to model black holes tearing apart neutron stars. High-fidelity observations of
these events will reveal, with unprecedented fidelity, the behavior of the
universe's densest matter and most strongly warped spacetimeâ€”but they will
require model waveforms with tremendously improved
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.