* 2208988
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Molecular dynamics of assembly of the cnidarian stinging cell organelle
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Anna Klompen, Klompen, Anna ML
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Cells are typically described as the smallest
unit or “building blocks” of biology, but cells often display sophisticated
internal structures that enable specialized functions. Broadly, this research
aims to address how cells build themselves by determining the processes involved
in the assembly of highly complex features. Specifically, this study will
investigate the elaborate internal structures of stinging cells, explosive cells
used by cnidarians (jellyfish, sea anemones, corals) in prey-capture and
defense. The focus will be how different stinging cell types are assembled in
the model sea anemone Nematostella vectensis. By teasing apart the precise
mechanisms that shape the internal features of stinging cells, this project will
lend to a better understanding of how complexity can arise and evolve in living
systems. Furthermore, the project will enable complementary training in
mentorship of undergraduates in the laboratory, public engagement across
multiple venues, and implementation of science communication workshops for
early-career researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The self-organizational processes
that result in complex cellular architecture includes both self-assembling
protein-protein interactions and genomic regulation through altered gene
expression. To establish a framework for how these molecular interactions shape
intricate cellular features, this project will use the assembly of nematocysts
as a model system. Nematocysts are cnidarian-specific projectile organelles
housed in stinging cells that display diverse morphological types, yet they
retain a conserved set of structural components that form specific subcellular
features (e.g. barbs, spines, tubule). The focus of this research will be to
disentangle the molecular and regulatory dynamics that contribute to the
production of distinct subcellular features in different nematocyst types by
integrating proteomics and protein-protein interaction network analyses, single-
cell sequencing, high-resolution imaging, and functional genomic tools. While
the project predominantly utilizes the sea anemone Nematostella, the coral
Montipora will also be studied to compare the self-organizing processes of
similar nematocyst types in two species. This project will include mentoring
undergraduates in independent research as well as engaging with the public
through an educational social media campaign and in-person community events.
Science communication workshops will be designed and conducted at the host
institution to train early-career researchers on how to communicate basic
research to a K-12 audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.