* 2208845
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: The Origin and Evolution of Nectaries in Non-Flowering Plants
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Jacob Suissa, Suissa, Jacob S
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

Fellow's name: Jacob S. Suissa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
2208845&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research title: The origin and evolution of
nectaries in non-flowering plants&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sponsoring scientist(s)
and host institution(s): Dr. Fay-Wei, Lee Boyce Thompson Institute and Dr.
Corrie Moreau, Cornell University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action funds an NSF
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2022, Integrative Research
Investigating the Rules of Life Governing Interactions Between Genomes,
Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship supports research and training of the
fellow that will contribute to the area of Rules of Life in innovative ways.
Interactions between plants and animals are ecologically important, and plants
have traits that evolved to affect these interactions. Understanding how and why
these traits have evolved remain some of the most important biological
questions. The fellow aims to take a step closer to answering these questions by
exploring the early evolution of plant nectar glands. Nectar glands (nectaries),
are common in flowers, but also occur in certain non-flowering plants, like the
ancient fern lineage. In ferns these nectaries attract ants that feed on the
nectar and fight off insects that want to eat the plant. Yet, we do not know
when these nectaries evolved in ferns or whether the underlying genes
responsible for their development are similar to those in flowers. The fellow’s
work is important in that it will reveal the early evolution of nectaries,
potentially shifting our understanding of the evolution of these structures and
early plant-animal interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadly, the fellow aims
to explore the origins and evolution of nectaries in a three-part
multidisciplinary research program. First, integrating data on the timing of
nectary evolution in ferns and flowering plants with major radiations of insect
lineages, he will determine when, why, and how nectaries first evolved. Then, by
using RNA-sequencing across divergent fern species he will uncover the genes
underlying nectary development in ferns. He will then use comparative
transcriptomics to determine if genes expressed in fern nectaries are similar to
those of nectaries in flowering plants. Finally, using comparative genomics
across land plants, he will pinpoint when this genetic toolkit first evolved.
The fellow hypothesizes that nectaries evolved first in ferns before flowering
plants, and that nectary genes in ferns are likely stomatal or phloem-specific
genes which evolved early in the evolution of land plants. In addition to his
research, the fellow is also committed to outreach and science communication. He
plans to continue his work of democratizing the study of plant biology through
his social media platform Let’s Botanize. He is also dedicated to creating a
more equitable and inclusive field of science by mentoring undergraduate
students from historically marginalized groups during the Cornell University
Summer Research Internship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.