* 2208795
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Regulation and response to environmental metals in thermophiles
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* John Barrows, Barrows, John K
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. How genes are turned on and off is a critical
aspect of life. Changes in an organism’s environment can lead to dramatic
differences in how genes are turned on and off, allowing the organism to adapt
and respond to different environmental stimuli. For many organisms, the
mechanisms underlying a genetic response to an environmental stressor are
unknown. This proposal aims to identify how a model microorganism called Thermus
thermophilus control how genes are turned on and off in response to heavy metals
in their environment. This project will be conducted at the large, primarily
undergraduate university, Kennesaw State University, which will provide the
fellow with resources and training to conduct research, as well as ample
opportunity to teach and mentor the next generation of scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermophilic organisms are commonly used as model systems
in a laboratory setting, and their proteins have considerable application in
biotechnology and industry. Despite their widespread use, our understanding of
the fundamental biology behind many model thermophiles is limited. Thermus
thermophilus HB8 contains three Ferric Uptake Regulator (FUR) gene homologs,
whose gene products are severely understudied. The FUR family of proteins are
transcriptional regulators that influence gene expression in response to
regulatory metals. This research will identify the transcription regulatory
networks for each Thermus thermophilus HB8 FUR homolog using the combinatorial
approach, Restriction Endonuclease Protection, Selection, and Amplification
(REPSA). Consensus DNA-binding sequences for each protein discovered
experimentally through REPSA will be identified by massively parallel
semiconductor sequencing and Multiple Em for Motif Elicitation software. These
motifs will be mapped to the organism’s genome using Find Individual Motif
Occurrences. Potentially regulated genes will be validated in vitro through DNA-
binding assays and in vitro transcription, as well as in vivo through gene
expression analysis in mutant Thermus thermophilus HB8 strains. Results of this
work will provide a better understanding of how heavy metals influence gene
expression through transcription regulatory proteins in a model extremophile.
This work should also result in novel methodologies, widely applicable to
transcription factor studies, that will be shared with the scientific community.
Finally, this project will support the mentorship and training of several
undergraduate and graduate students in the fields of microbiology and
biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.