* 2208993
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: An ecophysiological examination of the role of parasite interactions in mediating emerging fungal disease in snakes
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Kenzie Pereira, Pereira, Kenzie Elizabeth
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY2022,
Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The fellowship
supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will increase the
participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Wild animals are frequently
infected by multiple parasitic organisms simultaneously. Studies of warm-blooded
animals (endotherms) – mammals and birds show that interactions between
coinfecting parasites can have profound impacts on the ability to combat
disease. For example, parasitic worms (macroparasites) often dampen immune
responses, thereby, facilitating infection and disease caused by pathogenic
viruses, bacteria, and fungi (microparasites). This phenomenon is known as the
“macro-micro facilitation hypothesis.” Despite the common occurrence of
parasitic coinfections in wild cold-blooded animals (ectotherms) – fish,
amphibians, and reptiles, little is known about the interactions between macro-
and microparasites in these animals and how these influence ectotherm physiology
(such as the immune response) and disease outcome. This research will be one of
few studies to evaluate the mechanisms underlying macro-micro facilitation in an
ectothermic animal. By advancing understanding about how interactions between
coinfecting parasites shape ectotherm disease ecology, this research will
provide new insights for ectotherm conservation in a changing world. The Fellow
will design and implement educational activities and will create resources and
research opportunities to promote the inclusion and success of middle school and
college students underrepresented in biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will use field surveys, laboratory analyses, and advanced statistical
modeling to test the macro–micro facilitation hypothesis in wild snakes focusing
on the fungal microparasite Ophidiomyces ophiodiicola, which causes the recently
emerged skin disease ophidiomycosis. While the threat of ophidiomycosis to snake
biodiversity remains unclear, sublethal impacts may have substantial
consequences for population health and stability. The Fellow will describe how
parasitic worm infections, O. ophiodiicola infections, and ophidiomycosis
severity are correlated across multiple snake species and over time in one
widespread snake species in eastern North America. The Fellow will then use
structural equation modeling to identify and quantify the causal pathways that
directly and indirectly link the many physiological, environmental, infection,
and disease variables measured in wild snakes. The Fellow will participate in
broadening the representation of underrepresented student in biology by 1)
partnering with local outreach events to create activity kits and presentations
focused on how environmental change influences snake health for fourth grade
classrooms; 2) creating a social networking platform to connect and support
foster care student populations at the host institution; 3) mentoring and
providing independent research opportunities for undergraduate students through
the host institution’s Applied Ecology Minor program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.