* 2208293
* Novel Sampling Methods for Electromagnetic Inverse Scattering Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Dinh-Liem Nguyen, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2025
* USD 198,480.00

The inverse electromagnetic scattering problem (IESP) aims to determine an
unknown object from the electromagnetic fields scattered by that object. The
IESP has been an active research topic in the engineering, mathematics, and
physics communities for the past three decades due to its impact on a wide range
of applications including radar, nondestructive testing, medical imaging, and
geophysical exploration. However, solving the IESP is very challenging since
this problem is in general highly nonlinear and severely ill-posed. Therefore,
although computational algorithms have been extensively studied for the IESP,
there is still a high demand for algorithms with improved efficiency and
robustness. The project addresses this demand by developing new and highly
efficient sampling-type algorithms for the IESP in the context of optics and
radar. This project will also involve the training of undergraduate and graduate
students in computational mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solving the IESP
involves proper sampling methods to construct an approximate indicator function
for the unknown scattering object. Ideally these sampling methods are fast, non-
iterative, and do not require a priori information about the scattering object.
In this project, the principal investigator and graduate students will develop
new sampling-type methods for the IESP for both the Helmholtz equation and the
system of Maxwell's equations in different types of scattering media, including
infinite periodic media, small and point-like objects, bounded inhomogeneous
media, and nonlinear media. In addition to the aforementioned features, the
sampling-type methods that will be developed in this project will be simple to
implement and extremely robust against noise in the data. The resolution and
stability analysis of these sampling-type methods and their validation by
experimental data will be investigated. The new methods are expected to provide
a promising alternative tool to solve the IESP in optics and
radar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.