* 2208957
* NSF PRFB FY22: Gut instinct: environmental and reproductive influences on microbiome contributions to neuroinflammation
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Megan Massa, Massa, Megan G
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The gut is home to trillions of bacteria.
These microorganisms, collectively known as the microbiome, work together with
their host’s body. Prior research has shown that, depending on host physiology,
gut microbiome function can be altered by outside cues, with these changes
leading to consequences in the host body. Using zebra finch birds as a model,
this project explores how stress (an environmental variable) and hormones from
the ovaries and testes (an internal variable) change the microbiome and thus
alter host brain inflammation. Despite far-reaching consequences of the gut
microbiome to behavior and health, many complexities of understanding how the
microbiome affects the brain remain unprobed. This project will provide
additional knowledge of how various environmental and internal conditions can
alter this symbiosis to affect the brain. The Fellow will also development and
assess improved protocols to increase lab accessibility for undergraduates and
high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first aim of this project will
determine whether environmental stress alters the microbiome differently in
males vs. females to alter neuroinflammation. Male and female finches, with or
without microbiome presence will be placed in social isolation or group housing.
Microbiome composition and function will be assessed via polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) and carbohydrate utilization analysis, respectively. All animals
will then be subjected to penetrating brain injury and their neuroimmune
responses assessed via analysis of pro- and anti-inflammatory pathways by
quantitative PCR and immunoreactivity. The second aim examines the contributions
of gonadal hormones to microbiome composition and function and subsequent
neuroinflammation in response to penetrating brain injury. Animals will be
treated with pharmacological agents to alter androgen or estrogen levels before
assessing the microbiome and neuroinflammation profiles as previously stated. In
addition to this research, the Fellow will also be working towards developing
the skills necessary to teach at and develop a research program suitable for a
primarily undergraduate institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.