* 2208926
* Travel: Travel Support for Students from Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) to the 2022 Physics Congress
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Catherine Swartz, American Institute of Physics
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2023
* USD 51,066.00

The 2022 Physics Congress (PhysCon), organized by Sigma Pi Sigma (the physics
honor society) and supported by the American Institute of Physics (AIP), is the
largest single gathering of physics undergraduate students in the world. This
award to AIP supports the attendance to this meeting by members of
underrepresented groups in physics. This year’s conference, themed 100 Years of
Momentum, will include keynote lectures by renowned scientists; interactive
workshops on key topics of importance to undergraduates in the physical
sciences; and tours of major science facilities to provide transformative
experiences for the students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;African Americans and
Hispanics are both extremely underrepresented in physics. According to 2020 U.S.
Census data, 16% of the 20–24-year-olds in the U.S. are African American and
22.3% are Hispanic. By comparison, data from the AIP Statistical Research Center
shows that just over 3% of physics bachelor’s degrees in 2019 were awarded to
African Americans, and 11% to Hispanics in 2019. Thus, both ethnic groups see
less than the expected representation among physics undergraduates that should
be expected based on the population. This award aims to address the
participation and success of underrepresented students in physics by making them
aware of resources and building connections to the physics community. This
program would have SPS and volunteer leaders work with departments individually
to identify students that would benefit from the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.