* 2208975
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Paige Henning, Henning, Paige M
* Fellowship Award
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 06/30/2025
* USD 227,593.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2022. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Paige M Henning is "Identification of the S-protein homolog (SPH) receptor
proteins in Turnera subulata and high throughput initial characterization of the
SPH family in Arabidopsis thaliana" The host institution for the fellowship is
the University of Wisconsin Madison and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Michael
R Sussman.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Responsible use of genetic engineering has the
potential to be highly beneficial for agriculture and human health, enabling
improvements in crop yield and nutritional value. While genetically engineered
crops have benefits, there are potential consequences. Escape of transgenic
traits from transgenic into non-transgenic crops and wild plant populations
being one of the most significant. For example the passing of the herbicide
resistance trait from transgenic corn to non-transgenic neighboring cornfields
during reproduction. This is an economic, ecological and ethical problem, and it
is our responsibility to take measures to prevent the spread of transgenic
traits. One solution to prevent transgenic traits escaping is to prevent
reproduction between transgenic and non-transgenic crops or wild species. While
this can be done with physical barriers , this approach is labor-intensive,
expensive, and not applicable for all crop species. An alternative is to
engineer a "reproductive" barriers. Essentially to remove the transgenic
species' ability to mate with non-transgenic individuals of the same or related
species. To do so, we propose to emulate the naturally occurring barrier found
in the reproductive system of the Cuban buttercup (Turnera subulata) in
transgenic crops. To do this we need to thoroughly understand the genetic basis
of this reproductive system. This research will use computational methods,
genetics, and biochemistry to learn more about the Cuban buttercup's
reproductive system. Furthermore, this study will shed light on functions of a
large family of signaling peptides that likely regulate diverse aspects of
growth and development, using the model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Signaling peptides play varied and critical roles
during stress responses as well as growth, reproductive, and developmental
processes in the plant. A few signaling peptide families have been
characterized, but an alarming number of families remain entirely
uncharacterized. Characterizing signaling peptides may provide targets of
interest to synthetic biology. The S-protein homolog (SPH) signalling peptide
family was initially identified in Papaver rhoeas. PrsS, the only characterized
SPH, confers self-incompatibility in P. rhoeas. TsSPH1, identified at the self-
incompatibility locus in distylous Turnera subulata, is predicted to modify
anther placement within flowers by enhancing filament elongation, though the
mechanism is unknown. Expanding our knowledge of TsSPH1 will expand our
understanding of the morphology and breakdown of distyly, an Angiosperm
reproductive system that confers self-incompatibility. Aside from PrsS, the SPH
family has not been investigated in any species, including the model dicot
Arabidopsis thaliana. The goals of this project are 1.) to identify the receptor
of TsSPH1, 2.) to determine if orthologs of this receptor are present in
homostylous species of Turneroideae, 3.) to form hypotheses regarding the mode
of action of TsSPH1, and 4.) begin the initial characterization of the SPH gene
family in Arabidopsis using high throughput methods. The characterization of the
SPH gene family in Arabidopsis will allow researchers to form hypotheses
regarding the roles of SPH family members in other organisms based on homology
with Arabidopsis family members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.