* 2208558
* Support for the Archaeometry Laboratory at MURR
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Michael Glascock, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2025
* USD 377,414.00

Through the lens of archaeological science, geochemical datasets can produce
specific and accurate descriptions of where people lived and migrated, raw
material provisioning, object biographies, technological trends, and
socioeconomic and cultural exchange. Such data advance current theoretical
understandings of cultural evolution and adaptations, and can inform modern
studies of population movements, resource exploitation, social networks, and
land-use patterns. To this end, the Archaeometry Laboratory at the University of
Missouri Research Reactor (MURR) specializes in the provenance and compositional
analysis of archaeological materials including ceramics, chert, obsidian,
pigments, and metals. The long-term success of the Archaeometry Laboratory has
resulted in an unparalleled database of artifact and raw material chemical
compositions that enhance the explanatory power of future analytical studies as
well as provide the raw material for large-scale research projects using
existing data. The laboratory supports a wide variety of projects, trains
students, graduate interns, researchers, and visiting scholars every year, and
contributes to knowledge diffusion through close scientific collaborations
between MURR staff and outside researchers, student education, and professional
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MURR Archaeometry Laboratory focuses on
elemental and isotopic analysis in order to examine the production, exchange,
and movement of a broad variety of artifacts using neutron activation analysis
(NAA), X-ray fluorescence (XRF), Raman spectroscopy (RS), and inductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) including a laser ablation system and
a multi-collector. The laboratory also supports geochemical research on the
petrogenesis of various igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary rocks. Broader
impacts of the Archaeometry Laboratory at MURR include: (1) availability of
affordable chemical and isotopic analyses for students and faculty from academic
departments and non-profit research organizations in the US; (2) training of
undergraduate and graduate students in the selection and use of laboratory
methods of analysis; (3) advice in project design, statistical analysis, and
interpretation of the chemical and isotopic data; and (4) public access by
archaeologists, geologists, and scientists from many disciplines to the
compositional database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.