* 2208670
* Conference: 2022 Secure &amp; Trustworthy Cyberspace Principal Investigators Meeting
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Frankie King, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 01/31/2024
* USD 658,169.00

Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) is NSF's flagship cybersecurity
research program. It approaches security and privacy from a socio-technical
viewpoint that involves addressing deep scientific and engineering problems as
well as vulnerabilities that arise from human behaviors. With the increasing
importance of cybersecurity to the nation as a whole, and to the Foundation as a
research area, improving communication between program officers and researchers
supported by NSF and other government funding agencies, coordination among
researchers from the different perspectives sponsored by SaTC, and outreach to
the broader community are all increasingly important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
SaTC program provides national visibility with the participation of the NSF
Directorates for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE),
Education and Human Resources (EHR), Engineering (ENG), Mathematics and Physical
Sciences (MPS), and Social, Behavioral, and Economics Sciences (SBE). There are
currently over 1000 active awards in the program. The 2022 Principal
Investigator meeting will be a major event for the community, bringing together
researchers and government and industry representatives. This project covers
venue and conference logistics, including conference registration, audio visual,
and meeting space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.