* 2208631
* CAREER: Integrating a Data-Driven Approach with Technologies for Sharing Rural Knowledge and Values
* CSE,IIS
* 10/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Norman Su, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2024
* USD 425,894.00

The primary goal of this project is to develop the theories and designs needed
to inform the development of data-driven technologies to support and share the
knowledge and values of rural America. The methodology includes multi-sited
ethnographic fieldwork, design of data-driven technologies, and creation of a
theoretical framework to inform development of systems for rural populations.
Existing research shows that rural residents feel left behind and marginalized
due to rapid socio-economic changes often driven by urban dwellers. This project
aims to move beyond contrasting the challenges of living in rural areas, such as
lack of broadband access, in comparison with urban areas. Rather, it builds on
the conviction that knowledge work by rural members is undervalued, and that
research to make visible the innovative knowledge and deeply-held values of
rural populations can prove beneficial for users as a whole. The topic of this
Faculty Early Career Development project naturally supports the plan to deliver
STEM research and education to rural communities and students, cooperate with
local government agencies and organizations to create outreach programs which
attract participation and understanding of rural activities, and distribute
created technologies to bridge rural and non-rural
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work seeks to establish an action research
agenda investigating, conceptualizing, and supporting the intersection of rural
and urban knowledge and values. This CAREER project consists of three
interlocking strands: (1) Identification of expertise and values in rural
populations: The researcher will conduct multi-sited ethnographic studies to
identify the current data-driven practices and challenges of rural populations
in two subcultures: small farmers and outdoor recreationalists. (2) Design and
evaluation of reflective technologies: Scoped by findings of the multi-sited
ethnography, this strand will employ participatory design activities with rural
and non-rural members to iteratively create data-driven designs. The designs
will draw upon the "Design Approach for Authenticity" developed via the
researcher's past work on subcultures. (3) Development of theoretical
frameworks: Synthesizing findings from the first two strands on both
subcultures, the PI will develop a transferable theoretical framework outlining
strategies for designing data-driven technologies for sharing knowledge and
values. This framework will offer guidelines on designing technologies with
rural populations. The results of this work will assist human-computer
interaction researchers and practitioners who design for diverse populations
where distribution of expertise is unequal and values may
clash.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.