* 2208017
* Attosecond Resolved Photoionization Studies of Atomic and Molecular Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Joshua Williams, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2025
* USD 313,067.00

In this project, physicists will attempt to measure what happens in an atom or
molecule after a tightly bound electron is removed by a pulse of x-ray light,
leaving the atom or molecule in an excited state which eventually decays to a
lower energy configuration. The work will focus on a specific mode of decay
(Auger decay) in which the excited atom or molecule ejects another (loosely
bound) electron to carry away the excess energy. Here the Auger decay is
expected to take around 100 attoseconds (0.0000000000000001 seconds). After
Auger decay, a molecule will likely break up into pieces, leaving only its
constituent atoms. The experimenters will try to measure this Auger decay time
and correlate it with the type of fragments that are released, along with other
measured quantities. This study will help illuminate our understanding of the
quantum mechanical processes that play out during molecular breakup, and in
particular our fundamental understanding of the Auger decay process.
Additionally, it is expected that this will serve as the basis for at least one
Ph.D. student’s dissertation, several undergraduate students' senior theses, and
the employment and training of a postdoctoral fellow. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This proposed experiment will attempt to measure the time-resolved
dynamics of Auger decay in xenon, methyl iodide (CH3I), and expand our
preliminary studies of dichloroethylene (C2H2Cl2). This experiment will employ
the well-established COLd Target Recoil Ion Momentum Spectroscopy (COLTRIMS)
technique to simultaneously determine the gas-phase molecular frame (i.e.
molecular orientation in the laboratory frame), and the Auger decay time. Access
to the timing information is achieved through the measurement of the electron
momentum and knowledge of the time-dependent nature of the electric field. In
this experiment the time-dependent electric field is supplied by the atomic or
molecular system via the Auger decay. This experiment will expand our
understanding of the dynamics involved in atomic and molecular systems following
the ultrafast Auger decay. In the case of molecular systems, the experimenters
will attempt to determine the correlation between the Auger decay timing and the
Molecular Frame Angular Distribution (MFPAD). The MFPAD is highly sensitive to
the molecular potential and at least in principle could be used to glean
information about the molecular potential (i.e. the configuration of the
molecule’s constituent atoms in space at the “moment” the photoelectron is
ejected).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.