* 2208761
* CNS Core: Small: Seamless Coexistence of Positioning and Communication in 5G and Beyond Wireless Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Karthikeyan Sundaresan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 12/31/2025
* USD 540,000.00

Next generation 5G and beyond wireless systems are rapidly evolving to support
positioning as a native feature using their communication infrastructure.
Notwithstanding the dependence on a densely deployed infrastructure (for
accurate positioning), the overhead of such an infrastructure- based positioning
approach can bring significant degradation to communication performance, and
warrants timely attention. The proposed research explores a fundamentally
different paradigm of communication-aware collaborative positioning, whereby the
burden of positioning is offloaded to client devices in an intelligent,
communication-aware and collaborative (peer-peer) manner that reduces overhead
and improves spatial reuse to preserve communication performance, without
compromising on positioning accuracy. The proposed research will pave the way
for future wireless networks that double up as sensing platforms through a
seamless coexistence of positioning and communication. It can impact society in
more ways than one, ranging from enabling novel 5G applications that benefit
consumers (e.g. immersive applications) and enterprises to more broadly enabling
infrastructure-light/free positioning that is central to challenging public-
safety and remote orchestration environments. It aims to inform upcoming and
future IEEE and 3GPP standards by demonstrating the potential of collaborative
positioning and advocating for its accommodation in the standard specifications.
It will also impact the industry that is actively working on positioning through
demonstration of its results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to
take an important step towards this vision by addressing three key challenges:
(i) characterizing the tradeoff between communication and positioning
performance, and leveraging the paradigm of collaborative positioning to design
a seamless and efficient coexistence framework; (ii) realizing coexistence in
practice for both asynchronous (WiFi) and synchronous (cellular: LTE and new
radio, NR) access systems through scalable, distributed medium access
mechanisms; and (iii) enabling and leveraging positioning to go beyond
coexistence and optimize communication performance as we move to more
challenging high frequency millimeter-Wave systems that are burdened by
measurement overhead. Through the design of an analytically-sound coexistence
framework along with an integrated (WiFi + LTE/NR) 5G testbed network
deployment, we will propose a suite of innovative algorithms and protocols that
allow us to not only strike an efficient balance in both communication and
positioning performance, but also enhance communication performance in future
high frequency wireless systems. Such a framework will have broader implications
beyond positioning and will apply to several other sensing problems under the
much-anticipated paradigm of “joint communication and sensing” in our future 6G
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.