* 2208965
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2021: Functional responses of bird olfactory receptors
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Robert Driver, Driver, Robert
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Birds inhabit nearly all land environments,
yet were long thought to make limited use of their sense of smell. Recent
behavioral work in birds has shown important roles for smell in behavior and
ecology. Vertebrates detect odors using proteins called olfactory receptors
(ORs). The fellow has earlier shown that birds have many more ORs than
previously realized. There are no studies in birds that match odors to ORs, and
it is unknown which odors are important in bird ecology. However, researchers
have matched mammalian ORs to specific odors. In many cases, these mammalian ORs
are closely related to bird ORs. This research will test these closely related
bird ORs with the same odors that the mammalian ORs detect, to understand how
conserved OR function is between mammals and birds. This research will also test
OR response to odors relevant to bird behavior, including oils from the gland
birds use for preening. Additionally, outreach projects will show bird watchers
the importance of smell to their local species. The fellow hopes to change the
historical perception of bird smell and show that this is an important sense
birds use to perceive the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a
set of mouse ORs known to respond to specific odorants that are orthologous to
zebra finch (Taeniopygia guttata) ORs to test in vivo if odorant responses are
preserved through the evolution of these two highly divergent vertebrate
lineages. The fellow will then screen a larger panel of odorants against the
zebra finch ORs in vitro. This would be the first test aimed to reveal a
functional response for a bird OR. Using odorants that are behaviorally relevant
to the zebra finch, the fellow will investigate OR responses in vivo. The fellow
will conduct an outreach activity at nature centers using feeders with hidden
food and provide forms for the public to record observations and learn about
bird olfaction. The fellow will continue to promote inclusivity in bird
watching, and push for the removal of offensive bird
names.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.