* 2208717
* STTR Phase II:  Nanomaterial-based Residual Active Disinfectant for Decreasing Surface Acquired Infections
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Sudipta Seal, KISMET TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 06/30/2025
* USD 995,798.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is the development of a nanotechnology-based
coating to combat the rise in Healthcare Acquired Infections (HAIs). HAIs spread
in hospitals through healthcare workers’ hands and exposed surfaces. The coating
technology developed through this project will disinfect surfaces contaminated
with viruses and bacteria. The antimicrobial coating provides protection on
these surfaces between cleanings. In the United States, 1 in 25 patients get a
preventable HAI from hospital visits. HAIs cost hospitals an estimated $40
billion annually to treat. Commercialization of this technology will lead to
fewer preventable illnesses and deaths, while decreasing the financial burden on
the healthcare system for each HAI case. Other markets that will benefit from
this work include businesses impacted by norovirus (stomach flu) such as cruise
ships, restaurants, schools, nursing homes, chip manufacturing facilities, and
food processing plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a novel,
nanoparticle-enabled coating to combat the rise in HAIs. A novel nanoparticle
with a high output of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) and potent antimicrobial
behavior has been developed. Because the antimicrobial mechanism is a secondary
surface reaction, the technology can effectively deactivate viruses and bacteria
without being consumed. Phase I demonstrations were achieved using bench top
batches of nanoparticles. Phase II research and development creates a
manufacturing process appropriate for the synthesis of the novel nanoparticles,
creating a shelf stable formulated product, while ensuring the advances in
nanoparticle production and formulation do not degrade the nanoparticle's
antimicrobial efficacy. The synthesis allows for a decrease in the nanoparticle
cost at scale. Shelf stability of the formulated product is important to the
overall logistics and supply chain of the product. Improvements to both the
scaled synthesis and formulation chemistry will be evaluated for impacts to the
disinfection efficacy of the final product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.