* 2208061
* Ultrafast Electronic Decoherence Dynamics in Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Niranjan Shivaram, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2025
* USD 296,723.00

In this project, the researchers will study the motion of electrons (charge
dynamics) inside ionized molecules on time scales of a few femtoseconds (one
femtosecond is a millionth of a billionth of a second). Understanding and
controlling ultrafast charge dynamics in molecules is of fundamental importance
in biochemical processes and the development of molecular scale electronic
devices. The research group will use femtosecond laser pulses of various
wavelengths to track the motion of the charge and obtain insight into the
physical mechanisms that influence it. The results of this project will pave the
path towards control of molecular charge dynamics, which is important for the
design of laser-controlled chemical reactions and synthesis of quantum materials
and devices. To fully realize this potential, a highly trained STEM workforce is
essential. As part of this project, a diverse group of graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in ultrafast photon science and quantum
science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A detailed understanding of various
decoherence/dephasing processes in electronically excited molecules is essential
for the development of quantum coherent control protocols for the laser driven
control of molecular processes. This is particularly important in molecular ions
in which femtosecond and attosecond charge migration dynamics are being
intensely studied due to their importance in biochemical processes and charge
transport phenomena. When a superposition of multiple ionic states with
bandwidth of a few electron volts is created in molecules, electron correlation
driven charge migration dynamics can be initiated. Understanding electronic
decoherence mechanisms during charge migration is a critical first step towards
achieving control of ultrafast charge dynamics in molecules. While multiple
previous theoretical and experimental studies have explored charge migration
using photoionization probes, nonlinear optical probes of such dynamics can
offer a completely novel perspective. Similarly, when molecules are photoionized
near shape resonances, the electron temporarily trapped in a shape resonance can
affect the evolution of the molecular ion that may be left in a superposition of
cationic states. A nonlinear optical measurement can probe the evolution of the
molecular ion and shed light on the role played by the shape resonance. In this
project, the research group will use nonlinear optical measurements of strong-
field and extreme-ultraviolet ionized molecules to obtain direct and detailed
information about electronic decoherence dynamics in molecular ions. The
objectives are to (1) study electronic decoherence dynamics during strong-field
initiated charge migration in molecules such as methyl bromide on few-
femtosecond time scales and (2) study the effect of shape resonances on the
ultrafast evolution of a molecular ion after XUV photoionization in molecules
such as nitrogen and carbon dioxide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.