* 2208754
* SBIR Phase I:  Cosmic Ray Neutron Sensing for Soil Water Measurements at Irrigation Decision Resolution
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,10/31/2023
* Andrew Inglis, Silverside Detectors Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 10/31/2023
* USD 255,663.00

The broader impact/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project is a touchless, crop agnostic, automatic, always on, non-
drifting, and cost-effective way of measuring soil moisture in large fields with
data specific to each irrigation zone. The goal is to enable irrigators in
water-scarce environments to maximize yields given the water available, and to
mitigate the impacts of drought and aquifer reduction by enabling irrigators to
calibrate their systems to the precise needs of the plants. The impact of this
system is to maximize productivity of irrigation water, reducing waste and costs
for crop growers and other irrigators. The commercialization of this product
will provide the data needed for precision irrigation to respond to daily ground
water needs, broadly reducing water consumption in agriculture and other
markets. This technology translates a known methodology for soil moisture
monitoring used by researchers and academics into a tool that delivers
actionable data to end users that steward the worldâ€™s water resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research and
development is to verify that data from an arrayed set of smaller Cosmic Ray
Neutron Sensing (CRNS) systems, ingested into an interpolation algorithm, can
provide a soil moisture heat map with resolution at the level of each irrigation
point for water measurements in the field. This project will remove the main
technical risks associated with applying the CRNS methodology to a sub-field
measurement scale, providing actionable data through granular moisture analysis.
This data will be compared with a similar heat map generated by a multi hour,
high labor assay using a manual probing system. This comparison seeks to support
automated, precision irrigation systems to minimize water usage and correct for
overwatering. The main technical hurdles that will be addressed include: the
data collection from an array of smaller-form-factor CRNS systems that are
placed on the field at the spacing of the desired measurement resolution;
integration of neutron count data over the large temporal scales that are
necessary to overcome the noise associated with the less efficient detectors;
and the ability to provide the necessary temporally-changing information that is
relevant to the irrigation manager.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.