* 2208277
* Reduced Basis Enhancements of Neural Networks and Their Application to Quantum Materials Simulation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Yanlai Chen, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2025
* USD 296,555.00

This project combines two types of numerical techniques, one traditional and the
other nascent, in the context of efficient multi-parametric simulations. The
project aims to develop a new algorithm based on deep neural networks that will
be applied to the simulation of quantum materials in the field of two-
dimensional materials twistronics toward a fast and accurate configuration-to-
performance map. Outcomes of this project are expected also to benefit the
greater scientific community that utilizes supervised machine learning for
parameterized models. Software associated with this project will be made freely
available. The project involves development of graduate coursework and the
training of undergraduate and graduate students through involvement in the
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need to understand the behavior of a system
efficiently and accurately under variation of many underlying parameters is
ubiquitous yet challenging due to the prohibitively high computational cost. Two
techniques stand out in addressing this challenge, the more traditional reduced
basis method and the newer deep neural networks. This project aims to combine
these two techniques to build an analysis-driven computational emulator for the
parameter-to-solution map of parameterized partial differential equations and to
apply the resulting algorithm to the field of 2D materials twistronics. The
first theme of the project involves reducing the generalization gap (performance
of the trained network on data unseen during training) of certain machine
learning algorithms by tapping the potential of a rigorous mathematical approach
in judiciously generating computationally cheap training data in an
intrinsically multi-level and multi-resolution fashion. The focus of the second
theme is the development of novel numerical discretizations and their
corresponding fast algorithms for a class of nonlinear partial differential
equations that has direct application in optimal mass transport. Finally, the
project aims to provide a systematic and rigorous study of parameterized 2D
materials simulation, including the recently discovered magical angle twisted
bilayer graphene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.