* 2208161
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Long Term Adaptation to Climate Change
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Brian Holguin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2023
* USD 31,098.00

This project studies the relationship between climatic degradation, conflict,
and emergent complexity in Chumash society on the Northern Channel Islands and
adjacent mainland coast. Previous research has identified substantial
reorganization of labor, development of new technologies, and punctuated
increases in lethal conflict within Chumash society during the Medieval Climatic
Anomaly (MCA), a period of episodic droughts and fluctuating sea-surface
temperatures (SST). Very little is known about Chumash social organization and
marital patterns prior to Spanish contact, and archaeology is well-suited to
reclaiming this knowledge. This research will identify kinship patterns in
Chumash society during the MCA by using an innovative combination of
archaeogenomic (ancient DNA) and archaeometric (strontium, carbon, and nitrogen
isotopes) analysis of ancient Chumash burials. Minimally invasive small tissue
samples were taken from ancestral remains under the supervision of the Barbareño
Band of Chumash Indians. Resulting data will be contextualized with climatic
records for the region and will enhance our understanding of how environmental
change affected human social organization over the past two thousand years. This
research will substantially aide archaeologists in understanding nuanced ways in
which society changes in the context of climate change. The researcher’s
indigenous Chumash heritage provides a unique opportunity for this research to
positively impact both the Native American and scientific communities. Goals of
the proposed research include introducing a diverse array of Native American
perspectives within archaeology and development of pedagogical methods to help
integrate archaeological research within tribal communities as a form of
historical knowledge. Integrating ancient DNA and isotopic method within
indigenous archaeological practice serves as a foundation for transformational
change between indigenous and academic communities while stimulating important
discourse surrounding the future of minimally destructive analysis of indigenous
remains in North America. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will evaluate and
add to models broadly focused on how humans respond to short and long-term
environmental change and how these changes affect human social organization.
This research takes place on the Northern Channel Islands and the adjacent Santa
Barbara coastline, areas that have been continuously occupied by the Chumash
people. Significant changes in Chumashan society co-occurred with a series of
episodic droughts known collectively as the Medieval Climatic Anomaly. This
study will couple genome-wide sequencing with stable isotope data from Chumash
burials and compare these data to regional climate records to reconstruct
changing familial relationships and social structure through
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.