* 2208183
* SBIR Phase I: Optimizing Ion Mobility Spectrometry for Distributed Chemical Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Thomas Turpen, SensIT Ventures Inc
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project seeks to produce a high performance, low power,
electronic chemical sensor system that does not require a radioactive ionization
source. Achieving a low cost, non-radioactive Internet of Things (IoT) systems
for chemical sensing in a more distributed and connected network has potentially
far reaching implications in many industries. Creating an IoT network of sensors
to safely monitor chemical signatures on a large and distributed scale, in real-
time, may provide new analytical-quality chemical sensing capabilities. Sensor
applications may range from engineering (monitoring fermentations) and to health
care (diagnostics), to environmental monitoring (air quality) and defense and
security (hazard detection) or agriculture (waste mitigation). The chemical
sampling and sensor platform has the potential to be integrated with cell phones
and autonomous systems. The market for personal use devices could be
substantial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project seeks to establish an experimental and theoretical framework to
optimize Differential Mobility Spectrometry (DMS) for analytical quality
chemical identification. There are many types of chemical sensors that have been
commercialized but no high-quality systems meet the performance, safety, and
cost constraints required to be a successfully linked in an IoT system. The
fundamental physics and commercial utility of DMS is well established, so it is
a leading candidate for this use. The foundation of the system is a miniaturized
DMS. Because the microchip operates on lithium ion polymer batteries, it has the
potential for widely dispersed IoT-linked chemical sensing but the reliance on
radioactive isotopes for chemical ionization is a critical barrier to adoption
that limits commercial applications. This technical barrier may be overcome by
combining a non-radioactive, plasma-based method of chemical ionization. The
experimental results will be used to validate custom software to simulate
performance of this complex system. If the performance of the combined system
can be successfully modeled, it can be further miniaturized and optimized. The
detection of natural gas odorants and selected food and flavor compounds have
been selected as initial proof-of-concept commercial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.