* 2208914
* NSF PRFB FY 2022: Identifying a Novel Green Fluorescent Small Molecule in a Heterotrophic Dinoflagellate
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Brittany Sprecher, Sprecher, Brittany
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment, and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Biofluorescence is a widespread light
phenomenon where many organisms absorb and re-emit light at different
wavelengths. The earliest investigations in to biofluorescence led to the
discovery of the green fluorescence protein, GFP, from a jellyfish. This finding
revolutionized biological science, leading to breakthroughs in marine, medical,
and molecular sciences and ultimately resulting in a Nobel Prize. Further
investigations into marine biofluorescence have led to discoveries of important
functions in a number of organisms, and many of the discoveries from fluorescent
research are being applied in medicine and biotechnology. Despite the importance
of biofluorescence to the function and success of marine organisms, there are
still many species where more research is needed to understand where, how, and
why these organisms biofluoresce. This fellowship will investigate these
questions while also providing a larger picture of the marine environment in
which organisms that use biofluorescence live. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
objectives of the proposed research are to identify the structure, pathway, and
environmental distribution of the heterotrophic dinoflagellate, Gyrodinium
jinhaense AP17, novel green fluorescent molecule(s). Specifically, this
fellowship aims to (I) determine G. jinhaense AP17’s fluorescent molecule’s
structure(s), (II) identify the chemical and molecular pathways behind the green
fluorescence, and (III) investigate the environmental distribution of this green
fluorescence in both local and global contexts. These aims will be achieved
through the integration of analytical chemical techniques, experimental
treatments, transcriptomics, gene silencing, analysis of metatranscriptomic
data, and environmental sampling. The fellow will gain new scientific skills in
analytical chemistry as well as improve and advance current research skills.
Moreover, the projects will include undergraduate researchers and at least one
workshop where public participants will be introduced to dinoflagellates by
sampling and observing them, with other plankton, under the microscope. All
findings will be published and shared broadly from elementary classrooms to
scientific meetings and with media to inspire interest in biology, oceanography,
conservation, and the scientific process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.