* 2208947
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: Predicting Host-Parasite Eco-Evolutionary Dynamics Across a Climate Gradient
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Kelsey Lyberger, Lyberger, Kelsey
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research will address how climate change
will affect interactions between parasites and their hosts. A warming
environment may favor the host or the parasite, and each partner may differ in
their ability to adapt. The fellow will conduct a set of studies and experiments
using larvae of the tree hole mosquito Aedes sierrensis and its parasite
Lambornella clarki to determine how temperature affects the interaction between
hosts and parasites, and how the adaptation of each species to its local
environment shapes this interaction. Additionally, the fellow will mentor
undergraduates from underrepresented groups in biology during summers and will
lead workshops to introduce students to computer programming.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will combine genomic sequencing of populations
of hosts and parasites collected from a range-wide climate gradient with a local
adaptation experiment to directly test the theory that the species with higher
genetic diversity and migration rates will be ahead in the coevolutionary arms
race and show signs of local adaptation. Further, the fellow will construct a
modified Susceptible-Infected-Recovered model, parameterized with experimental
data on local adaptation and thermal performance and validated with
observational data from the range-wide survey. The model will provide a
theoretical framework for integrating thermal and coevolutionary responses into
predictions of disease prevalence under climate change, which has relevance to
other types of diseases, e.g. mosquito-vectored diseases and diseases caused by
facultative parasites. The research findings will be shared with vector control
agencies and with the public through outreach events at the Jasper Ridge
Biological Preserve. Overall, results from this work will lead to a more general
understanding of the ecological and evolutionary principles that guide the
response of host–parasite systems to climate change. The fellow will receive
training in genomic analysis, experimental design, and model construction and
parameterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.