* 2208034
* Cross-scale dynamics of LASV spillover within human-driven ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* Christian Happi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2027
* USD 2,627,212.00

The transmission of animal diseases to humans has significant consequences for
public health and economies globally, as evidenced by the COVID-19 pandemic.
When evaluating disease risks, policy decisions often rely on data visualization
techniques, such as risk maps. However, there is a limited understanding of how
broad-scale risk maps relate to local-scale processes that affect disease
transmission from animals to humans. For example, risk maps are often missing
vital information on how broad associations between disease risk and factors
such as climate, land-use, and poverty are driven by interactions between
humans, animals, and the environment that affect probability of human infection.
On the other hand, localized studies revealing fine-scale disease processes are
often poorly situated to inform projections of risk at broader spatial scales.
This project bridges this gap through a study of Lassa fever, a rodent-borne
hemorrhagic fever of public health significance in West Africa and a global
health priority. Field studies are conducted to examine human-environment
interactions that support reservoir populations and behaviors that result in
Lassa virus exposures. These data can improve our understanding of risk factors
and inform public health policies. This study uses participatory methods that
engage local communities at the forefront of global health challenges in the
construction of knowledge and management strategies. It also contributes to
public health via the production of robust data products for scientists and
decision makers and improved epidemic preparedness. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project uses a fine-scale quantitative and participatory modelling approach that
explicitly integrates results from local-scale field studies into broad-scale
risk models to identify the patterns and processes that drive spillover of Lassa
virus within human-driven ecosystems. Field studies sample across known broad-
scale drivers of Lassa fever risk to understand how local-scale processes vary
across scale (e.g., how reservoir population dynamics are impacted by human
land-use, or how poverty translates to high-risk human behavior etc.). Data on
rodent population dynamics, movement, and infection are combined with data from
participatory activity mapping and ethno-epidemiological research to capture the
anthropogenic factors that construct pathways for zoonotic spillover; for
example, through practices that modify environments, pathogen dynamics within
reservoir hosts, and the human-reservoir interface. These local-scale analyses
inform a set of interface models that can help to unpack the processes that
determine the spatial and temporal distribution of Lassa virus and risky human
exposures in relation to landscape dynamics. Model outcomes provide scenarios
for participatory examination of disease control interventions in the context of
competing risks, e.g., poverty and food insecurity. Finally, data from empirical
studies and emergent patterns from the interface models are integrated back into
existing broad-scale regression-based risk models. Local-scale studies and model
predictions can therefore fill key gaps in our understanding of how risk is
propagated across scales and be used to inform ongoing disease management
efforts for Lassa fever, and zoonotic spillover more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.