* 2208396
* Collaborative Research: Where does the water go: Improving understanding of stream-aquifer-atmosphere interactions around Beaver Dam Analogues
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Christa Kelleher, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 05/31/2024
* USD 218,027.00

In the arid western US, groundwater-surface water interactions have been
historically shaped by the presence of beavers, with beaver dams storing and
redirecting water into the floodplain. As populations of beavers have declined,
local municipalities, state agencies, and private landowners have been
installing beaver dam analogues (BDAs), a stream restoration structure that
mimics the form of natural beaver dams, in beaver-less stream reaches. Due to
their simplicity and expected benefits, BDAs are gaining extensive attention and
implementation across the western US, in spite of the absence of clear
scientific data to assess their impacts on reach scale hydrology. The proposed
project aims to address this gap in knowledge in order to determine the extent
to which BDAs alter groundwater and surface water levels, groundwater- surface
water exchange, and evapotranspiration by monitoring a research site containing
several BDAs located in Wyoming, USA. The project will be performed in close
collaboration with The Nature Conservancy of Wyoming (TNC-WY), who owns and
manages the research site. While the proposed work aims to improve understanding
of hydrological processes in the context of BDA deployment, observations will
also inform several management goals associated with BDAs (including reducing
stream velocity, reconnecting the stream channel to the floodplain, and
supporting riparian vegetation for wildlife habitat and forage for cattle).
Investigators will work in close collaboration with TNC-WY to evaluate these
management goals, to share findings with local and regional practitioners and
stakeholders, and to leverage the research site as a demonstration site for
BDAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project is to
disentangle the complex feedbacks between the stream, atmosphere (via
evapotranspiration), and aquifer (via hyporheic exchange and water table
dynamics) associated with BDA implementation at the watershed scale. To address
this objective, field and in situ observations as well as high resolution
imagery via unoccupied aerial vehicle (UAV) will be collected annually at
research sites and used in combination with integrated modeling of stream-
aquifer-atmosphere responses to constrain behavior during the length of the
project and beyond. Observations and numerical modeling will be leveraged to
determine the hydrological mechanisms governing interactions between BDAs and
evapotranspiration, streamflow, and groundwater levels to achieve a full
understanding of how BDA structures shape the physical hydrology of stream
reaches. Empirical analyses and model-based approaches employed in this study
will directly assess the responses of the research site to BDA installation. In
addition, both empirical and model-based analysis will yield transferrable
insight regarding the impacts of BDAs on hydrological processes and how this
compares with reference reaches. As the body of literature assessing the
mechanisms and impacts of BDAs is virtually nonexistent, this work will provide
much-needed context for western US watersheds where changes due to climate and
humans are colliding. Finally, this work will significantly advance the field of
data collection via UAV for hydrological and ecological sciences by providing
the broader scientific community with a template to use UAVs for environmental
data collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.