* 2208916
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: From helical fibers to vortical flow: unravelling the contributions of muscle geometry and physiology to swimming performance
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Yordano Jimenez, Jimenez, Yordano Eleazar
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The goal of
the Fellow’s research is to understand how animal movement is affected by small
differences in muscle anatomy. This research project begins with a simple
observation: bending from side to side is the oldest and most common form of
vertebrate locomotion. Nearly all fishes swim by bending their bodies back and
forth. For most vertebrates, in fact, to move is to bend. However, animals that
use body bending are subject to a biomechanical constraint: as muscles flex the
spine, muscle tissue deforms unevenly. Muscle close to the spine only shortens a
little, and muscle far from the spine shortens a lot, and neither of these are
optimal. This uneven muscle deformation risks sabotaging locomotor performance.
This research seeks to determine whether body-bending vertebrates may have
evolved specialized muscle fiber geometries to solve this biomechanical problem.
To answer these questions, the Fellow will use multiple cutting-edge approaches
to analyze and model fish motion in water. To increase participation in STEM,
the Fellow will serve in leadership roles in the Society for the Advancement of
Chicanos and Native Americans (SACNAS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To determine how
vertebrates have solved the biomechanical problem of bending, the Fellow is
conducting two studies examining fish and their geometrically complex axial
musculature. The work will involve multiple approaches including 3D modelling,
in vitro muscle physiology, and particle imaging velocimetry (PIV) to measure
patterns of water flow. The first study measures body curvature, muscle
activity, and fluid flow in largemouth bass swimming at different speeds. The
second study uses a classic technique called a “work loop” to measure
contractile performance for muscle fiber bundles with different fiber
geometries, as calculated using a 3D mathematical model and 3D measurements of
muscle fiber angle. The data from these experiments will be combined to generate
a spatial quantitative map of internal muscular forces and external hydrodynamic
forces. These results will determine if the complex helical fiber geometry of
fish muscles solves the bending problem. This research will also expand the
understanding of how force generated within muscles is transmitted into the
water, and whether fish shift strategies at different swimming speeds. For long-
term career development, the Fellow is being trained in student mentorship and
lab management. To broaden participation of underrepresented minorities, the
Fellow will participate in leadership programs offered by SACNAS and will also
participate in outreach at the Museum of Science in
Boston.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.