* 2208078
* Strong-Field and Ultrafast Processes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jean Marcel Ngoko Djiokap, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

This project aims to describe the interaction of intense coherent radiation with
large quantum systems, and to image and control the correlated dynamical
electronic processes in atoms by using ultrafast external fields. The challenge
in the theoretical description of such processes resides in the difficulty in
describing accurately the time-dependent interactions between particles
including the strong oscillatory fields. The basic research supported by this
project will provide insights into photochemical processes and contribute
broadly towards efforts to control matter on an atomic scale. A postdoctoral
researcher involved with this project will be given a broad education in
theoretical atomic, molecular, and optical physics, in computational physics,
and in ultra-cold atom physics; first-hand experience in all aspects of
scientific communication, and in teaching undergraduates at a large Big 10 Land
Grant university. In addition, this work will contribute to broadening
participation in STEM education since the PI, an underrepresented minority, will
serve as a role model for students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The time-dependent studies in strong-field physics
will promote the understanding of nonlinear and correlated elementary processes,
such as non-sequential double ionization (NSDI) and above-threshold ionization
(ATI) of two-active-electron atomic systems. Specific investigations supported
in this project include a full control of a particular channel in NSDI of He
atoms by tuning parameters of the time-delayed IR and XUV fields. Control of
photoelectron wave packets leading to spiral vortices from ATI demonstrates its
coherence (wave) nature, which is expected to occur in several branches of
science, is illustrated here in cold-atom physics. By emulating the basic
pattern of spiral vortices in ultracold-atom physics, this research seeks to
establish ultracold-atom quantum simulators as a complementary tool for
investigating ultrafast dynamics not only for small but also for larger quantum
systems. To overcome the challenge described above, this program aims to develop
some theoretical time-dependent approaches (that go beyond the single-active-
electron approximation). In particular, for two-electron systems the group has
developed efficient, optimized, and accurate numerical methods to solve the
full-dimensional time-dependent Schrödinger equation. For larger quantum
systems, they propose to use ultracold-atom quantum simulators, which will be
illustrated here for the case of one- and two-electron atoms as proof-of-
principle calculations. The recent experimental development by David Weld from
UCSB highlighted the critical need for and timeliness of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Atomic,
Molecular, and Optical Physics Theory Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.