* 2208777
* SBIR Phase I:  Multi-principal element alloy fillers for toughness enhancement in repair of Ni-base superalloy components
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Benjamin Schneiderman, HYSA FILLERS L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I project will be to improve safety and
reliability, and to reduce operating costs, for gas turbine engines, a
technology that impacts the daily lives of Americans by providing electric power
and aircraft propulsion. Moreover, the national defense and energy industries
are particularly reliant upon this technology, making this project highly
impactful to these aspects of American welfare. Gas turbine engines contain
nickel alloy blades, which must be carefully inspected and repaired at regular
intervals to ensure failure never occurs unexpectedly, as in-service failures
inevitably result in catastrophic engine damage. The integrity of repairs is
largely dependent upon mechanical performance of filler alloys designed to patch
cracks and cavities in the engine blades, which this project aims to improve
through novel metallurgical design grounded in fundamental science. The
scientific community at large will benefit from this research, as it will
pioneer applied development for alloys within an emerging material class only
two decades in the making. Designed alloys will have a commercial advantage over
existing repair products due to superior performance and similar cost. This
advantage will form the core of a successful business opportunity, which will
generate revenue and provide STEM jobs as the business expands.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;When designing new alloys from the ground up,
rather than making modifications to existing alloys, limitless possibilities
arise in multi-principal element alloys regarding which metallic elements to
include and in what concentrations, necessitating a careful design strategy to
efficiently identify candidates for a particular application. This project
employs, as its strong technical innovation, a rigorous alloy selection strategy
grounded in fundamental physics-based calculations to achieve this outcome.
Equilibrium and non-equilibrium metallurgical thermodynamics calculations form
the core of the selection strategy, with the aim to identify alloy compositions
in which phases detrimental to mechanical performance are most likely to be
suppressed. The project will design and test alloys to address cross-cutting
industrial challenges â€“ first and foremost, filling cracks in complex nickel-
base superalloys designed for use in the harsh operating environment of a gas
turbine engine. Much of the scope of work in this project will involve a vetting
process to test whether the filler alloys can withstand these harsh conditions
after crack repairs are performed. It will be of critical industrial relevance
to validate their long-term metallurgical and mechanical viability in a
simulated environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.