* 2208901
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Statistical Mechanics Reveals the Long-Term and Multi-Scale Consequences of Perturbations to Ecological and Evolutionary Dynamics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Renata Diaz, Diaz, Renata Montserrat
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

Fellow's name: Renata Diaz&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number: 2208901&lt;br/&gt;Research
title: Statistical mechanics reveals the long-term and multi-scale consequences
of perturbations to ecological and evolutionary dynamics&lt;br/&gt;Sponsoring
scientist(s) and host institution(s): Dr. Andrew Rominger, University of
Maine&lt;br/&gt;This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life
Governing Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The
fellowship supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to
the area of Rules of Life in innovative ways. A key challenge for ecology in the
21st century is predicting how perturbations, such as species loss, declines in
abundance, and changing environmental conditions, propagate across levels of
organization and over time in biological systems. Ecological systems can be
extremely difficult to predict in specific detail, but often conform to
predictable patterns at larger, aggregated scales. In many instances, these
aggregate patterns converge with patterns that emerge at random - not because
ecological and evolutionary processes do not contribute to these patterns, but
because many interacting processes at multiple levels of organization smooth or
cancel each other out. However, strong perturbations can temporarily drive
aggregate patterns away from the forms they assume at random. The fellow will
construct a unified theoretical, empirical, and computational framework for
using disruptions to aggregate patterns to detect and diagnose strong
disturbances to ecological and evolutionary dynamics. As part of this work, they
will develop computational and educational materials to facilitate wider uptake
of complex systems approaches in ecology, and lead workshops in active allyship
in the university setting and computational skills for early-stage scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will use agent-based simulations of random, process-
driven, and experimentally perturbed eco-evolutionary dynamics to characterize
the expected impacts of different types and magnitudes of disturbances on
aggregated patterns in ecological systems. They will integrate these findings
with the predictions from established theories derived from community ecology,
population genetics, and statistical mechanics. They will test the causal link
between perturbations and disruptions to aggregate patterns in experimentally
manipulated empirical systems using case studies and a meta-analysis of
disturbance experiments. They will develop a lab module on emergent phenomena
for a theoretical ecology course, and produce software packages, workshop
curricula, and interactive online tutorials to support applications of this
conceptual framework in new contexts. They will receive training in simulation
modeling, population genetics, software and curriculum development, and
mentoring. The products of this work will be publicly archived and made openly
available for re-use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.