* 2208422
* ECR Hub: Advancing the Long-Term Potential of Fundamental Research
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* David Miller, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,861,961.00

As a 5-year resource center, the EHR Core Research – Resource Coordination Hub
(ECR Hub) is designed to advance the ways in which NSF’s ECR Core (ECR) and ECR
Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR:BCSER) programs can better use
and support fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. ECR-funded
research has the potential to address pressing national problems by developing
foundational knowledge that can guide and inform the broader set of federal STEM
education investments. To help realize that long-term potential, the ECR Hub has
two central goals: (a) extend the influence and reach of existing ECR
investments (e.g., existing research results, existing ECR methods training
institutes) and (b) provide ECR career development opportunities to current and
potential grantees. The ECR Hub will conduct outreach to researcher communities
and institutions currently underrepresented in the ECR
portfolio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ECR Hub will target three core, immediate
audiences: current ECR grantees, prospective ECR grantees, and stakeholders in
other NSF Education and Human Resources (EHR) programs reached via coordinating
with other EHR resource hubs. The ECR Hub will engage, support, and build
connections among and across these audiences through a coordinated set of six
key project activities: (1) identifying the needs of a diverse ECR grantee
community, (2) cataloging and synthesizing past and current ECR research, (3)
building research networks and information sharing for current grantees, (4)
conducting outreach and broadening participation of prospective grantees, (5)
consolidating and disseminating resources from ECR methods training institutes,
and (6) building cross-hub collaborations to advance long-term ECR program
goals. The American Institutes for Research is the lead institution for the ECR
Hub, working in close partnership with scholars from Morgan State University,
Northwestern University, and Georgia State University. Partner to Improve will
serve as the external evaluator, and an institutionally diverse and
multidisciplinary advisory board will help guide the ECR Hub goals and
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform
efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and
innovations to address persistent challenges in
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.