* 2208905
* SBIR Phase II:  Rotary Electroadhesive Clutch for Lightweight and Energy-Efficient Actuators in Next-Generation Robots
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Stuart Diller, ESTAT ACTUATION, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 01/31/2025
* USD 944,190.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to create a lightweight and efficient
rotary electroadhesive clutch that enables improved robotic hardware performance
across the manufacturing, logistics, and medical industries. Despite decades of
research and commercial effort, society has yet to realize the widespread
availability of affordable robots that can safely work alongside humans and
assist them in their daily lives. A central obstacle in achieving this vision is
the prohibitive cost and poor performance of actuators. Efficient, lightweight
clutches that can improve robot operation time and safety at a competitive price
are a gateway to the proliferation of human-assistive robotic systems into
everyday life. For example, inexpensive motion assistance exoskeletons could
improve the quality of life for millions of physically impaired people who are
otherwise unable to engage in normal daily activities. Affordable robots could
also increase access to expensive labor-intensive services, such as daily
physical rehabilitation or full/part-time in-home care.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will be used to develop new materials understanding and
correlate parameters such as morphology, dielectric thickness, and chemical
modification to rotary electroadhesive clutch performance. The materials will be
assessed for electrical and physical properties, as well as ease of
incorporation into electroadhesive clutch assemblies and lifetime. Selecting
optimal materials will improve fundamental performance while continuing to lower
the weight, footprint, and energy consumption of rotary clutch designs. These
research and development activities will de-risk the technology and enable the
construction of a production-ready product. To efficiently achieve these goals,
testing capabilities will be improved through the development of automated test
stands to aid in rapid materials assessment, lifetime testing, and iterative
design. For fundamental materials understanding, novel testing protocols will be
developed that assess the electrical and wear properties of new materials,
producing a widespread scientific impact in fields such as corrosion, coatings,
and adhesion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.