* 2208356
* Collaborative Research: Algorithms, Theory, and Validation of Deep Graph Learning with Limited Supervision: A Continuous Perspective
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Thomas Strohmer, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2025
* USD 88,296.00

Graph-structured data is ubiquitous in scientific and artificial intelligence
applications, for instance, particle physics, computational chemistry, drug
discovery, neural science, recommender systems, robotics, social networks, and
knowledge graphs. Graph neural networks (GNNs) have achieved tremendous success
in a broad class of graph learning tasks, including graph node classification,
graph edge prediction, and graph generation. Nevertheless, there are several
bottlenecks of GNNs: 1) In contrast to many deep networks such as convolutional
neural networks, it has been noticed that increasing the depth of GNNs results
in a severe accuracy degradation, which has been interpreted as over-smoothing
in the machine learning community. 2) The performance of GNNs relies heavily on
a sufficient number of labeled graph nodes; the prediction of GNNs will become
significantly less reliable when less labeled data is available. This research
aims to address these challenges by developing new mathematical understanding of
GNNs and theoretically-principled algorithms for graph deep learning with less
training data. The project will train graduate students and postdoctoral
associates through involvement in the research. The project will also integrate
the research into teaching to advance data science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop next-generation
continuous-depth GNNs leveraging computational mathematics tools and insights
and to advance data-driven scientific simulation using the new GNNs. This
project has three interconnected thrusts that revolve around pushing the
envelope of theory and practice in graph deep learning with limited supervision
using PDE and harmonic analysis tools: 1) developing a new generation of
diffusion-based GNNs that are certifiable to learning with deep architectures
and less training data; 2) developing a new efficient attention-based approach
for learning graph structures from the underlying data accompanied by
uncertainty quantification; and 3) application validation in learning-assisted
scientific simulation and multi-modal learning and software
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.