* 2208840
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Reversible Formation of Sodium Hydrosulfide in Hybrid Electrolytes for High-Energy Density Storage
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Zheng Li, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2025
* USD 319,875.00

The development of the high-energy density and low-cost sodium-sulfur
(Na/S-NaHS) battery technology can potentially have a transformational impact on
the nation’s energy security and critical materials supply chain. This will
yield new methods and chemistry understanding to enable the use of this battery
system in applications requiring more durability and lower-cost including
electric vehicles and grid-scale energy storage for renewable energy generation.
This project will enhance partnerships between academia and industry and
facilitate the transfer of laboratory inventions to the marketplace. Graduate
and undergraduate students will receive research and industry internships
training through this project, and students from underrepresented groups will be
recruited to participate in this project. A special aspect of this project is
the collaboration with Argonne National Laboratory’s Advanced Photon Source for
in situ characterization studies and hands-on student
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By characterizing sodium-polysulfide speciation
and the electrode process of the battery, this project aims to provide
fundamental insights into the multistep phase transformation reaction pathway of
the sodium-sulfur chemistry in specific enabling electrolyte systems. By
focusing on X-ray scattering characterization of the electrolyte system, this
project will help understand the solvation structure evolution of the
electrolyte systems at the molecular scale. By focusing on the exchange current
density and nucleation and growth rate during electrochemical reactions, this
project will enable a better understanding of the Na/S-NaHS electrode reaction
kinetics. Together, these studies will advance the knowledge and understanding
of the thermodynamics and kinetics of metal-polysulfide electrochemical
reactions in various electrolyte systems in both solution and solid
precipitation regions. The insight gained here will thus address critical needs
in developing the high-energy density battery using abundant materials and lay
the foundation for future research in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.