* 2208248
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of novel artificial intelligence (AI)-enabled, non-invasive, heart attack diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2023,09/30/2023
* Jitto Titus, RCE TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 09/30/2023
* USD 255,892.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is a novel, portable, diagnostic device for non-invasively diagnosing
myocardial infarctions (MI) and ischemia in real-time with a high level of
sensitivity and specificity. The system aims to provide an accurate point-of-
care clinical classification for the 805,000 heart attack cases occurring in the
US each year with a real-time diagnostic and monitoring tool. The system aims to
significantly reduce the time needed with current invasive sampling and blood
analysis measures, thereby improving patient outcomes during the first critical
hours of an MI while saving healthcare resources and improving efficiency. The
portable nature of the technology enables other forms of integration including
at home, in clinic, hospital bedside use, or field use
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will develop a proof-of-concept diagnostic-prognostic
machine learning-based system for detecting MI. The scope of activities includes
testing multiple techniques and models and producing distribution analyses and
event plots of training data in order to optimize performance compared to
clinically adjudicated events. Success measures include a data model which, when
using their proprietary external noninvasive transdermal biomarker sensor with
their wearable garment electrocardiograms (EKGs), are able to detect MI with
&gt; 85% accuracy. The device will also be able to detect clinically relevant
ischemia with &gt; 85% accuracy. These results will progress the company’s
objective of completing a standalone, noninvasive, real-time diagnostic and
remote monitoring tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.