* 2208797
* Broadening Participation in the CyberCorps(R) Scholarship for Service Program
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2027
* Carla Brodley, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,601,827.00

Despite the high demand for cybersecurity professionals, progress in recruiting
members of populations historically underrepresented in the computing field has
been limited. In order to meet this demand and ensure a robust cybersecurity
workforce, a more inclusive and diverse workforce is needed. This project aims
to address this need and serve the national interest by broadening participation
in the NSF’s CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program. Northeastern
University’s Center for Inclusive Computing (CIC) will work with SFS
institutions to build inclusive environments and increase the representation of
students of all races, ethnicities, and genders earning cybersecurity graduate
degrees. Specifically, CIC will empower SFS institutions to build bridge
programs that connect graduate degree-seeking individuals from populations, who
have been historically underrepresented in computing, to advanced degrees in
cybersecurity. Such bridge programs will enable the participation of
individuals, who may have their undergraduate degrees in subject areas other
than computing, to pursue higher education in cybersecurity at SFS project
sites. Creating a path for a demographically and socio-economically broader
population to access cybersecurity graduate degree programs is critical to
strengthening and diversifying the cybersecurity workforce. Over a three-year
period, the CIC will work with two cohorts of up to eight SFS institutions
(i.e., for a potential total of 16 institutions) to identify and implement
strategies that have been shown effective in attracting, retaining, and
graduating students who identify as women, Black, African American, Latino(a),
Hispanic or Indigenous. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CIC was created in 2019 as a
national effort to increase the representation of women of all races and
ethnicities in computing. In addition to supporting institutions financially,
the CIC provides program management, technical consulting, data collection, and
visualization services. The objectives of this project are to leverage CIC's
experience with increasing the participation of women in computing and apply it
more broadly to increase the diversity and number of all students participating
in SFS projects, with particular attention to those seeking graduate degrees. To
achieve these objectives, the CIC will issue a call for proposals to all SFS
institutions interested in and committed to building a bridge program. For
selected institutions, the project team will conduct in-person site visits
involving current students and SFS scholars, cyber faculty, advisors, teaching
assistants, and the relevant chair(s), dean(s), or provost(s). The project team
will develop a summary report to share with the institution and NSF. The report
will summarize findings and recommendations on the interventions the CIC
believes will lead to a meaningful change in demographic diversity. The CIC will
also support the implementation of selected institutions over a two-year period,
providing coaching and support and connecting institutions with consultants with
deep expertise in related areas. Consultants’ areas of expertise will include
but not be limited to recruiting, marketing, student mentoring and support,
relevant industry engagement, and curriculum
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the Racial
Equity in STEM Education program (EHR Racial Equity). The program supports
research and practice projects that investigate how considerations of racial
equity factor into the improvement of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center the
voices, knowledge, and experiences of the individuals, communities, and
institutions most impacted by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise.
This program aligns with NSF’s core value of supporting outstanding researchers
and innovative thinkers from across the Nation's diversity of demographic
groups, regions, and types of organizations. Funds for EHR Racial Equity are
pooled from programs across EHR in recognition of the alignment of its projects
with the collective research and development thrusts of the four divisions of
the directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.