* 2208680
* Research Initiation: Advanced Modeling of Metacognitive Problem Solving and Group Effectiveness in Collaborative Engineering Teams
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Faisal Aqlan, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 02/28/2022
* USD 13,725.00

Most engineering professionals acquire their technical skills through academic
curricula. However, in order to succeed in fulfilling the missions of their
professions, graduating engineers require a broader set of professional skills.
Problem-solving, metacognitive awareness, teamwork, and mindsets supporting
sustainability are 21st century skills that help engineers solve complex
problems. These professional skills also allow engineers to work effectively in
collaborative teams. This project aims to investigate how engineering students
develop their professional skills and provide an approach for measuring and
quantifying these skills. Undergraduate engineering students will work
individually and in groups to solve real-life manufacturing problems while their
professional skills are assessed and enhanced. In order to optimize team
performance, the conflicts and errors that occur during the problem solving
process will be minimized. By acquiring these skills, engineering students will
become effective problem solvers and will be prepared to address complex
problems in their work environment. Extensive academic and industry
dissemination and outreach will be used to bolster the broader impact of project
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This initiative will develop a new integrated
approach to understanding professional skills in the engineering student
population and determine if students are attending to the correct elements while
solving engineering problems, both in individual and group settings. Physical
simulations and virtual reality testbeds will be used to study metacognitive
problem-solving and group effectiveness in collaborative teams. The testbeds
will help to pinpoint what the students are paying attention to during the
learning process as the low-level attention is measured through eye-tracking and
application of psychological theories of learning and attention. The project
will then develop analytical models to optimize team performance. The analytical
models will combine conflict &amp; error algorithms and statistical modeling
methods to describe this learning process and identify where improvements can be
made. The models will provide valuable insights into the metacognitive decision-
making process. By studying eye movements (using eye-tracking), a deeper
understanding of metacognition and factors affecting it can be achieved. Because
eye movements are indicative of attention, this will allow determination of what
information is being attended to, and ultimately processed, by students engaged
in the process. By comparing physical simulations with virtual reality
environments, this research will provide insights into the applicability of
virtual reality technologies in the education domain. Research activities will
be integrated into undergraduate courses to support problem-solving skill
development. The research will contribute to the economic growth and security of
our nation by enhancing the well-being, innovation, and creative problem-solving
skills of undergraduate engineering students. This in turn will positively
impact our society, academic environment, as well as manufacturing, service and
healthcare industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.