* 2208499
* Coupled Flow and Transport Modeling and Simulation of Complex Fluids and Extreme Weather Patterns by Harnessing Data
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Young-Ju Lee, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 05/31/2025
* USD 352,852.00

Complex fluids and tornadoes can be understood mathematically by studying a
coupled flow and transports. Complex fluids are used in many important areas,
including medicine, the military, and the oil industry, to name a few. Recent
experimental results by Shell groups show that the shear induced structure
observed in the wormlike micellar fluids can be effectively used for enhanced
oil recovery. The proposed research will provide a desired quantitative
understanding of wormlike micellar fluids. Tornadoes are complex meteorological
phenomena that are often associated with severe convective atmospheric
conditions. According to NOAA/National Weather Service, more than 797 tornadoes
occurrences have already been confirmed in 2021. Tornadoes are becoming more
frequent and severe due to global warming as well. The proposed research will
elucidate the understanding of tornadogenesis, which is crucial to make a proper
tornado warning issue, thereby avoiding catastrophic damage and casualties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop conservative, discrete maximum
principle preserving, and efficient numerical schemes that can be used for
simulating coupled flow and transports that arise in important areas of
research, such as complex fluids and tornadoes. These new methods will be
analyzed mathematically and enhanced by using a class of new fast solvers to
drastically reduce the complexity of computational bottlenecks. The framework
developed by the PI in this project will enable researchers to tackle a wide
spectrum of physical parameters that have been elusive for computational
rheologists for decades. Compatible window-wise physics informed neural network
will be attempted to solve regularized complex fluids. The project will present
a new tornado model for the understanding of extreme micro-weather patterns in
vapor-to-particle reaction, convection, and diffusion. In particular, this
project will elucidate and fill the gap between mathematical modeling and
phenomena of tornadoes, thereby deepening the understanding of tornadogenesis. A
data-driven deep neural networks will be designed for determining the unknown
physical parameters in the tornado model as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.