* 2208406
* Collaborative Research: Data-Driven Microreaction Engineering by Autonomous Robotic Experimentation in Flow
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Milad Abolhasani, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 12/31/2025
* USD 375,984.00

Existing experimental strategies often fail to comprehensively explore the
reaction universe of new chemicals and materials created with multi-step
synthesis procedures. Given the resource-limited nature of experimental searches
to find the best reactants and reaction conditions for a certain chemical
product, the resulting ad-hoc or uninformed selection of experiments will likely
fail to uncover valuable reaction process insights. This collaborative research
project will create a science and engineering knowledge framework for
accelerated mechanistic reaction studies and synthesis process development of
emerging materials and molecules with multi-stage chemistries through a modular
approach to chemical synthesis guided by a multi-stage artificial intelligence
(AI) strategy. The research team will produce a new data-driven scientific
approach to accelerate design and synthesis of high-performing materials and
molecules, reducing development time from years to months. Potential
applications include energy and chemical technologies, resulting in clear
benefits to the nation's prosperity, health, and security. This
interdisciplinary research project involves integration of multiple fields
including reaction engineering, materials science, and AI. This project will
train graduate and undergraduate students in data-driven microreaction
engineering and AI-assisted experimentation. The interdisciplinary nature of
this collaborative project will enhance participation of students from groups
traditionally underrepresented in STEM-related research. Furthermore, the
results of this project will positively impact modern engineering education
through hands-on lab modules for undergraduate students and tutorial YouTube
videos, free to the public and based on the knowledge generated by this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Implementation of data-driven reaction
engineering concepts for emerging solution-processed materials and molecules
with multi-stage chemistries require fundamental advancements of AI-guided
reaction space exploration, surrogate modeling, and modular experimentation.
This project seeks to develop the science base and understanding of modular AI
modeling and decision-making strategies for data-driven microreaction
engineering through closed-loop modular experimentation. This will enable time-
and resource-efficient navigation through the multivariate chemical synthesis
space of emerging solution-processed materials and molecules with multi-stage
chemistries. The modular AI modeling effort will result in new algorithms that
incorporate problem-specific structure and decision-making modalities, enabling
autonomous experimentation to move past proof-of-concept demonstrations.
Specifically, data-driven microreaction engineering of colloidal quantum dots
(QDs) will be targeted, a choice driven by the intriguing size- and composition-
tunable optical and optoelectronic properties of QDs as well as multi-stage and
process-sensitive synthesis. The results of this collaborative project will
advance the state-of-the-art AI-guided chemical synthesis, while lowering the
barrier to the use of AI techniques, enabling their broad application among
other scientific domains. Furthermore, the modular surrogate modeling of the
multi-stage flow reactor systems can be used for evaluation, testing, and
validation of kinetics and mechanistic models of nanocrystal nucleation and
growth. The autonomous and modular flow synthesis strategy will result in a
transferable computational framework that can be applied to other problems in
chemical science and engineering, including the models that capture multi-stage,
multi-objective process optimization, a problem ubiquitous throughout
experimental sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.