* 2208341
* STTR Phase I:  Next Generation Residential Solar Power
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Issa Batarseh, PROTIUM POWER SYSTEMS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is a residential solar power generation
technology that could provide a significant improvement to the United States and
world goals to reduce carbon emissions. This project combines several
breakthrough technology developments to make solar-generated electricity
practical for the consumer, installer, and the power company. The breakthroughs
are not in photovoltaic (PV) efficiency, but instead, focus on technology that
significantly increases dependability (reliability, accessibility, and
maintainability); makes installations easier; and makes residential solar energy
suitable for large-scale power generation for utility companies. The target
customers are regional companies that sell and install solar energy systems on
residential rooftops. These companies are sensitive to the reliability
(warranty), affordability, performance, and safety of the equipment that they
install. There are about 1,000 solar power installation companies in the US, and
they are outfitting homes at the combined rate of almost one per minute. The
solar energy market is currently valued at $17 billion dollars annually and is
expected to double in size in the next 5 years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR
Phase I project proposes to develop an innovative architecture that consists of
modular PV panels, unique non-flammable battery packs, patent-pending high
efficiency converters, and a sophisticated interface to utility grids. There are
no power combiners, external charging systems, communications boxes, current
transformers, load switches, sub-panels, inverter boxes, power optimizers, or
bulky battery packs involved. The product provides a much-needed breakthrough
for the utility industry as it enables residential solar power generation to be
a suitable power source for large-scale connection to existing power
grids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.