* 2208391
* Runge-Kutta Discontinuous Galerkin Methods for Convection-Dominated Systems with Compact Stencils
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Zheng Sun, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2025
* USD 158,030.00

The main objective of this project is to systematically develop a novel class of
efficient and high order accurate Runge–Kutta (RK) discontinuous Galerkin (DG)
methods for convection-dominated problems and the related applications. The new
methods feature improved compactness and local structures. They are expected to
be more suitable for parallel computing and implicit time marching in
computational fluid dynamics simulation. They have potential applications in
diverse areas such as meteorology, oceanography, gas dynamics, aircraft design,
hydraulic engineering, oil recovery simulation, and so on. The project will also
provide research opportunities for graduate and/or undergraduate students
interested in computational mathematics and benefit curriculum development in
the PI’s department. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, the PI will
investigate a novel approach to reduce the stencil size of the traditional RKDG
methods, which typically grows with the number of RK stages. The resulting new
methods are referred to as the compact RKDG methods. A comprehensive study of
the methods will be carried out in the following directions. Firstly, high order
compact RKDG methods will be designed for nonlinear hyperbolic conservation
laws. Techniques for oscillation control, implicit time marching, and parallel
computing will be investigated. Secondly, a rigorous theoretical framework for
convergence, stability, and error analysis of the compact RKDG methods will be
established. Thirdly, numerical techniques to preserve the solution bounds and
investigate their applications to nonlinear hyperbolic systems in
multidimensions will be developed. Finally, in addition to purely convection
equations, the methods will be extended to convection-diffusion problems for
simulation of viscous flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.