* 2208822
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Rewriting the Code: Elucidating how early life adversity alters DNA to affect amygdala-related behavior
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Amelia Cuarenta, Cuarenta, Amelia
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 01/31/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Events
experienced early in life can have lasting consequences for brain development
and behavior. Recent research suggests that mobile genetic elements
(retrotransposons), which are so named because they can move around in the
genome, could be a mechanism by which early life events cause lasting effects.
This research will investigate how changes in the early life environment alter
mobility of a retrotransposon, called long interspersed element 1 (L1), in the
brain and whether these changes affect later social behavior in rats. This
research will enhance understanding of how the environment can impact behavior.
The project will also broaden participation for underrepresented groups in
biology through training of the fellow, workshops hosted through a collaboration
with local organizations committed to diversity and inclusion, mentorship of
students, and development of outreach networks for underrepresented scientists
in the Philadelphia area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate
how different environmental conditions (exposure to aversive odors) alter L1
insertion sites in the amygdala and whether these changes affect amygdala-
related behavior in rats. For the first aim, the fellow will use molecular
genetic approaches to determine number and location of de novo L1 in amygdala
cells and determine if a given endpoint is altered by early life experiences.
This research will be the first to use REBELseq in rats to identify the location
and number of de novo L1 insertions. These results will help resolve an ongoing
debate in the field about whether de novo L1 insertions are randomly inserted or
inserted systematically. For the second aim, the fellow will assess the
functional consequence of L1 knockdown in the amygdala. Prior research found a
negative correlation between L1 insertions and juvenile social play. Utilizing
antisense oligonucleotides, the fellow will transiently knockdown L1 mRNA within
the amygdala during the neonatal period and assess whether there is a resultant
increase in social play behavior or anxiety-related behavior during the juvenile
stage of development. This research will enhance understanding of how the
environment can impact behavior and document de novo L1 insertions and their
relevance during development. The fellow will partner with two different
diversity and inclusion programs to support underrepresented minority students
by creating workshops, serving as a panel member, and directly mentoring
students. Additionally, the fellow will create a networking event for
postdoctoral researchers to increase community engagement and collaboration at
the Philadelphia chapter of Society for Neuroscience
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.