* 2208804
* RUI: Shell Structure and Collective Excitations in Exotic Nuclei
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Lewis Riley, Ursinus College
* Standard Grant
* Alfredo Galindo-Uribarri
* 07/31/2025
* USD 152,151.00

This project engages Ursinus College undergraduates in experimental nuclear
structure research. The project is part of an ongoing collaboration with
colleagues at the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB), Florida State
University (FSU), and the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL). The
Ursinus College Nuclear Structure Group will contribute to the understanding of
the systematic evolution of single-particle and collective excitations through
experimental work at FRIB and FSU. The group will also support the nuclear
structure community through the continuing development of simulations of the
GRETA gamma-ray tracking array used extensively at FRIB. The project will
contribute to the training of the STEM work force by maintaining an active
research program in nuclear structure on the Ursinus College campus.
Undergraduate participants will apply their knowledge of physics outside the
classroom, gain practical skills in data acquisition, analysis, and simulation,
observe and participate in the operation of nuclear accelerator facilities and
present their work at the Ursinus College Summer Fellows Symposium and at
American Physical Society/Division of Nuclear Physics
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of two independent
experimental programs and a detector simulation effort. First, the mechanism(s)
driving changes in structure in the N=28 isotones below Ca-48, including the
erosion of the N=28 shell at Z=14 is a topic of great interest which the group
proposes to address at FRIB with inverse-kinematics proton scattering and
Coulomb excitation measurements of Si-42. The proposed measurements of Si-42
will extend the empirical picture of the relative contributions of neutrons and
protons to first 2+ excitations in the N=28 isotones down to Z=14, where the
N=28 shell collapses. Second, the systematics of first 2+ state energies suggest
that the N=32 subshell gap decreases with increasing neutron number above the Ca
isotopes and vanishes entirely in the Fe isotopes. The group proposes to
continue their ongoing investigation of the closing of the N=32 subshell through
a neutron-transfer measurement to an N=28 Cr-52 target at FSU. Finally, the
project will support the continuing development of simulations of the GRETA
gamma-ray tracking array. This work is an important to the nuclear science
community for at least two reasons. First, simulations are a central tool in
experimental design, needed for the planning and proposal of experiments at
FRIB. Second, due to the complexity of many experimental techniques, accurate
simulations are needed to extract experimental results from raw
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.