* 2208912
* Postdoctoral Fellowship FY22: Cis-regulatory basis of developmental plasticity and growth in the development and evolution of beetle horns, a class of highly diversified weapons
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Phillip Davidson, Davidson, Phillip Luke
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY22,
Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing Interactions
Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of Rules of Life in
innovative ways. How organisms develop is regulated through the interactions of
genes and environmental conditions like nutrition. Gene regulation (turning
genes “on” or “off”) therefore is an important point of control for many aspects
of development, such as growth. Further, when gene regulation is modified by
evolution, it can lead to the emergence of new traits. Yet, exactly how gene
regulation is controlled is not fully understood. The fellow will research
horned beetles, which are well known for their diverse forms of environment-
dependent development, in order to understand how environment affects gene
regulation to promote diversity. The fellow will also perform K-12 outreach and
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nutrition-responsive and male/female dimorphic
traits are among the fastest evolving phenotype classes, yet the contribution of
cis-regulatory elements like enhancers and promoters in facilitating or
hindering such diversification is still relatively unexplored. This research
seeks to better understand the interplay between molecular and environmental
factors in the development and evolution of beetle head horns, behaviorally and
ecologically significant structures. Horn formation is restricted to males in
most species, and may be further elaborated as alternative horned or hornless
male morphs depending on larval nutrition. In other species, such nutrition-
responsive development has been lost or even reversed such that females now grow
elaborate head horns. The fellow will 1) characterize the roles of chromatin
accessibility and regulatory element sequence in regulation of beetle horn
development within species; 2) perturb horn gene network function to gain
mechanistic insight into the epigenetic architecture underlying horn formation;
and 3) analyze how regulatory elements have evolved to drive diversification of
beetle horn shape and size across species. Collectively, this proposal will
provide fundamental insight into the role of cis-regulatory elements in the
evolutionary development of traits across multiple axes of biological
diversification of relevance across the tree of life. This research will be
directly integrated with two broader impact efforts including creating high
school summer research opportunities in bioinformatics at Indiana University and
developing educational resources on genomics for K-12 schools in south-central
Indiana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.