* 2208782
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Syntax and its interfaces in an endangered language
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Madeline Bossi, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 05/31/2024
* USD 21,104.00

This project uses detailed fieldwork with native speakers to study the factors
that influence word choices in how speakers convey information about what they
do and do not know in an understudied and endangered language. While speakers of
all languages make these choices, addressing this question in an endangered and
less studied language is important for two reasons: 1) understanding the choices
that speakers of different languages make is key to identifying universal
patterns across languages, and 2) this language has many features that are not
common across languages, which make it a useful testing ground for current
linguistic theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves three case
studies exploring the structure and meaning of verbs like 'think' and 'say',
words that translate as both 'might' and 'must', and questions that imply that
the speaker already knows the answer. In all of these cases, speakers must
choose to use one particular word or sentence type over another, which often has
implications that go beyond the literal meaning of the sentence. This type of
research is difficult to conduct in understudied languages, since it requires a
basic knowledge of the language's syntax and semantics, to which this project
also contributes. The research will be based on interviews with native speakers,
as well as oral narratives and conversations between speakers. In addition to
advancing linguistic theory, this project contributes to the creation of
language materials for the community, including an online "living dictionary"
containing practical words and phrases with corresponding audio
recordings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.