* 2208971
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Molecular Evolution of Bacterial Iron Piracy in Amoeba Hosts
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Edward Culbertson, Culbertson, Edward McLouth
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 05/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Environmental microorganisms, like bacteria,
can evolve the molecular machinery to become disease pathogens in animal or
human hosts. How does this occur? One hypothesis is that the need to survive
predation by microeukaryotes, such as amoeba, selects for the evolution of genes
that fight eukaryotic immunity. However, one ancient eukaryotic immune response
is to deny pathogens access to iron. Successful pathogens have evolved tools to
fight against the host to acquire iron. The outcome of this molecular tug of war
is critical as iron is a vital micronutrient, required by most organisms for
growth and survival. This project focuses on how adaptation to predatory amoeba,
specifically the host-pathogen battle for iron has caused the bacterial pathogen
Legionella pneumophila to evolve at the molecular level. The Fellow will recruit
and mentor students in research in collaboration with the University of
Pittsburgh. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Host-pathogen conflicts can lead to molecular
arms races, where domains of the proteins at the host-pathogen interface are
subjected to ongoing cycles of rapid host and pathogen evolution. This project
will test the hypothesis that the battle for iron has led iron sequestration
genes to rapidly evolve as part of a molecular arms race between Legionella and
its natural amoeba hosts. This project takes advantage of the power and utility
of the Legionella/Dictyostelium infection model. Specifically, the Fellow will
interrogate the evolution of MavN, a protein secreted by Legionella that
functions to transport iron from the host cytosol into the Legionella-containing
vacuole. The MavN protein shows signatures of rapid evolution and this sequence
diversity has phenotypic consequences. These features suggest that MavN might be
evolving due to a molecular arms race. This work bridges the current divide
between evolutionary microbiology, bioinformatics, and bacteriology, and will
enable the Fellow to enhance and develop skills that they will need to establish
their own career as an independent researcher. This project will enable the
Fellow to gain training in mentoring, scientific rigor, and how to foster
inclusive environments in STEM. In addition, the Fellow will engage in efforts
designed to increase scientific outreach in the Pittsburgh area by enhancing
K-12 STEM curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.