* 2208715
* I-Corps: Advanced Salt Electrolysis Process for the Domestic Refinement of Battery Minerals
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Ashok Gadgil, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of technologies that could perform high-efficiency salt splitting
electrolysis more efficiently and at reduced cost via innovations in catalytic
materials design and reactor architecture. Current state-of-the-art electrolysis
technologies utilize potentially expensive catalytic materials and can have
limited efficiency due to their unoptimized cell design. The electrolysis
technology to be developed utilizes low-cost carbon-based flow-electrodes that
have high-catalytic activity and incorporate the latest innovations from flow-
battery cell design into electrochemical mineral refining. The result may be a
reduction in cost and a reduction in the environmental impact of what is
traditionally a high-emissions chemical process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of potentially novel process
technology. This innovation is the electrified, single-step conversion of
lithium extracted from natural brines. This technology could have distinct
economic and environmental advantages over conventional hydrothermal/chemical
conversion processes and may support upstream chemical processes by producing
hydrochloride for sorbent regeneration. This electrolysis technology may allow
for ion-selective, closed-loop recycling, and could offer cost savings in energy
consumption and carbon emissions compared to existing refinement processes that
require a consistent supply of reagents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.