* 2208030
* Collaborative Research: Dynamical Sampling on Graphs: Mathematical Framework and Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Akram Aldroubi, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 06/30/2025
* USD 292,872.00

Effective methods for analyzing data that evolve in time are crucial for solving
some of the most relevant problems of society today. Such methods help identify
the source and track the spread of a virus, detect and monitor dangerous
pollutants, study neurological and other biomedical interactions, and design
transportation networks for data, energy, or goods. In many applications, such
as the ones mentioned above, data are often modeled by time-evolving functions
on graphs. In this project, a diverse group of Ph.D. students, postdoctoral
fellows, and senior researchers will develop novel mathematical techniques and
algorithms for designing cost-effective space-time sampling, processing, and
reconstruction strategies for such functions. The algorithms will analyze and
manage various time-evolving processes that are sampled under realistic
conditions and corrupted by noise. The project will study the optimal spatial
placement of sensors for data collection, space-time trade-off between the
number of sensors and the frequency of their activation, and ways of identifying
various types of parameters of an evolution process driving the data. The
research is expected to have a significant impact on sensing network design and
implementation as well as other applications where signals on graphs are
utilized. Broader impacts of the project will include developing and mentoring a
diverse working group of junior researchers from several institutions and
engagement in various outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses on the development of a mathematical framework, tools, and algorithms
for sampling and reconstruction of time-evolving functions on graphs. The
investigators will solve several inverse problems such as the recovery of an
initial state, an evolution operator, and/or a forcing source term of a
dynamical system from space-time samples on graphs. For this purpose, they will
extend the dynamical sampling framework for functions in graph Paley-Wiener
spaces, set up and solve several optimization problems for finding robust and
cost-effective sampling patterns, and create and study computationally efficient
algorithms that implement the solutions of the above theoretical problems. The
researchers will use and combine results from sampling theory, dynamical
systems, Fourier analysis, functional analysis, numerical linear algebra, and
discrete optimization to create and sustain a fertile environment for
theoretical and applied research. The project will enhance existing approaches
and provide new mathematical tools and computational schemes that offer
practical solutions to basic inverse problems in signal processing and system
identification on graphs. Some of the results of this investigation will also
contribute to the understanding of several challenging and fundamental issues in
optimization, frames, and graph theory. For example, the investigators will
create fast algorithms for approximating solutions of certain NP-hard discrete
optimization problems on graphs and provide theoretical guarantees for their
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.