* 2208949
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Linking Diversity and Environmental Change to the Productivity of Alpine Snow Algal Communities
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Brooke Weigel, Weigel, Brooke L
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 03/31/2025
* USD 138,000.00

Fellow's name: Brooke L. Weigel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
2208949&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research title: Linking diversity and environmental
change to the productivity of snow algal
communities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sponsoring scientist(s) and host
institution(s): Dr. Robin Kodner (Western Washington University) and Dr. Jodi
Young (University of Washington-Seattle)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action funds
an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2022, Integrative
Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing Interactions Between Genomes,
Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship supports research and training of the
fellow that will contribute to the area of Rules of Life in innovative ways.
Microscopic algae called snow algae thrive in snow-covered alpine ecosystems
worldwide. Snow algae cells have red pigments, and blooms of snow algae darken
the snow surface and accelerate snowmelt. Snow-covered mountains around the
world provide a critical supply of water, so understanding how snow algae impact
snowmelt is important for global water security. This research aims to determine
how the productivity (photosynthesis rates) and biomass of snow algae
communities in alpine ecosystems is linked to their genetic and life cycle
diversity, and to environmental factors such as temperature and atmospheric
carbon dioxide levels. This research will allow scientists to determine the
impacts of climate change on snow algal communities and predict how snow algae
will impact snowmelt in alpine ecosystems in the future. Key components of this
project will include engagement with local communities through the Living Snow
Project, and broadening participation in science through mentorship of students
underrepresented in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
determine how multiple components of biodiversity (interspecific and life cycle
diversity), together with environmental conditions (seasonality, temperature,
light, and carbon dioxide levels), shape the primary productivity and biomass of
snow algae communities. This project has three primary aims: (1) quantify
variation in genetic diversity (using amplicon sequencing of taxonomic genes),
life cycle diversity (using microscopy), and phenotypic traits of snow algal
communities (photophysiology, carbon fixation and cellular respiration rates)
across the spring and summer growing season at field sites in the North Cascades
of Washington; (2) test the physiological and transcriptional responses of snow
algal communities to rising atmospheric carbon dioxide levels in the lab; and
(3) synthesize results from aims 1 and 2 to parameterize predictive models of
snow algae impacts to bioalbedo and snowmelt in alpine ecosystems. The fellow
will gain invaluable training in alpine ecosystem fieldwork techniques,
transcriptomic sequencing, data analysis, and inclusive pedagogical practices.
Throughout the fellowship period, the fellow will broaden participation in
science by mentoring students underrepresented in the sciences on snow algae
research projects, and by peer education to other postdoctoral researchers
through a zoom-based inclusive pedagogy in STEM
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.