* 2208973
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: Male/female reversal and the ecological implications of plasticity in development
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Caitlin McDonough-Goldstein, McDonough-Goldstein, Caitlin Elizabeth
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The type of reproductive organs and traits a
plant or animal develops can be influenced by a combination of environmental and
genetic factors. Variability in male/female development across changing
environments, such as male/female reversal, may make a species more or less
vulnerability to changes in the environment. This research will investigate the
causes and consequences of plasticity in male/female development and provide
insight into how species may respond to environmental changes. The Fellow will
use copepods for this study, which are abundant aquatic organisms of
environmental and economic importance. Investigation of these traits will be
conducted from an intentionally inclusive perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will conduct a thorough examination of gene x environmental
influences on male/female development and the molecular mechanisms of this
development in the copepod E. affinis. Mechanisms of male/female development are
unknown for E. affinis, although changes from male to female have been observed.
E. affinis is also a model system of habitat expansion with populations that
have adapted from marine to freshwater environments. Variation in traits
associated with reproductive organs will be investigated in natural populations
adapted to a range of salinities. Lab isoline populations will be used to track
how environmental perturbation influences the development of these traits,
potentially arising in male/female reversal. Genome sequencing of identified
morphs and transcriptomics throughout male/female development will be applied to
identify putative determination genes and the molecular pathways that may
contribute to variation in male/female development. Together, this research will
provide a framework for understanding the sensitivity of male/female development
and the mechanisms through which environmental changes can influence these
phenotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.