* 2208541
* Shape-Morphing Modes for Efficient Computation of Multiscale Evolution Partial Differential Equations with Conserved Quantities
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Mohammad Farazmand, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 196,255.00

Large-scale computations are needed in many areas of science and engineering,
such as climate modeling, weather forecast, and design of sustainable
structures. The corresponding mathematical models often involve a wide range of
time and spatial scales which the simulations need to resolve. Efficiently
resolving these multiscale structures has been a long-standing challenge in
scientific computing. This project proposes shape-morphing modes as a new
computational method that will drastically reduce the computational time and
memory requirements of simulating multiscale systems. Shape-morphing modes are
computational elements that adaptively change their shape and location to
efficiently capture various temporal and spatial scales. The resulting
computational speedup will enable us to perform real-time prediction,
optimization, and control tasks that had been inaccessible to previous methods.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The dynamics of spatiotemporal systems are routinely
described by time-dependent partial differential equations (PDEs). The solutions
of these PDEs often exhibit time-varying localized structures, with sharp
gradients, surrounded by regions of large-scale motion. Such multiscale PDEs
arise in numerous applications, such as aircraft design, weather prediction,
ocean and climate modeling, where resolving small scale structures remains a
major challenge. Currently, there are two broad classes of methods for
addressing this challenge: 1. Adaptive methods which dynamically evolve the
spatial discretization so that the computational grid is refined around the
localized structure and less so in the quiescent regions. 2. Multiresolution
methods, such as wavelets, which encode various scales in the basis instead of
the discretization. This project will develop a new and computationally
efficient method called shape-morphing modes. The main idea behind this method
is to use a time-dependent basis of functions that automatically morph their
shapes over time and space in order to efficiently resolve all scales. Being
mesh-free, the proposed method substantially reduces the computational cost as
compared to existing adaptive methods. Furthermore, since the modes adapt
themselves to the solution of the PDE, far fewer modes are needed to resolve all
scales. This significantly reduces the memory requirements, thus outperforming
the existing multiresolution methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.