* 2208050
* Studies of Coherent Radiative Dynamics with Matter-Wave Quantum Emitters
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Dominik Schneble, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2025
* USD 723,430.00

Harnessing the interaction between light and matter is a central topic in
quantum optics and emergent quantum technologies. Waveguide-QED (quantum
electrodynamics) provides a recent framework in which such interactions, i.e.
those between guided photons (particles of light) and elementary quantum
emitters (real or artificial atoms), are controlled and engineered through the
structure and geometry of the environment in which the two interact. In prior
NSF-supported work, the PI has introduced an experimental platform for studies
of waveguide-QED effects in the alternative context of ultracold atoms, in which
the wells of an optical lattice (i.e. a crystal made of light) act as quantum
emitters, while guided atomic matter waves play the role of light. The platform
also provides a natural connection to radiatively coupled condensed-matter
systems featuring polaritons (quasiparticles made of light and matter). The PI
will investigate how tunneling in a lattice influences matter-wave decay, how
matter waves reflect from arrays of quantum emitters, and how the controllable
properties of quantum emitters can be used to control wave propagation. The
project has the potential to address fundamental questions and guide future
technological efforts, while also providing pertinent scientific and technical
training to graduate and undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is devoted to studies of coherent
radiative behavior in systems of atomic matter-wave quantum emitters. The work
uses a recently developed, optical-lattice based platform that provides
analogues to waveguide QED and is made possible through the manipulation of
coherently coupled hyperfine-state mixtures of bosonic atoms in state-dependent
optical lattices. The goals of the project include explorations of super-and
subradiant dynamics, of resonant scattering from two- and three-level emitters,
and of the effects of polariton bandstructure on matter-wave transport. The
project extends the PI's recent NSF-supported work on single-emitter fractional
decay, bound states, and the formation of polaritons to address collective
dynamical effects, scattering phenomena, and transport
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.