* 2208910
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: Quantifying the microbiome's contribution to host acclimation and evolution under stress
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Lana Bolin, Bolin, Lana Gayle
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Global environmental change is occurring at
such a rapid pace that organisms are struggling to adapt to it. However,
forecasts of species responses to change have left out potentially pivotal
players: the microbes that live with organisms, called host-associated microbes.
Soil microbes often benefit plants in new environments, but this benefit may
ultimately reduce plants’ ability to evolve in response to these environments.
This project investigates the relative strength of these opposing forces. That
is, to understand whether microbes ultimately help or hinder plants in their
responses to global change. The fellow will also conduct a case study as a
mentor to local community college students. The case study focuses on drought
stress on a common, native plant in New Mexico, the most water-stressed state in
the US. Understanding the drivers and outcomes of host-associate microbes will
yield more accurate predictions of species’ responses to global change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses field experiments, metagenomic analyses,
and population modeling to investigate the most important microbial, ecological,
and evolutionary drivers of microbe-mediated host stress responses, and to scale
these up to predict host population responses to future conditions. First, a
field experiment will manipulate the presence/absence of microbes to quantify
their relative influence on plant acclimation (e.g. buffering, plasticity) and
adaptation (e.g. natural selection, opportunity for selection) to drought
stress. Then, meta-genomic and -transcriptomic data will identify microbial
properties that may underlie these effects. Finally, microbial effects on
individuals will be scaled up to population growth using integral projection
models that forecast how microbes will influence host persistence under future
stress scenarios. The fellow will create a paid summer research program that
brings local community college students to the University of New Mexico (UNM)
campus to participate in this research, and to design and conduct independent
research under the mentorship of the fellow and UNM graduate students.
Altogether this project will expand the fellow’s range of experimental,
computational, and modeling approaches for a future research faculty position,
and construct a novel, general framework for innovative research on the
evolutionary ecology of host-microbiome interactions to anchor a future research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.