* 2208317
* SHF: Small: Exploring and Enhancing Capabilities of Emerging Hybrid/Convertible Solid-State Drives
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Bingzhe Li, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2025
* USD 583,947.00

The world’s digital data has increased immensely with the tremendous development
of technology. By 2025, the total amount of digital data will reach 175
Zettabytes. It becomes a critical and increasing challenge to manage this huge
amount of data. The demand for high-performance and large-capacity storage
systems is rapidly increased to cover this big data environment; still, it is a
critical challenge to satisfy both high performance and large capacity in a
single storage device with a low cost. To achieve this goal, an emerging storage
device named hybrid/convertible Solid-State Drive (SSD) provides unique
properties compared to traditional storage devices and can satisfy the
requirement in such an environment. However, the emerging device has not been
fully investigated and cannot reach its full potential. This project aims to
fully explore the abilities of hybrid/convertible SSDs. The completion of this
project will initialize a paradigm shift in today’s storage systems to handle
massive amounts of data more efficiently with high capacity and high-speed
access. The research will also impact the burgeoning storage market, implement
outreach to K-12, undergraduate, and minority students, and incorporate research
results into courses, thus enhancing the student
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to develop and
enhance the capabilities of the emerging hybrid/convertible SSD through the
following three thrusts: 1) A novel management scheme for hybrid/convertible
SSDs is developed to balance the performance and capacity of the storage system.
In particular, this thrust focuses on device management and advanced the zone
named space technique. 2) A high-performance Redundant Array of Inexpensive
Disks system is built inside hybrid/convertible SSDs to efficiently protect data
stored in these drives while retaining the same reliability. 3) An efficient
key-value store system in the emerging storage devices is investigated to solve
big data issues. In particular, this thrust develops a high-performance log-
structured merge tree-based key-value system based on the unique properties of
the emerging storage device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the SHF program cluster of the CISE/CCF directorate and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.