* 2208800
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Using eDNA metabarcoding to measure the impact of anthropogenic activities and predator reintroduction on parasite-based ecological networks
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Jasmine Childress, Childress, Jasmine N
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 01/31/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Ecological
networks are used to describe biodiversity and the ways in which plants and
animals interact with one another. While parasites comprise nearly half of all
described animal life, they are routinely left out of these networks. Thus,
essential features of ecosystems are overlooked because parasites are excluded
from ecological networks. One of the main challenges to integrating parasites
into these networks is the difficulty of surveying for parasites using
conventional methods that rely on complex techniques, which are invasive or
lethal to host organisms. This problem will be resolved by using new DNA methods
to detect the DNA fragments that all species shed into the environment (for
example in feces, mucus, and skin). This environmental DNA (eDNA) can be used to
identify parasites without capture and harm to their hosts. Using this non-
destructive method, the distribution of parasites will be added to ecological
networks, including those in which human activity has had an impact and ones in
which top predators have been reintroduced. This will help lay the foundation
for enhancing future disease, community, and ecosystem studies. To broaden the
impact of the project, the Fellow will present workshops to students to help
them learn skills important for STEM training and careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will use eDNA metabarcoding to detect
host–parasite community biodiversity of the Jasper Ridge Biological Preserve and
incorporate those data into a molecular ecological network analysis to inform
two guiding questions: (1) how does incorporating parasites into ecological
networks alter our understanding of ecosystems, and (2) how do anthropogenic
impacts and predator reintroduction reshape parasite-based ecological networks?
To broaden participation of underrepresented groups, the Fellow will lead “Flash
Skills,” which is a series of small workshops aimed at teaching and refining
skills that may be left out of the classroom, such as grant writing, data and
time management, and coding. These competencies will help prepare undergraduate
and graduate students for postdoctoral opportunities and careers in
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.