* 2208057
* Non-volatile magnetic memory devices based on field-free spin-orbit torque switching of perpendicularly polarized magnets.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Simranjeet Singh, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2025
* USD 344,942.00

Exploitation of spin degree of freedom in solid state systems is key to
realizing ultrafast, energy efficient, and densely packed magnetic data storage
devices. In these magnetic memory devices, the information is encoded in the
magnetization direction of a bistable ferromagnetic thin film layer. To achieve
thermally stable and closely packed magnetic bits, a perpendicularly magnetized
ferromagnetic layer is preferred. Spin orbit torques, generated by applying a
charge current to an adjacent spin source material, has emerged as an efficient
means to manipulate or switch the perpendicularly magnetized ferromagnetic
layer. However, an external magnetic field is required to achieve deterministic
spin orbit torque switching of a perpendicularly magnetized ferromagnetic layer
because the charge-current induced spin current in conventional spin-source
materials is polarized in the film plane due to the crystal symmetry. This
fundamental limitation in conventional spin-source materials has prevented the
use of spin orbit torque to achieve field-free deterministic switching of
ferromagnets with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. To overcome this
longstanding hurdle in the field of spintronics, this research program proposes
to explore low-symmetry crystal structure and topological electronic structure
in a special class of materials, namely Weyl semimetals, to demonstrate field-
free deterministic magnetization switching of variety of perpendicularly
magnetized ferromagnets. A successful outcome of this research program will lead
to next generation energy efficient magnetic memory and spin-logic devices. This
research program will support the education and training of a graduate student
and undergraduate students. Through proposed research activities, the graduate
student and undergraduate students will be trained in experimental techniques
and skill sets for spin orbit torques for nonvolatile magnetic memory devices.
Educational outreach activities and events will be planned to kindle scientific
interest and provide interactions and mentorship for middle school and high
school students, especially those belonging to underrepresented minorities in
southwestern Pennsylvania. Moreover, hands-on experimental demos to explain spin
and magnetism-related phenomena will be developed for outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilization of topology and crystal-symmetry in
emergent quantum materials, to obtain large current induced spin orbit torques
for an energy efficient and field-free manipulation of the magnetization in FM
materials, is promising for spintronic device applications. In this context,
Weyl semimetals provide a distinct opportunity to obtain highly efficient and
unconventional charge to spin conversion owing to strong spin-orbit coupling,
symmetry breaking, and topology-based phenomena. The goal of this research
program is to demonstrate field-free operation of spin orbit torque-based
prototype magnetic memory devices that exploit the interplay of low-symmetry
crystal structure and topological electronic structure in Weyl semimetal
candidate materials to generate spin current with out-of-plane spin
polarization. The main research objectives of this program are to use electric
field induced out-of-plane oriented spin current in Weyl semimetals to
demonstrate field-free magnetization manipulation in three different classes of
ferromagnets with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, namely: (1) van der Waals
based semi-metallic ferromagnets; (2) van der Waals based semiconducting
ferromagnets; and (3) a ferromagnetic insulator. In proposed devices, integrated
electrostatic gates will be used to tune the charge carrier density in Weyl
semimetal thin films, to control magnetism in semiconducting ferromagnets for
enhanced spin orbit torque-based device functionalities, and to probe electric-
field dependent switching phase diagram to map out the optimal parameter space
for low-energy spin orbit torque switching for magnetic memory
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.