* 2208664
* Collaborative Research: AF: Small: Promoting Social Learning Amid Interference in the Age of Social Media
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Jason Jones, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2025
* USD 60,621.00

Information acquisition is embedded in a social setting. This distorts - or at
least changes - the incentives individuals face when they are uncertain about
the truth and communicate with others. Social learning, an increasingly
impactful topic in the computer science/economics literature, formally studies
when and how dispersed and self-interested agents aggregate information. A
potential, but unrealized, goal of the social-learning literature is to enable
the building of socio-computational systems that promote social learning. A
growing volume of literature in social media and computational social science is
deeply concerned that, at present, incentives are not aligned with truth-
seeking/truth-telling and that discussion is becoming increasingly polarized.
This leads to an acrimonious public discourse rife with conflicting information
and theories, where the truth is hard to locate. Building on and using
theoretical computer science techniques, this project adds to the fundamental
understanding of how societies learn. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The social learning
system itself, with given parameters, can be seen as a computational process.
This project considers two interesting perspectives in this family of problems
that involve computational complexity and algorithm design: 1) the computational
complexity required for agents to best respond or to determine the properties of
different systems; 2) considering social learning as a complex system where the
models of social interactions, input signals, and self-regulating/evolving
nature can be viewed as constraints, and the design parameters can be optimized
to encourage social learning towards truth discovery. This work includes the
analysis of models with relevant first-order features to learn which conditions
are sufficient and necessary for crowds to quickly and reliably converge on the
truth in both the sequential social learning and social learning with repeated
updating settings. In addition, the project includes design of algorithms and
insights to optimize certain parameters, corresponding to platform design
choices, to promote fast and robust social learning in each of these settings. A
key feature is augmenting the social-learning literature to explicitly consider
agents' social embeddedness including their mixed incentives and the reality of
polarized environments. Additionally, with carefully crafted empirical research,
the project develops models for learning more complex truths amid social
pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.