* 2209226
* Focused CoPe: Strengthening Resilience of Manoomin, the Sentinel Species of the Great Lakes, with Data-Science Supported Seventh Generation Stewardship
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Peter Beckman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2027
* USD 5,000,000.00

Native communities are disproportionately affected by threats of land
development (e.g., mining, logging, oil/gas pipelines) and climate change.
Extreme weather events, warming waters, and rapid habitat loss reduce the
ability of these communities to access, maintain, and use coastal resources such
as Manoomin (Ojibwe word for wild rice). Manoomin grows in coastal wetlands, and
its range has decreased considerably, making understanding, conservation, and
restoration of manoomin habitat a critical challenge for the Great Lakes.
Manoomin ties the physical and ecological issues of coastal wetlands to the
spiritual, social, and subsistence issues of the people who have lived on these
coasts, and acts as an interface between people and coastlines. This Focused Hub
will develop cyber, scientific, educational, and community foundations to ensure
7th generation sustainability and resilience of the Great Lakes by bringing
together tribes, government, conservationists, and researchers around Manoomin
as a pillar of Ojibwe culture and livelihood, and as a keystone sentinel species
for understanding and conserving Great Lakes coastal wetlands.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Focused Hub will use a holistic, transdisciplinary
approach to untangle the interconnected human, coastal, and climate change
issues causing region-wide manoomin decline in the Western Great Lakes. The Hub
will advance scientific capacity to measure, understand, and predict changes in
coastal wetland ecosystems, focusing on manoomin as a vital sentinel species.
Direct partnerships with Native Nations and Communities will affirm local
sovereignty over coastal land, water, and ecosystems, and inform resilience
decisions at community, tribal, national, state, and regional levels. The Hub
will increase coastal community capacity through community engagement, knowledge
co-production, and training a new generation of scientists and leaders from
currently underrepresented communities in the region. The Hub enables basic
research on coastal wetlands processes across four Themes: 1) Sensing and Data
Science Cyberinfrastructure will combine local and remote sensing with Data
Science approaches to develop a deeper understanding of coastal wetlands. This
theme will provide data to support the other Themes: 2) Physical and
Environmental Processes will unravel the fundamental processes that underlie
wetland systems, focusing on the combined effects of water, sediments, and
contaminants in manoomin ecosystems, 3) Governance, Social, and Human Dimensions
will investigate the governance systems that guide decision-making and the
social and human dimensions of manoomin resilience. 4) Community Engagement,
Communication, and Education will strengthen relationships between university
researchers, government, tribal entities, and conservation organizations while
building novel educational opportunities for Indigenous
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.