* 2209387
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Delineating ecological and evolutionary controls on animal gut microbiomes
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Samuel Degregori, Degregori, Samuel
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The intestines
of animals are colonized by diverse communities of microbes that provide vital
functions for their animal host, including digestion, immune function, and
modulation of behavior. These microbial communities, termed “gut microbiomes”,
have been shown to be reliable predictors of host health and disease, often more
so than the host’s genome. While significant progress has been made in the
understanding of the gut microbiome, a majority of studies have focused on
mammal hosts—whereas hosts from other groups, such as fish, reptiles, or
insects, have largely been ignored. Sampling a more diverse range of hosts can
provide a better understanding of the biological and ecological “rules” that
govern animal gut microbiomes. This project aims to generate the most
comprehensive animal gut microbiome dataset to date, in order to better
understand the origins of the gut microbiome and how an animal’s evolutionary
past and current ecology impact the community of microbes within their gut. This
project also will broaden participation in STEM by connecting postdoctoral
scientists with high school students from underrepresented backgrounds to create
a mentorship network that will positively impact both current and aspiring
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this research is to use
a massive comparative gut microbiome dataset to build an accurate model of the
gut microbiome that accounts for both microbial and host evolution and
diversity. Specifically, the project will 1) assess the extent of coevolution
between gut microbes and hosts across the animal kingdom, 2) determine the
relative contributions of host diet, phylogeny, habitat in shaping animal gut
microbiomes, and 3) build a predictive model of the gut microbiome that accounts
for both microbial and host diversity. In total, the fellow will collect gut
microbiomes samples from 1500 mammalian species, 800 fish species, 500 bird
species, 200 reptile species, 180 amphibian species, and 150 insect species,
totaling 3300 host species—the largest and most diverse animal gut microbiome
collection attempt based on the current literature. The fellow will also be
trained in the latest computational and laboratory methods used for generating
and analyzing metagenomic data and how to effectively communicate the project
results to the public in various mediums. Additionally, the fellow will
collaborate with Northwestern campus organizations to recruit underrepresented
undergraduates into STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.