* 2209834
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Building a Collaboration Infrastructure: CyberWater2 -- A Sustainable Data/Model Integration Framework
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Lan Lin, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 12/31/2026
* USD 69,999.00

Natural hazards, such as coastal and inland flooding caused by Hurricanes and
severe drought and its associated wildfire, have been occurring with
unprecedented frequency, induced by climate changes that encompass hydrological,
biological, environmental, atmospheric, ocean, and other geosciences. Such
hazards have caused not only profound damages to our environment and required
tremendous efforts to recover, but also cost people's lives. To mitigate these
potential disasters, it is a critical time to tackle their associated scientific
questions both fundamental and large-scale that impact on the health,
resilience, and sustainability of the Earth system we live in. The problems are
complex and multidisciplinary, and researchers and practitioners from diverse
fields must work together to find solutions. By its nature, Earth system models
are comprised of component models â€“ from land surface, to rivers, coastal
regions, ocean, sea ice, and atmosphere, where each component model is coupled
with one another. As science advances, a component model or its subsystems may
have to be replaced because of new understanding, or because different
perspectives must be explored and tested for the credence of different
combinations to find the most credible predictions for different conditions at
different locations. Such tasks often require substantial efforts and time and
can become a bottleneck. This project is aimed at developing a new open-source
cyberinfrastructure framework, Cyberwater2, in which model coupling is shifted
from the current "code-coupling" approach to a new "information coupling"
approach, and can be configured without writing glue code. This minimizes the
need to access and modify each participating model's original code, and removes
a major obstacle for large-scale cross-institutional collaborations and
scientific investigations across disciplines and geographic boundaries.
CyberWater2 is designed for diverse research communities including water,
climate, coastal, engineering, and beyond. With our framework, researchers can
devote their collaborative energy on problem solving and exploration of new
frontiers, while using CyberWater2 to effectively achieve two-way open model
couplings across platforms, model parameter calibration, data assimilation,
testing/validations/comparisons, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to make it easier to conduct large scale collaboration on complex
problems and solve them efficiently, accurately and in-depth by developing a
cyberinfrastructure, CyberWatyer2, that (1) significantly eliminates "glue"
coding for two-way couplings across heterogeneous computing platforms,
disciplines, and organizations; (2) automates complex model calibration and
facilitates data assimilation processes applicable to various models; (3)
supports task-based and in-situ hybrid workflow for greatly improved efficiency
on two-way coupling across heterogeneous platforms; (4) provides a CyberWater2
server and web service framework for users in addition to the standalone
systems; (5) enables sustainable data access from diverse sources by
automatically adapting data agents to the changes (e.g., API interfaces) made to
external data sources by providers; and (6) enables automated resource planning
with intelligent site recommendation for High Performance Computing (HPC)/Cloud
access on demand to maximize users' benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate
for Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering and the Division of
Earth Sciences in the Directorate of Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.