* 2209155
* GEM: Modeling Realistic Chorus Generation Using Large-Scale Particle-in-Cell Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Xiangrong Fu, New Mexico Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 07/31/2026
* USD 590,898.00

Ubiquitous in the Earth's magnetosphere, plasma waves are formed by the
collective motion of charged particles interacting with electric and magnetic
fields. Understanding the generation and propagation of these waves is not only
of scientific importance, but it also helps to protect human activities and
assets in space. In this project, the team will study chorus -- a type of
whistler wave commonly observed in the inner magnetosphere that plays an
important role in controlling Earth's radiation belts. This project involves
training junior scientists new to the field and helping develop their careers in
the GEM community. The outreach plans associated with the project will also
enhance local STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although it is generally
accepted that chorus is generated by the unstable distribution of energetic
electrons formed during geomagnetically active times, key observational features
of the chorus are not fully understood. Here the team will use an open-source
particle-in-cell (PIC) code to carry out large-scale first-principal simulations
to explore the generation mechanisms of chorus and produce features that can be
directly compared to observations. Realistic magnetic field topology and plasma
parameters derived from observations will be used in our simulations, and chorus
with rising tone, band gaps and repetitive elements consistent with observations
is expected to be produced. With 2D and 3D PIC simulations, existing theories of
chorus generation will be tested, and the underlying nonlinear physics will be
revealed. The study will greatly advance our understanding of wave-particle
interaction in an inhomogeneous magnetic field like Earth's dipole field. This
effort will be an important step toward building a physics-based chorus wave
model, which is critical for reliable prediction of radiation belt dynamics and
the near-earth geospace environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.