* 2209691
* IUCRC Phase III Villanova University: Center for Energy Smart Electronic Systems (ES2)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Bahgat Sammakia, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 08/31/2027
* USD 50,000.00

With the proliferation of automation and electronic devices throughout most
major industries, the amount of data being produced and the need to
process/manage that data continues to grow. Automated management of data
centers, addressing their emerging thermal challenges and improving their energy
efficiency form the key to addressing this demand. The Center for Energy-Smart
Electronic Systems (ES2), an NSF Industry University Cooperative Research Center
(IUCRC), was established in 2011 to address these needs for data centers. This
award provides a Phase III renewal for this 3-site IUCRC, which consists of
Binghamton University, Villanova University and University of Texas at
Arlington. ES2's vision is to develop systematic methodologies for operating
electronic systems, including data centers, as dynamic, self- sensing and
regulating systems that are predictable and verified in real time. The focus in
Phase I and Phase II has been to develop new energy-optimization and thermal
management models and designs, as well as tools and algorithms enabling
electronic data systems to operate more efficiently and securely. Phase III will
further expand on these methodologies to progress closer to a full realization
of the ES2 vision. The Center brings together computer scientists, electrical
engineers, and mechanical engineers in a synergistic multidisciplinary team to
advance industrially relevant research in this area. ES2, in promoting
significant reductions in energy consumption in electronic systems, will
contribute to the national agenda of eventually reaching net-zero carbon
emissions. Reducing energy costs in data centers will help to allow computing
services to be more deployable and accessible for a larger population segment.
ES2 continues to attract a diverse group of students at the undergraduate and
graduate levels and provides industrially relevant training in their careers
beyond graduation. ES2 has also integrated a variety of mechanisms across the
partners universities and industry members to increase participation by women
and underrepresented students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the Villanova site,
research activities focus on advancing the overall center goals of smart
workload and server management, smart integration of controlled on-demand
cooling, and smart elimination of energy waste and inefficiencies. Activities
are focused in three main focus areas: air- and hybrid air- liquid cooling
systems, advanced liquid cooling, and sustainability, including the consumption
of water, energy, and the re-use of waste heat. Research in the hybrid air-
liquid cooling systems focuses on developing capabilities for simulating and
predicting the behavior of components and systems such as heat exchangers that
are at the heart of most systems. Of particular interest is in developing
compact thermal-fluid models that can be embedded in system CFD computational
frameworks. The focus of research in advanced liquid cooling systems is in
indirect or direct-to-chip liquid cooling using single phase cooling, i.e., with
water, or using two-phase cooling, using refrigerants. Investigations span the
entire system from: the chip-scale, to the cold plate and server cooling system
scale, to the development of simulation tools for entire systems. New research
will be launched in direct immersion two-phase cooling with the goals of
understanding and extending the limits of direct immersion cooling of server
electronics. A new focus on sustainable data centers will feature new projects
in the areas of carbon sequestration and developing innovative tools and metrics
to predict and track the impact of data centers on water and energy consumption.
The Villanova University ES2 site is committed to research within the overall
context of environmental sustainability, with a commitment to use NSF funded ES2
research to initiate, promote, and advance the careers of students, faculty, and
researchers from diverse backgrounds, and to disseminate our research to the
scientific, engineering, and public communities through innovative uses of print
and visual media and public forums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.