* 2209408
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology: The Coevolution of Climate Change Responses in Grasses
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* William Brightly, Brightly, William H
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 01/31/2026
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Climate change poses substantial problems for
many organisms, particularly those which are stationary and cannot easily move
if their current habitat become unsuitable (e.g., plants). To survive, these
organisms must be able to withstand new conditions (e.g., by evolving new
traits) or colonize new areas where conditions are suitable (e.g., via seed
dispersal). Unfortunately, very little is known about how these two potential
survival strategies interact. In particular, it is unclear whether historical
investment in one strategy limits capacity for the other (e.g., plants with wide
environmental tolerances but poor seed dispersal capacity). Plants occupy a
critical position at the base of all terrestrial food webs and are by far
societies' most important agricultural products. Nevertheless, they often
receive less conservation attention than animals. A better understanding of how
plants respond to climate change is necessary to accurately predict its
potential consequences, and how to direct resources to mitigate
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop a better understanding of these two
responses, the project uses the melicgrass tribe (7 genera, 158 species), which
occupies diverse habitats and possesses a wide range of seed dispersal
strategies. The fellow will first produce a comprehensive phylogenetic
reconstruction for the tribe, and then evaluate the dispersal capability and
environmental niche of its constituent taxa. Dispersal capability will be
evaluated on the basis of several quantitative seed and plant traits known to
influence dispersal outcomes. A combined approach synthesizing published
literature, geospatial data, and growth experiments will be used to classify
both fundamental and realized environmental niche. Using phylogenetic
comparative methods, the project will then test whether dispersal ability
correlates with the rate of environmental niche evolution, realized niche
breadth, or ability to acclimate to new conditions (fundamental niche breadth).
During the course of this research the fellow will broaden his technical
expertise through training in advanced phylogenetic and ecophysiological
methods. The fellow will also recruit and mentor a diverse group of students to
participate in the project, learn research skills, and eventually pursue semi-
independent projects, with potential for first-author
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.