* 2209473
* PM: Optomechanical Dark Matter Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Dalziel Wilson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 10/31/2025
* USD 449,837.00

The origin of dark matter is one of the enduring scientific mysteries of our
time. After four decades of searching, direct detection of a dark matter
“particle” remains elusive, spurring calls for a comprehensive rethinking of the
search space and detection strategy. Optomechanical sensors, which use light to
probe minute deformations of solid-state objects, have emerged at the forefront,
as they give access to a broad set of dark matter candidates which couple to the
size or position of atoms. The aim of this project is to build a first
generation optomechanical dark matter detector, drawing on techniques which have
enabled optomechanical systems to operate at the quantum limit in recent years.
Beyond fundamental physics, the project will address key challenges to the
development of quantum sensors, such as scalability and decoherence mitigation.
A broader goal is the education of a new generation of graduate students and
postdocs with hybrid interests in particle and quantum physics, recognizing that
the future quantum workforce will benefit from drawing upon a wide pool of
scientific backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will join
experimentalists (the PI) and theory collaborators to explore detection of
ultralight “dark photon” dark matter using an array of cryogenic optomechanical
accelerometers. Each accelerometer is based on a frequency-tunable, ultra-high-Q
silicon nitride membrane coupled to an optical cavity. Silicon nitride membranes
are a well-established mechanical resonator technology and can have
exceptionally low dissipation at millikelvin temperatures, giving access to
pico-g acceleration sensitivities at acoustic frequencies. In this exploratory
phase of the project, a prototype detector will be developed based on a single
centimeter-scale membrane in a 4 K cryostat. The goal will be to eclipsing
current constraints on dark photon dark matter in the 1.e-9 to 1.e-11 eV mass (1
kHz – 100 kHz Compton frequency) range set by the Eöt-Wash torsion balance
experiments. Longer term efforts, involving an array of photonic crystal
membranes probed at the standard quantum limit, will target order of magnitude
improvement and give access to a variety of fundamental weak force
tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.