* 2209352
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: How do dominant species mediate elevational range shifts for subordinate species?
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Sisimac Duchicela, Duchicela, Sisimac A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Environmental
change is expected to cause major shifts in plant species ranges. It is
important to understand the direction and consequence of those shifts. Plant
ranges are predicted to move towards the poles and higher elevations. However,
previous research suggests plant populations are following different
trajectories, including no change, or shifting in the opposite direction than
predicted. Therefore, it appears that factors such as how plants interact with
each other must be considered for making predictions about changing plant
species ranges. With this research, the fellow aims to increase the
understanding of how plant communities will be altered in a changing climate and
how plant interactions shape those changes. Mountain ecosystems in temperate
regions have been studied. Here the fellow will expand knowledge by
investigating tropical mountain ecosystems in the Andes to analyze range changes
and test ecological theories. This study will make contributions to the fields
of community ecology and global change biology while strengthening international
collaborations between US scientists and scientists from Andean countries, with
an emphasis on Ecuador. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One key factor affecting the shift
in plant ranges may be how the presence or absence of a dominant species will
affect the subordinate species in their new range. If the dominant species is
absent from the novel community, the abundance and diversity of subordinate
species may be reduced or enhanced if the dominant species primarily acts as a
facilitator or competitor, respectively. To test these concepts, the fellow will
transplant naturally occurring turfs in the Ecuadorian Andes to higher
elevations, artificially warm some of the turfs using open top chambers and
remove the dominant species from some turfs. Functional traits, growth forms, of
the plant species will be tested to determine whether these traits aid in
predicting the response of the subordinate species to the presence or absence of
the dominant species under the new (elevated and/or warmer) conditions. This
research will expand the fellow’s research expertise and will provide
opportunities for Ecuadorian postdocs, researchers, and students to participate
in biological research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.