* 2209903
* Research in Elementary Particle Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Pran Nath, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 240,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Pran Nath, James
Halverson, Brent D. Nelson, and Tomasz R. Taylor at Northeastern University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this grant, research will be conducted across a wide
range of topics in theoretical high-energy physics. These topics include many of
the most exciting current research areas ranging from a unique kind of symmetry
amongst the elementary particles called "supersymmetry" to speculative theories
that might be able to unify quantum mechanics and gravity, such as string theory
and F-theory, and studies of new ways of studying the behavior of particles when
they scatter --- methods involving so-called "celestial amplitudes". In
addition, machine-learning tools will be used to explore the nature of
fundamental physics beyond the Standard Model. New data expected to emerge from
RUN3 of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) and from a variety of astrophysical
experiments will also be explored for evidence of new physics beyond the
Standard Model of electroweak and strong interactions. This research will
advance the national interest by advancing fundamental physics at the frontiers
of current knowledge within the United States. These research projects will also
involve several Ph.D. students working under the guidance of the PIs. In
addition, an important part of this project is the outreach program TheoryNet,
which fosters direct interactions between Boston-area theorists and high-school
students through lecture presentations and
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the research to be
performed is aimed at developing new formalisms and tools to investigate the
nature of physics beyond energy scales currently accessible. This includes
theoretical work related to unified models based on strings and F-theory and
further investigations on celestial amplitudes. This work also includes the
development of methods to find possible evidence of supersymmetry or strings in
new data expected to emerge from the LHC. This project will also include the
application of machine learning for the exploration of the string landscape and
related phenomena. This project will also include work at the interface of
particle theory and cosmology, including a more unified framework encompassing
dark matter and dark energy. Another area of investigation includes the study of
hidden sectors which appear in a broad class of supergravity and string models
and which have begun to play an increasingly significant role in both particle
physics and cosmological phenomena. This project has a strong educational
component which includes the training of graduate students for research as well
as the mentoring of undergraduate physics majors. Likewise, the "TheoryNet"
program will continue to cultivate interest and excitement for science among the
young, to help prepare a future generation of potential scientists and
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.