* 2209073
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Investigating Fractionation in Land Plants with Comparative Genomics
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sylvia Kinosian, Kinosian, Sylvia
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2025
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2022. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Dr. Sylvia Kinosian is "Investigating Fractionation in Land Plants with
Comparative Genomics" The host institution for the fellowship is the University
of Arizona and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Michael
Barker.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic variation is the raw material that
evolutionary processes, such as natural selection, act upon. One way novel
genetic variation is generated is via whole-genome duplication. This process is
common in plants and is typically followed by a loss of unnecessary duplicated
material. The downsizing of a duplicated genome can occur very rapidly in
flowering plants, but appears to proceed much slower, and potentially by
different mechanisms, in non-flowering plants such as ferns. This project will
investigate the evolutionary mechanisms that affect genome downsizing in ferns,
a study now possible due to access to newly sequenced fern genomes. This
research will inform not only our understanding of the drivers of genome
evolution in land plants but will also aid in determining what areas are in need
of future work. Studying genome evolution in land plants is critical for
understanding how crops, endangered species, and ecosystems evolve, and how they
will adapt to a changing climate. Broader impacts include mentoring and training
undergraduate students as well as partnering with a local organization in Tucson
(AZ) to develop a K-12 field course in botany and ecology and provide science
outreach education in partnership with Letâ€™s Botanize, an online science
communication series using plant life to teach about ecology, evolution, and
biodiversity. Training objectives include obtaining expertise in comparative
genomics, bioinformatics, machine learning, and genome sequence assembly and
annotation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The loss of unnecessary duplicated genetic
material following polyploidization, and a return to diploid inheritance, is
known as diploidization. One mechanism of diploidization is fractionation, where
genes are lost or silenced in one or both homeologs (chromosomes with shared
homology from different parental taxa in a polyploid). This affects the amount
of genetic variation present following diploidization, influencing how a lineage
will be able to evolve over time. Despite its evolutionary importance, little is
known about how fractionation occurs in different lineages of land plants,
particularly in ferns and lycophytes (pteridophytes). This project will include
pteridophytes for the first time in comparative work on fractionation. It will
leverage newly available pteridophyte genomes, along with existing seed plant
genomes, to investigate how genome fractionation following polyploidization
occurs in land plants. Specifically, mechanisms of fractionation will be
compared between lineages of land plants, and among different life-history
traits. All whole-genome and transcriptome sequences will be publicly available
on GenBank; the code and workflows used throughout this project will be
available on GitHub (github.com/sylviakinosian).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords:
ferns, polyploidy, genome structure, genome downsizing, fractionation, whole
-genome duplication&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.