* 2209829
* IUCRC Planning Grant The University of Memphis: Center for Electrified and Autonomous Transportation in Agile Freight Supply-Chains (CEATAFS)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Myounggyu Won, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

This project will plan the formation of a new Center for Electrified and
Autonomous Transportation in Agile Freight Supply Chains (CEATAFS) to research
emerging technologies in connected, electrified, and autonomous trucking and
freight logistics networks and to help build efficient, safe, agile, and
sustainable supply chain systems. Members will be recruited from small high-tech
start-ups, large automotive corporations, third-party logistics providers,
trucking technology platforms, network communications providers, motor carrier
fleets, retail chain-stores, e-commerce pioneers, federal research labs, sea and
inland ports, and state transportation departments. These diverse stakeholders
would fund and guide CEATAFS's transdisciplinary research, led by faculty
members in engineering, business, informatics, and public policy at two
university sites. CEATAFS research can help solve major national challenges in
road transportation and supply-chains, such as crash deaths and injuries,
difficult trucking lifestyle, and logistics logjams that disrupt the economy.
Research-based solutions will help four societal groups: drivers and vehicle
operators, vulnerable road users, consumers and shippers, and passengers sharing
roads with freight. Society can benefit from reduced accidents, emissions, fuel
use, and cost of goods transport. Increased lane capacity and extended time
operation can improve roadway utilization. Improved work conditions may attract
more diverse drivers as the nature and future of work - especially truck driving
- will be transformed with new roles for human operators interacting with
automated systems. The accelerated deployment of freight mobility solutions can
help create new global market opportunities for US industries and strengthen US
leadership in supply-chain innovations and autonomous trucking. CEATAFS will
also train the next generation of engineers, researchers, and managers in
electrified and autonomous systems, especially in the Midwest. Outreach programs
to broaden participation in engineering and related fields will engage with
local organizations, and launch an autonomous electric vehicle racing
competition for youth. Research opportunities for undergraduates will be
expanded, including industry internships.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;CEATAFS will be
planned to advance research in freight management, supply chain planning, agile
logistics, platooning/caravanning, remotely driven and driverless trucks, long-
haul electrification, geofenced and smart infrastructure, and last-mile
services. CEATAFS research will help scale up the application of connected,
electrified, and autonomous vehicles in the logistics and trucking industries,
transforming digitally enabled supply chains and increasing e-commerce
efficiency. A two-day planning workshop will be held to engage and attract
industry members to further refine the research concepts, establish value
propositions, and develop a multidisciplinary research agenda aligned with
industry members' innovation and technology interests. Potential topics that
CEATAFS may investigate include: (i) autonomous vehicle adoption models and
business cases; (ii) operational strategies such as platooning and caravanning;
(iii) vehicle-to-vehicle and vehicle-to-infrastructure communication systems for
efficient autonomous operation; (iv) electrification of long-haul trucking with
highly durable fuel-cells and optimal deployment of charging stations; and (v)
strategies for overcoming the transportation workforce deficit. Conceptual and
operational challenges of deploying electric and autonomous freight
transportation systems will be explored by converging knowledge in engineering
analysis, behavioral sciences, and business analytics. Significant new knowledge
will be generated in interdisciplinary fields such as cooperative multi-agent
control, reliability assessment, automotive powertrain design, vehicle design,
systems engineering, agile logistics, energy management, human-machine
interaction, and vehicle data communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.