* 2209486
* RUI: Testing Fundamental Symmetries with Muon Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Frederick Gray, Regis University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2025
* USD 250,240.00

This award will support the Regis University group in continuing to probe one of
the few known experimental discrepancies with the Standard Model of subatomic
physics, which encodes our understanding of the fundamental building blocks of
matter and energy. The Fermilab Muon g-2 experiment observes muons, which are
subatomic particles that are like massive electrons, as they move through a
magnetic field. It measures the rate at which the muons’ spin directions rotate;
this rate is determined by the sum of the muons’ interactions of all kinds,
potentially including interactions with new particles or via new kinds of forces
that have not yet been discovered directly. The Standard Model makes a precise
theoretical prediction; it differs from the recently-published result from the
experiment’s first year of data collection at a level that may reveal the
effects of new physical processes. A much larger data set has already been
collected and is being analyzed, and one additional year of data collection is
expected. Meanwhile, the precision of the Standard Model prediction is limited
primarily by the uncertainty of the contributions to it from hadrons: particles
that are composed of quarks and gluons, which are the domain of nuclear physics.
The Regis group will participate substantially both in the completion of the
Fermilab experiment and in the development of the MUonE experiment at CERN,
which will measure the hadronic contributions with an independent method. Regis
University’s physics program is undergraduate-focused, and this award will
generate opportunities for physics majors and minors to become involved in
leading-edge research in nuclear physics. They will develop laboratory, data
analysis, and computing skills as they participate, with substantial mentoring,
in the Muon g-2 and MUonE experiments. Furthermore, Regis University is a
diverse campus, so many of the students who will be supported by this renewed
grant are expected to be from groups that are currently underrepresented in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Muon g-2 experiment will improve the
precision of the measurement of the muon’s anomalous magnetic moment from 350 to
140 parts per billion (ppb), providing a window for discovery. Extending the
experiment to the negative muon polarity in the final run, as is planned, will
also allow for a precision test of CPT and Lorentz symmetries. The uncertainty
associated with the Standard Model prediction, which is currently 370 ppb, will
soon be the limiting factor in interpreting the Muon g-2 result. This
uncertainty arises predominantly from the hadronic vacuum polarization
component, which MUonE will determine from the running of the electromagnetic
coupling (alpha) with energy scale in elastic scattering of a muon beam from
target electrons. The Regis University group will continue to operate and
analyze data from the “fiber harp” beam monitoring detectors in the Muon g-2
experiment, and to further develop the collaboration’s Monte Carlo simulations,
which will be used to study questions related to the dynamic motion of the
stored muon beam. The Regis group will also contribute to the completion of the
technical proposal for the MUonE experiment and to its first physics data
collection, initially taking on roles in the design, simulation, and testing of
the electromagnetic calorimeter and other downstream detector
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.