* 2209262
* Elements: The PERTURBO Package: A Community Code for Electron Interactions and Dynamics in Materials
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Marco Bernardi, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Scientists in academia and industry are studying increasingly complex materials.
Meanwhile, novel experimental probes enable unprecedented characterization of
the microscopic interactions governing materials properties. This project
supports the development of future versions of PERTURBO, an open-source software
to study how electrons interact and move in the next generation of complex
materials, which takes into account their complex atomic and electronic
structures and the effects of electric and magnetic fields in the experimental
probes. PERTURBO provides a set of accurate computational tools that are robust,
extensively validated, sustainable, and user-oriented. Its workflows can predict
with quantitative accuracy the electron interactions and dynamics in a wide
range of conventional and quantum materials, with applications in electronics,
optoelectronics, energy, sensing, computing, and quantum technologies. The
software targets users in academia, national laboratories and industry, and
leverages the current and future generations of high-performance computers.
PERTURBO fills an important gap in the scientific software needed for the future
development of science and technology in the United States, thus serving NSF's
science mission and placing the country at the leading edge of materials and
device research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PERTURBO project enables accurate studies
of electron dynamics in complex materials and provides tools to interpret state-
of-the-art transport and spectroscopy experiments. This project develops new
theory and computational methods to predict the interactions and dynamics of
electrons, phonons, spin, and excited states, in both conventional and quantum
materials, using a unified framework. It additionally improves PERTURBOâ€™s
performance and memory usage, expands community engagement and integration with
the cyberinfrastructure, and develops GPU parallelization and machine-learning
functionalities. These efforts make PERTURBO efficient, sustainable, compatible
with modern paradigms of software engineering, and prepared for the next
generation of exascale and GPU supercomputers. The vision is to ensure that
PERTURBO becomes the computational tool of choice for first-principles studies
of electron dynamics in materials, transitioning during this 3-year project to a
community code with thousands of users and many co-developers. The new workflows
provided by PERTURBO advance both basic sciences (materials science, physics and
chemistry) and applications in electronics, optoelectronics, energy, sensing,
computing, and quantum technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal receives
funds through the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Computer and
Information Science and Engineering Directorate and the Division of Materials
Research in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.