* 2209614
* Studies of the Quark Gluon Plasma at STAR and CMS at UC Davis
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Daniel Cebra, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2025
* USD 425,088.00

Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) is the theoretical framework that describes the
strong nuclear force. The fundamental particles that interact via this force are
the quarks and gluons that build up protons and neutrons, which in turn build up
the nuclei that make up all atoms. This project aims to study the nature of
matter at very high temperatures (about a million times hotter than the sun’s
core), where nuclear matter reaches a phase called the Quark-Gluon Plasma (QGP).
These extremely high temperatures are reached at the Relativistic Heavy Ion
Collider (RHIC) and the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), which have produced
striking evidence for QGP formation. At RHIC, the UC Davis Nuclear Physics Group
(UCD NPG) will study the thermodynamic properties of the transition in the high-
density regime, taking advantage of the versatility of the collider to access
different regions of the QCD phase diagram, with particular focus on the
existence of a critical point. The UCD NPG will study both fixed-target
collisions and beam-beam collisions to scan areas of the phase diagram where
indications of the critical point have been found. At the LHC, the UCD NPG will
use heavy-quark bound states to study the properties of the QGP at the highest
available temperatures, made even higher by the upgrade of the LHC energy to 5.5
TeV per nucleon pair. Heavy quarkonium states, such as bottom-antibottom or
charm-anticharm, are sensitive to the modification of the QCD potential expected
in the QGP phase. This award will support studies of the pattern of
modifications for the bottom and charm quark states that allow a
characterization of the temperature of the medium and of the changes to the QCD
potential in the QGP phase. The UCD NPG will promote science education by
reaching out to the broadest possible audiences through the NSF-funded giant-
screen film “Secrets of the Universe”, narrated and starring Co-Pi Calderon de
la Barca, and which features the students and work from this group. Through
public screenings of the film with live Q&amp;A sessions, the UCD NPG group will
educate the public about the science done at the LHC and will encourage
children, particularly girls and underrepresented kids, to consider pursuing
careers in STEM. The UCD NPG will train and mentor REU and UCD undergraduate
students throughout the project. The UCD NPG, in its pivotal role pertaining to
the RHIC fixed-target program, will conduct a study of collisions that mimic
cosmic radiation. Such studies have a direct impact on the NASA space-radiation
protection program aimed at understanding and mitigating the effects of cosmic
radiation during lengthy space missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of this
project involves studies at RHIC and at the LHC. At the energy range covered by
RHIC and the fixed-target program of the STAR experiment, from 3 – 200 GeV, the
UCD NPG will study the phase diagram of QCD matter. Analyses of hadron spectra
and baryon-number fluctuations will be used to characterize the QCD environment
at each measured energy. These studies will enable searches for the conjectured
critical point of the phase diagram near the low-end of the energy range scanned
by RHIC. This part of the project will advance our knowledge of the existence of
such a critical point and its location in the phase diagram of the strong
interaction. At the top energy available at the LHC, the UCD NPG will study
heavy-quarkonium states with the CMS experiment. The energy upgrade at the LHC,
enabling higher energies and luminosities, will allow studies of events with two
quarkonia mesons in the same collision. Events where an Upsilon (bottomonium)
and J/psi (charmonium) are simultaneously produced will provide a new window to
study the QGP, and how the QCD potential affects the formation of these states
in the high-temperature, deconfined phase of the strong
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.