* 2209494
* The Biophysics of Collective Cell Locomotion
* MPS,DMS
* 12/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Calina Copos, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 12/31/2023
* USD 300,880.00

For a single fertilized egg cell to form into an embryo, there are many
intermediate steps, including repeated cell division and development of organs
in the correct location. But the details of this process and its regulation have
yet to emerge. For example, in the sea squirt -- a simpler system than the human
embryo but one that shares a lot of commonalities -- a pair of cells is the
starting point of the heart of this organism. These cells must move from their
origin to the future location of the heart guided by cues from inside the
embryo. As the paired cells move, they must push other cells out of their path
to reach their destination, all while not losing contact with each other.
Although observational studies of the coordinated movement of groups of cells
involved in organ formation advance knowledge of embryonic development and
associated congenital conditions, this project will deepen understanding by
employing mathematical modeling and computer simulations to tease out the many
facets of this process. The project will involve developing new computer
simulation schemes for the mechanical interactions between cell boundary and
interior dynamics, new models for the biochemistry needed to initiate collective
migration, new methods for efficiently solving equations in deforming, moving
geometries, and extensions to full three-dimensional domains. The investigators
will use the interdisciplinary nature of the project to recruit and train
undergraduate and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of
collective locomotion of organisms has led to important mathematical models that
have guided biological discovery. A distinguishing feature of this project is
that the multi-body interaction is achieved through mechanochemical bonds that
interact with the cell's biochemistry and biomechanics in an unknown way. We
focus on the collective migration of two cells in the early stages of heart
development of the sea squirt Ciona intestinalis, an important model organism.
Initially, these two cells are indistinguishable, yet at some point they
establish leader and follower roles and move with distinct morphologies,
squeezing through deformable tissues. Experiments show there is an advantage to
move as a cohesive pair rather than a single cell, however, it is unclear why
two cells do not slow each other down. These observations lead to the following
questions: How are intracellular mechanics integrated to give rise to motility
as a cohesive group? Why can two cells move faster together than alone? Is the
two-cell system better at polarization and initiating migration than an
individual cell? Mathematical modeling can aid experiments in answering these
questions, but numerical solutions of the model equations will require
development of novel computational methods that will be able to simulate coupled
mechanical, transport, and chemical reaction equations in complex evolving
geometries. Collaboration with an experimental lab will result in the discovery
of a set of minimal yet sufficient interactions underlying the mechanical and
biochemical organization of a cohesive cell group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.