* 2209854
* IUCRC Phase I University of Missouri: Center to Stream Healthcare In Place (C2SHIP)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Marjorie Skubic, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 07/31/2026
* USD 149,999.00

Chronic health conditions are financially and emotionally costly. Creative
solutions are needed for managing physical, social, and psychological needs that
empower patients and help maintain autonomy and quality of life. The Center to
Stream Healthcare In Place (C2SHIP) unites the best minds in academic medical
and engineering disciplines with leaders in biomedical industry to research,
develop and promote in-place care technologies for managing chronic health
conditions in the home. The Center will accelerate innovation through
partnerships, multi-specialty collaborations, and resource sharing. C2SHIP will
prepare an educated workforce to promote wellness through self-care
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C2SHIP’s trans-disciplinary team will pursue
research and development in new sensors, human-centered designs, and system
integration with physiological modeling, machine learning, and Artificial
Intelligence. Through an “Internet of Things”, patient data can be streamed to
clinical professionals at remote locations in real-time, establishing a mobile
hub for vulnerable patients in their own home. C2SHIP will focus on mitigating
physiological, environmental, and psychological changes for real-time management
and intervention. The University of Missouri (MU) site will focus on the design
and development of new sensing systems that produce secure, clinically relevant,
data-driven analysis for supporting older adults and their family members.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center will accelerate knowledge and intellectual
property transfer between academia and industry through collaborative
partnerships. This will promote rapid development of new technologies, transform
healthcare delivery, and enhance the quality of life of chronically ill
patients, while reducing healthcare costs and preventing hospitalizations.
Student engagement in the proposed research projects will create opportunities
with Center companies and organizations and provide multidisciplinary
participation at C2SHIP conferences and workshops. MU C2SHIP will recruit
students and engage faculty in engineering, medicine, nursing, and health
professions. MU promotes an inclusive environment, allowing the Center to engage
underrepresented individuals from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data
produced from C2SHIP projects will be housed on university-supported OneDrive
storage, which is available to all MU faculty, staff, and students. OneDrive is
a Microsoft cloud-based, file storage platform, that supports file sharing
inside and outside of MU. Data will be maintained for five years. MU C2SHIP
projects that collect participant data will be approved by the MU IRB prior to
project onset. All data will be deidentified, with no personal identifiers
recorded or retained in any form. In addition, a center-wide website will be
maintained at https://c2ship.org/ to provide up-to-date information on C2SHIP
news and events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.