* 2209999
* ADVANCE Catalyst: An Institutional Self-Study of STEM Faculty Equity at Clark Atlanta University
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Cimona Hinton, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 02/28/2025
* USD 0.00

Clark Atlanta University (CAU) will undertake an institutional self-assessment
to identify potential gender-based equity issues for their STEM faculty. The
project will result in a five-year STEM faculty equity plan that will guide
actions to address any issues identified during the grant. CAU is a HBCU and
United Methodist Church-affiliated institution that has strong roots in African-
American southern culture. Traditionally held beliefs about gender roles are
theorized by the proposers to curtail the advancement of women through academic
ranks and into senior leadership positions at CAU. Preliminary assessments
indicate that inequality appears in several areas among CAU STEM faculty,
including attainment of tenure and positions in senior leadership. To guide the
institutional self-assessment, CAU will follow an intersectional framework that
aims to identify how African-American and academic cultures interact with each
other and with gender and other social categories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
institutional self-assessment and five-year strategic plan will set a foundation
to improve equity on campus, from entry-level faculty positions to the
presidentâ€™s office. This will benefit STEM disciplines as well as non-STEM
disciplines due to the interconnected nature of university policy. Results of
the Catalyst project will be regularly communicated with the CAU community and
more broadly through the Atlanta University Consortium. The catalyst project at
CAU will examine STEM faculty equity through the lens of intersectionality
within a unique institutional culture that is influenced by many strong factors.
The project is expected to add to our understanding of STEM faculty equity and
intersectionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to
foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide support for institutional
equity assessments and the development of five-year faculty equity strategic
plans at academic, non-profit institutions of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.