* 2209090
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Uncovering the Genomic and Developmental Basis of Gliding Structure Evolution in Gecko Lizards
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Aaron Griffing, Griffing, Aaron H
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 05/31/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Aerial locomotion, such as gliding, has
evolved repeatedly across the tree of life. Gliding behavior is often
facilitated by the presence of patagia: flappy, membranous structures which
allow the organism to slow and control their descent through the air. Although
these features have evolved numerous times, little is known about their
developmental origins. The core aim of this fellowship is to determine how
membranous structures, such as those found in gliding organisms or in
pathologies, are formed. The Fellow will characterize patagium development in
gecko lizards, which have evolved gliding behavior and membranes several times.
By characterizing development from the tissue level to the genomic level, the
Fellow aims to uncover genes and pathways required for the formation of gliding
membranes. The Fellow will also reach diverse audiences by involving early
undergraduate students at the hosting institution in research as well performing
public outreach through institutions like the Milwaukee Public
Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using histology, apoptosis assays, and cell
proliferation assays, the Fellow will characterize the tissue composition and
cellular activity of developing patagia in two species of gecko to determine if
convergently evolved gecko patagia are the result of convergent or divergent
cellular and developmental patterns. To identify candidate genes and regulatory
pathways which result in patagium outgrowth, the Fellow will characterize the
transcriptional and regulatory landscape of embryonic patagium formation using
RNAseq and ATACseq. The Fellow will experimentally inhibit candidate genes and
pathways to test their function in patagium development. Collectively, this
research provides a foundation for the study of membrane formation in lizards,
specifically, and vertebrates, broadly. Generated morphological and sequence
data will be made publicly available. This fellowship will also facilitate
training the Fellow in genomic and developmental genetic techniques as well as
mentoring undergraduate and graduate students in evolutionary developmental
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.