* 2209241
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Linking Genotype-Phenotype and Environment of Human Head Lice to Understand the Drivers of Population Level Variation
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Niyomi House, Wijewardena, Niyomi
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 11/30/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research aims to quantify the impact of
environment on the genotype and morphology of a globally distributed human
parasite: the human head louse. This parasite is now commonly found among
school-aged children but has had an impact on human health for all of modern
human history. This research utilizes a global human head louse population to
explore the connections between multiple biological systems at the genome,
phenome, and environmental levels to understand how each of these layers are
interconnected in shaping population level variation. Understanding how these
parasites have adapted to their environments by undergoing both genetic and
morphological changes will help in elucidating the mechanisms underlying
adaptive evolution. Outreach to a diverse, public audience will assist in
meeting one of the main goals of the study which is debunking the social stigma
associated with head lice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary data from whole
genome sequencing of louse specimens representing the worldwide louse population
show strong evidence of continentally structured nuclear genetic clusters. This
raises the possibility of regionally divergent adaptive trajectories. However,
little is known about morphological and genetic adaptations in response to
different environmental stimuli. This research aims to collect and integrate
data from the genotype, phenotype, and environment in order to quantify
variation and to identify potential adaptive responses of human head louse
populations globally. More specifically, this project will (1) identify genes
that are under positive selection and influence morphological variation, (2)
quantify the spatial diversity of genotypic and phenotypic traits of the human
louse, (3) evaluate the geographic extent of head louse populations and their
co-occurrence probabilities, and (4) quantify the impact of environmental
variables (e.g., landscape and climate) on the spatial differences in head louse
genotypes and phenotypes. The Fellow will gain experience in the use of genome
scans, high-resolution Computed Tomography (CT) scans, and environmental
variables to achieve the above-mentioned objectives. In addition, the research
organism of this project presents a unique opportunity to engage the public in
many different ways; high-resolution CT scans, 3D prints of louse specimens, and
slide mounts will be made available through public platforms incorporated into
K-12 lesson plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.