* 2209762
* Escalation in coevolution: Characterization of novel plant toxins, how specialist herbivores cope, and tests of phylogenetic intensification in plant defense potency
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Christophe Duplais, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2025
* USD 657,747.00

Insects that feed on plants are thought to impose natural selection for chemical
defenses in the plant tissues they eat. The research being conducted here is on
milkweed plants, which contains a highly potent toxin, labriformin, which has
evolved to high concentrations in in several species. When highly expressed,
labriformin inhibits an essential transport enzyme (the sodium-potassium pump)
of the monarch butterfly and the large milkweed bug. These specialized insect
pests biochemically modify labriformin to less toxic compounds and sequester
these-products for their own defense. The monarch and seed bugâ€™s highly tolerant
sodium pump and biochemical modifications point to labriformin being at the
center of reciprocal evolution between milkweed and its herbivores. This work
serves to unravel the mechanisms of the interaction through physiological and
evolutionary analyses. The research also serves as a model for understanding
both natural and agricultural interactions between plants and pests. Finally,
the milkweed - monarch system lends itself well to public engagement because of
its iconic stature, declining populations of conservation concern, and use in
school curricula. As part of this project, the researchers are developing
modules for K-12 schools and engaging in public outreach through presentations
and blogs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among milkweed plants which are fed upon by
several specialized lineages of insect herbivores, coevolutionary interactions
have been well-studied and novel mechanisms have been elucidated. Researchers
recently discovered a milkweed that contains high levels of labriformin, a
highly toxic cardenolide which is unusual in form (containing a ring with
nitrogen (N) and sulfur (S)), which could well be an escalated form of costly
defense. The current work seeks to investigate additional N-containing
cardenolides across the milkweed phylogeny and seek to decipher their
physiological impacts and detoxification in independent herbivores lineages.
Repeatedly evolving offense-defense mechanisms in plant-herbivore lineages will
likely reveal generalities of coevolution. Three objectives will address both
sides of coevolution: 1) Determine the mechanisms by which N-containing
cardenolide defenses are processed, detoxified, and stored by two specialist
milkweed insects, monarch caterpillars and seed bugs. This will employ feeding
trials with isolated compounds, physiological assays, and studies of behavior,
using both specialists as well as CRISPR-edited Drosophila that have genetic
substitutions for tolerating cardenolides. 2) Assess the costs and benefits of
detoxification and sequestration using quantitative genetics coupled with
feeding and chemical assays of monarchs and seed bugs on milkweed plants with
and without N-containing cardenolides. Genetic correlations will reveal life-
history costs and traits associated with differential sequestration. 3) Examine
the pattern of N-containing defense evolution among milkweeds across the
phylogeny, testing hypotheses about N-limitation, defense allocation, and trade-
offs between cardenolide concentration and potency. One hypothesis, that later
diverging milkweeds have evolved more potent but less concentrated cardenolides,
was predicted by theory and suggested by a phylogenetic pattern, but never
rigorously tested. Overall these objectives will advance understanding of
coevolutionary mechanisms by characterizing novel plant defenses and the
physiological ecology of counter-adaptation in specialist herbivores, genetic
variation in detoxification and sequestration of toxins, and plant defense
evolution at the macroevolutionary scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.