* 2209112
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Investigating the spatiotemporal coordination of cell and chloroplast division
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Manuella Clark-Cotton, Clark-Cotton, Manuella R
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. In this
project, the Fellow will investigate intracellular communication and the
coordination of key cellular processes in photosynthetic organisms. During
photosynthesis, land plants and algae use specialized cell structures called
chloroplasts to capture light energy and convert carbon dioxide into oxygen and
sugars. About half of photosynthesis on earth occurs in single-celled organisms
like algae, making them absolutely essential for the global ecosystem, including
for human survival. Many algae maximize the use of light by growing during the
day and dividing at night. These algae often have a single, large chloroplast
that is divided along with the cell, indicating that exquisite communication
between the chloroplast and the rest of the cell controls the timing and
orientation of both cell and chloroplast division. How cells coordinate cell and
chloroplast division is a mystery, because chloroplast division depends on
different genes than cell division. Understanding how cells coordinate these
events will illuminate general principles of intracellular communication.
Insights into the regulation of chloroplast division will also improve society’s
capacity to leverage single-celled photosynthetic organisms to mitigate climate
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Fellow will use Chlamydomonas reinhardtii to
define the intracellular communication mechanisms underlying the spatiotemporal
coordination of cell and chloroplast division in unicellular algae. Based on
prior work, the Fellow hypothesizes that cytoskeletal structures mediate the
spatial coordination of cell and chloroplast division, and that cell cycle
regulators temporally control both processes. Using CRISPR-mediated gene
knockout and fluorescence labelling, the Fellow will construct strains and
perform live-cell microscopy to test these hypotheses. The Fellow will also
pursue dual strategies to identify novel genes and proteins involved in the
coordination of cell and chloroplast division: robotics-assisted, high-
throughput forward genetic screens, and proximity-based protein labeling with
mass spectrometry, using known and newly identified components involved in the
process. These projects will promote the Fellow’s training in new genetic
techniques and in biochemistry. The Fellow has designed a broader impacts
program that will increase the participation of groups underrepresented in
biology by developing a cross-institutional mentoring and support program for
Black female postdoctoral fellows in biology in the Research
Triangle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.