* 2209996
* NSF-ANR: Precision of collective, distributed, dynamic gene regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Ilya Nemenman, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 03/31/2026
* USD 464,016.00

All multicellular organisms, including humans, develop from a single cell by
engaging a network of genes that activate and suppress each other in a concerted
program, providing different cells with distinct, precise molecular identities.
The rules of this program are only now beginning to be understood. Specifically,
characterizing biophysical mechanisms that biology employs to make development
robust to the inevitable randomness in molecular interactions remains a frontier
question in modern developmental biology. In this project, a team of U.S. and
French researchers will explore, using theoretical physics methods and computer
simulations, effects of many so called “enhancers” – regions on the DNA that
some genes can use to regulate others – on the precision of organism
development. The team will use the fruit fly as a model organism. Understanding
these effects will extend our basic scientific knowledge, and it may in the
future impact human health since many diseases trace their roots to
abnormalities in developmental genetic networks. The broader impacts will
include training of the next generation of the workforce at the interface of
physics and biology – in the participating research groups and through an
international summer school organized by these groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
focus is on building theoretical and computational models to understand the
physical limits imposed by molecular architectures of gene regulatory systems on
the precision and speed of regulation. The project will develop a predictive
analytical and computational theory of the role of dynamical, spatially extended
interactions among multiple enhancers, multiple transcription factors, and
multiple promoters on precise gene regulation in eukaryotic development. Early
fruit fly development will be used as an example, motivated by large amounts of
existing data and the theoretical teams’ existing relationship with
experimentalists. The theory will address the role of multiple proximal and
distal enhancers, characterize the effects of crosstalk among various enhancers,
promoters, and transcription factors on precision of gene regulation, and
elucidate the constraints that the dynamical nature of the development process
imposes on molecular implementations of transcriptional
hubs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/France project is supported by
the US National Science Foundation and the French Agence Nationale de la
Recherche, where NSF funds the US investigator and ANR funds the partners in
France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.