* 2209133
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2020
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Marianne Kramer, Kramer, Marianne C
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 12/31/2025
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2022. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Dr. MARIANNE KRAMER is "USING ‘ALL-IN-ONE’ RNA-SEQUENCING TO DISCOVER THE
TRIGGERS OF RNA INTERFERENCE" The host institution for the fellowship is the
DONALD DANFORTH PLANT SCIENCE CENTER and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. R.
KEITH SLOTKIN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants are very efficient at identifying and
destroying non-self genetic material to defend the host from viral infection and
prevent DNA mutations and rearrangements caused by mobile pieces of DNA called
transposable elements. These mechanisms are also used to identify and shut down
expression from foreign fragments of DNA that are purposefully inserted into the
plant genome called transgenes. The field of transposable element and transgene
repression is called ‘silencing’, and how this process is first triggered and
can discriminate these regions from normal genes is unclear. This project will
investigate how the molecular process of silencing is first triggered. Over the
course of the project, the Fellow will engage in community outreach to expose
STEM minority students to the scientific method through the NSF funded program
Mutant Millets and will also work with experienced educators to teach and
prepare underrepresented upper-level high school students in the city of St.
Louis for entry-level positions in AgTech through a joint partnership between
the Danforth Center and St. Louis Community College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
process of transposable element and transgene silencing in plants is a feed-
forward cycle that involves DNA methylation, histone modification, and small
interfering RNAs. However, the initiation of this feed-forward cycle is
mechanistically very different from the cycle itself and is dependent on the
production and quality control processing of RNAs. The RNAs that trigger the
silencing process have been termed ‘aberrant RNAs’ because there must be
something wrong with them or something that differentiates them from genic RNAs.
Besides hairpin RNA transcripts that researchers have previously created to
purposely trigger silencing, as a field we do not understand what a typical
aberrant RNA looks like, or how these RNAs are differentiated from genic RNAs,
since these RNAs may only be generated for a brief moment to kick off the cycle
of silencing. This project will identify the imperfect ‘aberrant’ RNAs that
trigger silencing. Data generated from this project will be shared in open-
sourced, peer-reviewed publications and presented at scientific conferences.
Transcriptomic data produced in this project will be publicly available on NCBI
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), plant materials will be stored at the Arabidopsis
Biological Resource Center (ABRC), and methods will be published in a peer-
reviewed journal and code will be uploaded to GitHub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.