* 2209765
* LTREB: Pace of life and differential migration in changing environments
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* James Sedinger, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 08/31/2027
* USD 252,488.00

For millennia, humans have been fascinated by the long-distance migrations that
many animals undergo to find food, reproduce, and survive. In recent decades,
scientists have observed that more and more animals are not migrating as far as
their ancestors did. Why is it that some individuals stop their migration short
while others continue to adopt traditional, long-distance migrations? What are
the consequences of these changing behaviors for migratory species, and how does
this impact human societies? Using a unique long-term study of brant geese, the
researchers will address these questions by studying the dual influence of
climate change and an individualâ€™s reproductive history (how many babies they
have reared to date) on migration distance, and the impact of migratory
decisions on future chances of survival and reproduction. The team will then
quantify the contribution of each type of migration behavior to the overall
abundance of brant geese. Brant geese affect coastal economies via their role as
primary grazers of eelgrass along the Pacific Coast, the same habitat that
serves as the rearing ground for a myriad of fish and shellfish species. Without
an abundance of brant to maintain healthy beds of eelgrass, and a solid
understanding of the factors affecting brant abundance, the fishing industries
that rely on eelgrass estuaries could suffer. While carrying out the study, the
team will train a highly diverse group of students, including Alaska Native
students, in STEM fields. The team will also develop open educational materials
covering wildlife sampling techniques and models for K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Like other taxa, many brant are stopping their
seasonal migration short and wintering at high latitudes as the climate warms
and as habitats further south are damaged by humans. But many individuals
continue to invest in traditional long-distance migrations to southern
latitudes, creating a divergent pattern of migration tactics within brant
populations over time. By leveraging a long-term study of brant in Alaska, the
researchers will test whether environmental change is allowing individual brant
to choose equally from a broad range of migration strategies, or if
environmental change is directionally favoring a particular migration strategy
(long- vs. short-distance) associated with life-history tempo (fast vs. slow
reproductive investment and lifespans), as measured via the currency of lifetime
evolutionary fitness. Modeling will also reveal the contributions of individual
migration tactics to brant population viability, and the impact of brant
populations on the ecosystems they graze.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.