* 2209202
* CAS: Understanding the Role of External Constraint on Electrochemical (De)alloying Mechanisms
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Matthew McDowell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2026
* USD 509,263.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solid-state batteries offer the
potential for more energy and greater safety compared to conventional lithium-
ion batteries. However, the reaction behavior of materials used for lithium ion
storage within solid-state batteries must be understood and better controlled
for improved battery performance. A variety of metals can react with and store
lithium ions within solid-state batteries, but their dynamic reaction behavior
when entirely surrounded by and constrained by other solid materials is largely
unknown. This research uses a variety of experimental techniques designed to
reveal reaction processes of lithium metal alloys under various degrees of
mechanical constraint and relate this to electrochemical behavior. The new
knowledge created through this research is important for advancing the current
state-of-the-art in energy storage technologies. This research is being carried
out by graduate student researchers, who are being trained in the science of
materials for energy storage. Additionally, this project also includes a
collaboration with a K-12 teacher to develop materials science curriculum
related to batteries for use in their classroom.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metals that electrochemically alloy/dealloy with lithium
often exhibit high lithium storage capacity. Because of the large volume changes
exhibited by alloy materials during electrochemical reactions, mechanical
constraint at different length scales likely plays an important role in the
transformation behavior of particulate alloy materials. However, the effect of
mechanical constraint on alloy/dealloying reactions is not well understood. The
overall objective of this research is to understand how external mechanical
constraint affects and controls internal reaction mechanisms across length
scales during electrochemical alloying/dealloying of metal particles for solid-
state batteries. These systems inherently exhibit mechanical confinement due to
their all-solid nature. This research uses in situ and ex situ imaging methods,
real-time stress measurement during electrochemical cycling, and other
electrochemical assessments. Together, these techniques clarify how constraint
exerted by surface coating layers and surrounding materials affect morphological
evolution and electrochemical behavior during alloying and dealloying of metal
particles with lithium. This research provides new understanding of solid-state
alloying/dealloying processes, which is critical for developing these materials
as electrodes for solid-state batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.