* 2209184
* Nuclear Structure and Reactions from Effective Field Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Gautam Rupak, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2025
* USD 270,000.00

Fundamental research in nuclear physics is the study of atomic nuclei. The list
of all known nuclei, most of them short-lived, is in the thousands. The short-
lived and exotic nuclei play an important role in the synthesis of the stable
elements during Big Bang Nucleosynthesis and stellar evolution. Exotic nuclei
also play an important role in element synthesis in supernova remnant sites. The
temperatures and densities at which the reactions responsible for element
synthesis occur are often difficult to access in terrestrial laboratories.
Theory calculations play an important role in these studies. The effective field
theory (EFT) formalism is applied to calculate the properties of halo nuclei.
These are exotic nuclei that have excess protons or neutrons that form a halo
around a core. EFT enables systematic first-principles calculations that provide
rigorous uncertainty estimates that are necessary in many astrophysical models
of element synthesis. Properties of asymmetric nuclear matter are also
calculated using a numerical method called lattice EFT. These are important in
the study of gravitational waves from colliding neutron stars and blackholes.
Broader impacts of the research include training of graduate students in
numerical and analytical work for an academic or industry career benefiting
society. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project builds on past work by the
principal investigator (PI) on halo nuclei and lattice EFT that were partly
funded by previous U.S. National Science Foundation grants. Halo nuclei are
abundant on the nuclear chart near the edge of stability. EFT relies on the
separation of energy scales in physical systems to construct a systematic
expansion for low-energy approximations. The small separation energy of the
valence nucleons in halo systems is ideal for this. Multi-channel reactions in a
coupled-channel formalism in the presence of strong Coulomb forces are studied.
Charge radii of lithium-8 and boron-8, reactions involving triton and helium-3
with valence nucleons are considered. Bayesian analysis is used to provide
uncertainty estimates and develop a robust reaction theory. Properties of
asymmetric nuclear matter under conditions relevant to neutron star densities
and temperatures are studied using lattice EFT. The Pinhole algorithm developed
in earlier work by the PI is used in these studies. The numerical lattice method
allows us to perform Monte Carlo calculations involving tens of protons and
neutrons using interactions derived in EFT. The research in this project ties in
with major U.S. investment in rare isotope beam
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.