* 2209532
* I-Corps:  Evaluating Regenerative Peripheral Nerve Interfaces for Prosthetics and Other Assistive Devices
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Alex Vaskov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a nerve interface that will provide patients with intuitive
prosthetic control. The global market for advanced upper-limb prosthetics is
expected to be valued at $0.87 billion in the year 2024. However, despite their
high cost, patient satisfaction for these devices remains low. Current solutions
do not provide reliable or intuitive control of robotic hands and arms while
creating a burden on the prosthetist trying to provide patients with a
comfortable and functional prostheses. The I-Corps project will explore the
commercial potential of a nerve interfacing technology by testing the hypotheses
around these customer and end-user needs, as well as the needs of other
stakeholders in the ecosystem such as physicians, surgeons, occupational
therapists, and insurers. Beyond this application, the customer discovery model
can be used to validate similar products for other patient populations who need
to control prosthetic, rehabilitative, or digital devices. This technology may
not only improve the well-being of patients, but also reduce employment shifts
that are common after disabilities. It further advances a field that is vital
for the United States to maintain a productive and competitive
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of the regenerative peripheral nerve interface (RPNI). The proposed RPNI
technology is built by grafting small muscles on the ends of severed nerve
branches that reinnervate the grafts. This technique has three key benefits.
First, the muscle grafts naturally amplify small nerve signals into large
amplitude electromyography. Second, it reduces limb pain by preventing the
formation of neuromas. Third, it allows us to use muscle as a biological cuff to
implanting electrodes for a prosthetic interface. Control signals may be read
from the nerve with higher functional specificity, strength, and stability than
current technologies. This technique has been validated in rodent and primate
models and is currently being evaluated in a clinical trial. Research has
demonstrated intuitive control of individual finger and grasp movements without
the need for frequent controller adjustments or recalibration. Should this
technology be commercialized, people with amputations may no longer require a
certain amount of remaining musculature or a high gadget tolerance to benefit
from a multi-articulating prosthetic hands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.