* 2209023
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Ordered Evolution and Muscle-Specific Specializations of Constriction Behaviors in Snakes
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* John Capano, Capano, John
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 05/31/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Constriction in snakes has been long thought
to have been an important trait that helped snakes become extremely diverse and
widespread. This behavior is quite complex and likely evolved from simpler
versions where the snake wrestles its prey instead of coiling. The Fellow will
study how this ordered evolution occurred, creating a new framework to
understand how complex traits evolve in nature. This multifaceted approach will
involve mapping different ‘constriction’ forms on the snake family tree,
studying specializations of their muscles, and investigating how these traits
are genetically regulated. Moreover, as a first-generation, low-income student,
the Fellow will pay forward opportunities he experienced by involving students
from a high school, where 90% of the students are from underrepresented groups,
in behavioral observations and hands-on experiments with
snakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel traits often emerge when ancestral traits
gain complexity. However, the mechanisms that iteratively “build” these
elaborate traits, fundamental aspects of phenotypic diversity, remain unclear.
‘Constriction’ in snakes exemplifies how physiological and molecular systems
intertwine to sustain life. ‘Constriction’ describes hierarchically complex
patterns that include (1) fully looping coil constriction; (2) partially
encircling hairpin looping; and (3) simple pinioning, similar to wrestling.
These are not mutually exclusive, and more complex forms have increased
performance despite lacking increases in muscle mass or cross-sectional area
(two correlates of force). This suggests ‘constriction’ evolved through an
ordered process and involved muscle specialization to produce complexity. This
project will categorize constriction behaviors within snakes using phylogenetic
comparative methods in order to determine whether ordered evolution occurred.
The Fellow will conduct muscle experiments to determine whether complex
constrictors have muscles specialized for force production or fatigue
resistance. This work will also identify genetic differences between each
‘constriction’ form associated with the variation measured in the former
experiments. The Fellow will gain experience with phylogenetic comparative
methods, behavioral physiology, and transcriptomics to enhance his future
research program and probe what makes snakes so successful. As part of this
project, the Fellow will recruit interested students from underrepresented
groups at a local high school to assist with experiments that enhance their
ability to see themselves as future STEM researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.