* 2209442
* Research in Low-Energy Nuclear Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Richard Furnstahl, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

The strong interaction is responsible for the binding of protons and neutrons
into atomic nuclei. Improved quantitative understanding of how this happens is
essential not only for fundamental nuclear research at US experimental
facilities but for progress in astrophysics, for experiments on the nature of
neutrinos, and for applications to energy and homeland security. The era of
precision calculations of nuclear structure and reactions is underway, enabled
in part by research findings and products from past NSF grants to the PI. New
activities will include extending the range and capabilities of statistical
methods for assessing theoretical uncertainties and for physics discovery,
improving the extraction of information from experiment that minimally depends
on model assumptions, and developing and testing a novel approach to
systematically describing the full nuclear landscape. The training received by
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral research associates in
carrying out these activities contributes directly to the building of a diverse
scientific workforce. The mix of analytical and numerical computation the
students and postdocs must employ is excellent preparation for both academic and
industrial research, which is validated by the strong track record of past
members of the group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Projects are proposed in three major
categories: Bayesian statistics for effective field theory (EFT) uncertainty
quantification, calculation/extraction of process-independent quantities, and
EFT for finite density nuclear systems. The Bayesian methods will be enabled by
the extension of eigenvector continuation emulators and applied to inter-nucleon
interactions, few- and many-body systems, and electroweak probes. Recent
progress on the density matrix expansion and phase-space power counting for
many-body calculations will be extended and a renewed attack on EFT for nuclear
density functional theory will be made. Finally, the group will extend recent
calculations of knock-out reactions from a renormalization group perspective,
which exploits scale and scheme dependence in these reactions. Applications
range from further treatments of short-range-correlation (SRC) physics relevant
for JLab experiments and novel treatments of knock-out and other reactions for
FRIB and astrophysics, including the consistent use of optical potentials for
reactions involving heavy nuclei. These projects all contribute to the goal of
microscopic, model-independent calculations of nuclei. All of these projects
will impact forefront problems in low-energy nuclear physics as outlined in the
Long Range Plan for Nuclear Science, such as the physics of nuclei far from
stability, which is relevant for multi-messenger astrophysics and to
FRIB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.