* 2209322
* Elements: Elastica - A software ecosystem for modeling, simulation, design, and control of soft, compliant, and heterogenous structures interacting with their environment
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Mattia Gazzola, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

This Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific Innovation (CSSI) project
seeks to establish Elastica as a best-in-class, open source, and ready-to-use
ecosystem for the simulation, analysis, design, and control of complex
structures made of elastic, slender elements. The goal is to enable researchers
to make inroads in three knowledge gaps identified as foundational and of
national strategic importance: (1) scarcity of rigorous modeling and engineering
design methods for continuum, compliant and configurable structures, devices and
robots; (2) paucity of control methods able to effectively coordinate the
virtually infinite degrees of freedom that characterize these distributed
systems; (3) lack of models and design methods specialized to biomaterials to be
incorporated in living biological machines, connecting full circle to the first
point. This project will result in a versatile computing framework that tackles
a unique set of problems at the intersection of biology, robotics and control,
thus increasing competitiveness in manufacturing via advanced computational
methods. This effort is complemented by a strong outreach component. Indeed,
applications of Elastica to animal locomotion and biological robots have great
potential to capture the imagination of a broad, especially younger audience. By
highlighting the natural world connection, curiosity and creativity will be
fostered, drawing attention to math, physics, biology and advanced computing.
Particularly, the paper2tree project that involves local, underrepresented
communities in planting trees associated to scientific discoveries, will be
leveraged to engage elementary-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within this
context, this effort will augment Elasticaâ€™s modeling capabilities and solution
methods, aiming at tens-of-teraflops to petaflops-grade simulations entailing
millions of rods in complex environments. Concurrently, to maximize adoption and
impact, a cyberinfrastructure ecosystem of pre/post processing tools and
interfaces, organized in easily customizable pipelines, will be created. A
structured project plan focused on science, computing, and cyberinfrastructure
innovation will deliver: (i) A scalable, versatile, and efficient Cosserat rod
solver that incorporates a variety of material models and environmental
interface conditions, and that can run on a range of computing architectures
from desktops to heterogeneous computing clusters; (ii) Benchmarked and verified
discipline-specific modules of prebuilt primitives relevant to address the
identified knowledge gaps above; (iii) A suite of both pre/postprocessing tools
to assist in setting up domain-specific workflows. Throughout, open science and
users/developers support will be core, to accelerate adoption, foster impact and
catalyze innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Division of Civil, Mechanical
and Manufacturing Innovation within the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.