* 2209060
* First-Principle Nuclear Structure and Reactions for Astrophysics and Experiments with Rare Isotope Beams
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Kristina Launey, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Following the history-making discovery of nuclear fission, which manifested the
huge amount of energy that is released by breaking the strong bonds between
neutrons and protons, nuclear physicists have searched for ever more
comprehensive explanations of the properties of the atomic nucleus. Such
advances are critical to predict exotic nuclei in processes under extreme
conditions as stellar mergers and explosions, and to probe neutrino-related
processes. The recent advent of radioactive beam facilities has enabled exotic-
nuclei measurements, based on collisions of nuclei and their reactions. To
predict inaccessible nuclei, these reactions must be well understood and
modeled. However, exact solutions exist up to about five particles. The
objective of this program is to expand dramatically the capabilities of nuclear
reaction theory, by providing input to reaction simulations that is anchored in
first principles but also can accommodate heavier nuclei and enhanced
deformation. This is important for studies of the origin of elements, one of the
biggest challenges in physics today, and has a wider impact since nuclear energy
applications and national security research have similar needs. Future leaders
(postdoc and students) are trained in low-energy nuclear science and petascale
computing, while advancing a web-database for research and educational
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal is to learn from and inform
experiments at radioactive beam facilities, and to predict properties of
experimentally inaccessible nuclei that are key to advancing our knowledge about
astrophysical processes. The program focuses on improving reaction modeling by
constructing the effective interaction between a target and a projectile from
first principles (historically, referred to as an optical potential and fitted
to experimental data), which now account for the challenging microscopic
structure of the participating nuclei. As these interactions are an essential
input to numerous reaction models that are currently in use, the new
developments serve as an important tool in a broad spectrum of studies. The
project capitalizes on a symmetry-guided approach that, by exploiting symmetries
known to dominate the dynamics, has enabled ab initio investigations of heavier
nuclear species, deformed or not. In this approach, all participating particles
are treated on the same footing within a "shell model" picture, while employing
chiral effective field theory interactions between protons and neutrons. The end
products include calculations of beta decays in nuclei of enhanced deformation,
and of reaction observables, e.g., cross sections for scattering, charge-
exchange, and (d,p) reactions, of importance to
astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the objectives of
"Windows on the Universe: the Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the
10 Big Ideas for Future NSF Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.