* 2209203
* PRFB FY 2021: Characterizing the symbiosome membrane in two divergent cnidarian lineages to investigate the cellular mechanisms and evolution of coral-algal symbiosis
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Shumpei Maruyama, Maruyama, Shumpei
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The fellow will use cutting-edge gene-editing
and molecular techniques to study the fundamental mechanisms governing the
symbiosis between corals and algae that live with the coral, which is a key
aspect of coral health. Climate change threatens the stability of this symbiosis
and therefore can impact coral survival. Better understanding this relationship
therefore may help with the development of solutions for coral survival. The
fellow will support diversity and inclusion in the sciences by presenting their
work at outreach events in Baltimore, MD, developing a hands-on curriculum for
local K-12 students using a sea anemone, and by designing a research-based
course for Oregon State Universityâ€™s Invertebrate Biology
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In cnidarian-algal photosymbiosis, the
algal symbiont resides within a phagosomal membrane, called the symbiosome.
Proteins localize to the symbiosome membrane to maintain symbiosis, and several
of these proteins are shared among hosts that evolved photosymbiosis
independently. The fellow will characterize the symbiosome membrane proteome in
two divergent cnidarian lineages that have independently gained photosymbiosis:
the sea anemone Exaiptasia diaphana and the coral Acropora millepora. To
characterize the symbiosome membrane proteome, first, algal cells will be
isolated from each host species and symbiosome-positive algal cells will be
enriched with antibody labeling and flow cytometry. Then, symbiosome membrane
proteins will be purified with biochemistry and identified using tandem mass
spectrometry. The fellow will then test the function of symbiosome membrane
proteins by knocking out each gene with CRISPR/Cas9 in the two host species.
Knockout larvae will be inoculated with algal symbionts and symbiont density
will be measured. Knockouts of genes critical for symbiosis are predicted to
have a strong effect on symbiont density, while those that are less vital will
have weaker effects. Finally, the fellow will develop a course-based
undergraduate research experience at Oregon State University where students will
characterize the gene expression of symbiosome membrane proteins in E. diaphana
larvae through a time course during the early stages of symbiosis. Expression of
these genes are expected to vary temporally depending on their function. The
fellow will be trained by his sponsors in bioinformatics, proteomics,
CRISPR/cas9 knockout techniques, and curriculum
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.