* 2209284
* Large-scale CoPe: Reducing Climate Risks with Equitable Nature-based Solutions: Engaging Communities on Reef-Lined Coasts
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Michael Beck, University of South Florida
* Cooperative Agreement
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2027
* USD 5,465,707.00

Large-scale CoPe: Reducing Climate Risks with Equitable Nature-based Solutions:
Engaging Communities on Reef-Lined Coasts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
supports US national interests to reduce climate risk, confront environmental
degradation, enhance adaptive capacities of vulnerable communities, and advance
public and private investment in disaster risk prevention and reduction. Coastal
zones provide key services to local communities but also carry significant risks
from the land and ocean including threats from waves, storm surges, floods, and
sea level rise, all of which are increasing with climate change. Protecting and
restoring coastal ecosystems such as coral reefs and mangroves can help mitigate
these threats while also supporting local economies and societal resilience.
This project explores risks and benefits to communities in tropical coral reef-
dependent communities where replenishing coral reef and mangrove ecosystems has
been piloted and can be scaled up to regional and national management levels as
“Nature-based Solutions” (NBS). This project is co-creating new knowledge with
coastal communities in Florida, the US Virgin Islands, and Belize on how
ecosystem-based processes can help address climate risk and support equitable
and appropriate NBS. The team's complementary expertise in engineering, ecology,
and social sciences, linking seven academic institutions, multiple local
partners, and cross-regional organizations, expands the scope of potential
research outcomes to the entire US and ultimately to global tropical coastlines
beyond the three focus regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances our
understanding of coastal flood and erosion risk and the role of ecosystems and
“Nature-based Solutions” (NBS) to empirically assess hazards reduction, social
vulnerability, and overall socio-environmental risk. The goals are to (1)
establish an inclusive participatory co-design approach for assessing current
and future coastal risks and rigorously quantifying the benefits of NBS,
including coral reef and mangrove restoration and protection, for equitably
reducing risks while enhancing human well-being, economic recovery, and
biodiversity benefits, and (2) determine how community experiences of risk
differ within and across sites, how that affects NBS implementation, and how
adaptive capacity to mitigate increasing climate change is related to localized
impacts. This convergence research approach advances the quantitative, data-
driven evaluation of NBS for hazard risk reduction through the assessment of
ecosystem social and economic co-benefits. Project results support the
development of effective policy changes, community engagement, engineering
guidance, and incentives and innovative financing for NBS. The research is
standardizing monitoring and analysis methods to allow for effective
mainstreaming of active coastal sustainability management solutions. The
expanded and standardized use of NBS also opens the opportunity to broaden
participation of diverse stakeholders in the climate adaptation
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.