* 2209411
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: The Mechanical Engineering of Dendritic Cell Migration
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Byunghang Ha, Ha, Byunghang
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This research will explore the biophysical mechanisms and genetics that
influence the movement of cells (called cell migration). The fellow will use
dendritic cells as a model for this work. Dendritic cells are immune cells that
migrate through tissues as they patrol for foreign pathogens (i.e., bacteria).
However, it is poorly understood how the immune cells can squeeze and migrate
through tissues which often have spaces hundred to thousand times smaller than
the cells themselves. The Fellow will (1) determine how dendritic cells push,
pull, and squeeze their way through tissues, (2) investigate how mechanical
properties of the tissues impact dendritic cell migration, and (3) discover
genes that either promote or suppress the cell migration. These studies will
reveal fundamental insights into the immune cell migration and potentially
uncover new mechanisms of cell migration. The genes identified as being involved
in dendritic cell migration could potentially guide novel immunotherapies. In
addition, the Fellow also aims to increase diversity and inclusion by bringing
perspectives and tools of mechanical engineering into the fields of biophysics
and immunology and mentoring underrepresented students in the academic fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tissues and their extracellular matrices can exhibit
viscoelasticity, undergoing irreversible deformations in response to mechanical
forces. In viscoelastic matrices, cells can generate forces which can induce the
matrix to flow and create and expand an opening in a plastic fashion. The
research hypothesizes that first, dendritic cells use its nucleus to create
exceptional forces that are not found in adherent cells, plastically opening a
path to facilitate migration; second, the matrix mechanical properties such as
plasticity, stiffness, and adhesivity impact the migration behaviors. Using
tunable biomaterials for 3D culture and confocal microscopy, the Fellow will
study the cell migration and how varying matrix properties impact the migration.
Moreover, considering that dendritic cells exhibit striking differences in their
3D migration compared to typical adherent cells such as epithelial cells,
fibroblasts, and cancer cells, the Fellow assumes that there may be critical
genes involved in the cell migration that are unknown. The research aims to
discover the genes using genome-wide CRISPR screen and microfluidics-based
approach for single cell-in-gel encapsulation for a migration assay. The Fellow
will benefit from training in mechanobiology and immunology while conducting the
studies. This project will also aid in recruitment and retention of historically
underrepresented individuals by providing mentorship to undergraduate and
graduate students through outreach programs supported by the host
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.