* 2209399
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Desert Adaptations of Asiloid Flies: Genomics, Heat Shock Proteins, and Climate Change
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Allan Cabrero, Cabrero, Allan
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 03/31/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. As
temperatures rise due to global climate change, it is important to study groups
that are at risk and have largely been neglected, like desert adapted insects.
By studying the diversification and physiological adaptations of desert flies,
the fellow will investigate how these different species have adapted to extreme
temperatures. The studies on the effects of climate change on these groups may
also inform how other desert adapted insects will respond to global climate
change. The fellow will provide mentorship and training in collections-based
studies for students from underrepresented groups. The fellow will also engage
the public at the sponsoring institution, disseminating findings and educating
the public about the importance of collections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given high
species richness in deserts, asiloid flies are an ideal model system to
investigate how life has adapted to deserts and what physiological mechanisms
may have led to their diversification. In this project the fellow will sequence
the genomes of a broad sample of asiloid fly groups, that will serve as a
foundational dataset to be used for further studies for the fellow and other
researchers interested in genomics. In addition, the fellow will identify and
characterize the heat shock proteins of asiloid flies and develop an
understanding of how they have influenced adaptation to desert biomes. Using a
combination of historical biogeography, distribution modeling, and results from
previous studies, the fellow will investigate how global climate change may
affect asiloid flies and other desert adapted groups. The fellow will be trained
in genome sequencing, bioinformatics, heat shock protein identification and
characterization. In addition, the fellow will learn various collections-based
research skills including museomics, morphology and cybertaxonomy. The fellow
will engage with undergraduate interns from diverse backgrounds at the
sponsoring institution, providing mentorship, academic guidance, and training in
various genomic and collection-based research methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.