* 2209278
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Genomic and Behavioral Insights into the Role of Mate Choice in the Origins and Maintenance of Biodiversity
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Patrick Kelly, Kelly, Patrick
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 05/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. While learning new research skills, the fellow
will use a marine worm to explore a major source of biodiversity. Different
populations of animals sometimes begin to evolve differences in how their
offspring develop. These population differences can set the stage for the
evolution of new biodiversity. They can even lead to the origins of new species.
Whether this happens depends on whether members of the diverging populations can
still mate and produce offspring. A common barrier to such matings consists of
female mate preferences for males with the same developmental traits. Such
preferences can reduce chance matings between divergent populations and allow
them to diverge further. Thus, they can be major sources of biodiversity. Yet,
how these preferences arise is largely unknown. Using genomics, molecular
techniques, and behavioral assays, this research aims to uncover the genomic
makeup of such mate preferences. In addition, the fellow will develop K-12
lessons, perform public outreach, and mentor students using research
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will use the model marine worm system
Streblospio benedicti to investigate the role of female mate choice in the
divergence of populations that differ in developmental type. In some
populations, S. benedicti females produce many small, obligately feeding larvae.
In other populations, they produce many fewer, much larger offspring that can
develop to adulthood via maternal provisioning. Intermediate developmental types
are nearly never found in nature. Yet, they are readily produced in the lab by
breeding adults of opposite types. This suggests selection acts against such
intermediates in nature. Preliminary evidence suggests female S. benedicti
preferentially mate with adult males who had the same larval form as them. Thus,
it is possible that a behavioral, prezygotic mating barrier is contributing to
population divergence in developmental type. The fellow will use crosses and
whole-genome sequencing of females with different mating preferences to pursue
this possibility. This research will identify the genetic basis for mate
preferences in this system and its association with developmental type and
population divergence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.