* 2209620
* IUCRC Planning Grant University of Delaware: Center for Robotic Oceanic and Coastal Systems (CROCS)
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Herbert Tanner, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 05/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

The planning meeting to potentially establish an interdisciplinary industry-
university cooperative research center (IUCRC) will bring together faculty and
researchers at the University of Delaware in engineering, oceanography, disaster
research, technology, and ethics with leading industry technology experts,
government agencies, and first responders to discuss mutual interests in
establishing a Center for Robotic Oceanic and Coastal Systems. The Center's
mission is to fill major intellectual and economic gaps through convergent,
faculty-driven, collaborative, pre-competitive, fundamental research projects
focused on helping the maritime sector of the US economy overcome hurdles
holding it back. This will be accomplished by interviewing possible constituents
to identify areas of high priority to industry to formulate a strong value
proposition that will engage the private sector in funding Center research. The
Center will operate at the intersection of oceanography, environmental and
weather science, artificial intelligence (AI), robotics, sensor networks, data
science, and public policy. Goals of the Center will be to obtaining scientific
insights on the morphology and evolution of deep ocean and coastal, natural,
multi-scale, and interconnected dynamical systems and how they are influenced by
human activity. the Center will also work to help assess the long-term impact of
coastal and offshore development projects, and improve responses to natural and
man-made emergencies and disasters in a timely and effective fashion. This
planning grant provides the resources to work with and identify,
collaboratively, with industrial partners common-interests for the type of basic
and pre-competitive research that can potentially give Center members a
technological edge. Broader impacts of the planning process will be the
development and planning for a strong student training and workforce development
piece in ocean robotics and data analytics, improved competitiveness of the US
marine robotic sector, and public outreach to elementary and secondary schools.
Additional impacts include involvement of faculty from Delaware State University
and the University of South Carolina, both of which are in EPSCoR
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Robotics and Oceanic and Coastal
Systems builds on University of Delaware's successful tradition of creating
robust solutions to address industrial and societal needs rooted in fundamental
science and engineering and the understanding of underlying phenomena. The
Center will target applications that require the interconnected areas of
predictive modeling using Artificial Intelligence and machine learning, seabed
mapping in rapidly changing coastal environments; underwater communications and
application of 5G to bridge the water/air interface; development of algorithms
for managing arrays of communicating underwater robotic vehicles swarms carrying
various sensors to measure ocean temperature and chemical and biological
properties; power considerations to improve the duration a autonomous underwater
vehicle can stay active and collect data; and collection and integration of
critical data elements, like those from remote sensing, and air-sea/weather
inputs. Exemplar, high-impact, research projects will form the basis of the
Center in-person planning grant meeting that will involve university faculty
promoting a value proposition of strong interest to members of the maritime
sector of the US economy. Goals of the meeting will be to interest private
sector companies in becoming paying members of the Center and whose membership
fees will then pay for Center research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.