* 2209219
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: How short-term plastic responses produce long-term evolutionary change
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Michelle St John, St John, Michelle E
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Understanding mechanisms that allow organisms
to adapt to new environments is a key question in evolutionary biology. While
genetic mechanisms have traditionally been viewed as a primary mechanism of
adaptation, increasing evidence suggests behavioral changes may also be
important. Genetic mechanisms of adaptation tend to be clearer (e.g., new
mutations); however, we still lack a strong understanding of mechanisms allowing
shifts in behavior to facilitate evolutionary processes. Ultimately, this
project will reveal mechanisms connecting short-term behavioral changes to long-
term evolutionary processes and produce new predictions about when and how
behavior may drive adaptation. In addition to these research goals, the project
also aims to increase diversity, equity, and inclusion in the field of
evolutionary biology by providing learners with access to mastery experiences
such as performing scientific research with museum specimens and using the
scientific method for problem-solving.

Plasticity’s impact on evolutionary processes is still highly debated in
evolutionary biology which lacks a strong understanding of mechanisms connecting
short-term plastic changes to long-term evolutionary change. The Behavior First
Hypothesis predicts that mechanisms responsible for producing plastic behavioral
responses should be similar to those producing behavioral diversity on an
evolutionary scale. This project aims to test this prediction by investigating
molecular and neural mechanisms underlying behavioral plasticity in the pupfish
system. The pupfish system contains a novel fish scale-eating specialist—an
excellent organism for investigating how behavioral flexibility can lead to
diversification—along with several non-specialist species. This research will
quantify neural activity, integration, and gene expression in the brains of
specialist and non-specialist pupfishes with the end goal of providing
fundamental insights not only into behavior’s role in evolutionary processes,
but also into how the nervous system responds to novelty, mechanisms of
plasticity, and adaptation to new ecological niches. The Fellow will benefit
from training in neuroscience and transcriptomics while conducting studies at
the host institution. This research will also aid in recruitment and retention
of women and historically underrepresented groups in evolutionary biology by
providing mentorship to current students, including undergraduates in ongoing
research, and by partnering with local museums to provide science mastery
experiences to the public.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.