* 2209579
* Precision Measurement of Coherent Elastic Neutrino-Nucleus Scattering from Reactor Antineutrinos
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Juan Collar, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2026
* USD 137,729.00

Coherent Elastic Neutrino-Nucleus Scattering (CEvNS) is a recently demonstrated
mode of interaction for neutrinos. Possible technological applications include
nuclear reactor monitoring. CEvNS also provides a new sensitive window into the
study of neutrino properties and nuclear structure. This award will allow the
installation of a CEvNS-sensitive detector in the vicinity of a power nuclear
reactor (an intense source of low-energy neutrinos), observing for the first
time the correlation between CEvNS signals and reactor power. A comparison of
the signals detected with expectations from theoretical models will constrain
several neutrino properties presently not well-known. Deviations from the
predictions of the Standard Model of particle interactions, if observed, will
inform new models capable of superseding this current theoretical framework. The
award will also facilitate detector calibrations using neutron beams capable of
mimicking CEvNS signals: these studies are necessary to interpret the data
obtained during reactor exposure. Support for a graduate student towards Ph.D.
completion will be provided, with an emphasis on the recruitment of Hispanic
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous NSF support (PHY-1506357 and
PHY-1812702) allowed the PI and his team to perform the first measurement of
CEvNS at a spallation source, and to obtain suggestive evidence for this process
from reactor antineutrinos using an ultra-low noise, large mass germanium
detector in close proximity to the core of the Dresden-II nuclear reactor. This
award will continue this effort at one of the underground tendon galleries of
the Braidwood Generating Station. This location will provide an improvement in
signal-to-background ratio from the presently obtained 1/4 to &gt; 20,
generating in the process a high-quality precision measurement of CEÎ½NS,
independent of background model assumptions. This will maximize returns on the
effort already made in detector development and analysis tools. Additionally, a
new measurement of the sub-keV quenching factor for nuclear recoils in germanium
will be performed at the Ohio State University research rector, profiting from
past experience at that facility. The combination of these two measurements is
expected to have a large impact on multiple aspects of neutrino
phenomenology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.