* 2209383
* NSF-BSF: Control of molecular, cellular, and organismal phenotypes by the transcription factor NFAT5
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Dietmar Kueltz, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 07/31/2027
* USD 929,308.00

This project investigates how fish cope with the stress imposed by salt in the
water in which they live. Key to understanding this important process -- which
impacts survival, growth, and reproduction -- is to examine how the fish sense
environmental salinity and how they generate, in response, internal signals that
orchestrate the regulation of molecular networks that counteract the stress. The
project examines the molecules involved, and their interactions, using novel
molecular, genetic, and biochemical tools in combination with custom-built
computational models. By studying responses to salt stress, specifically, this
project has the potential to help understand, in general, responses to
environmental stress at different levels of biological organization. By
examining these processes in tilapia, the second-most important aquaculture
species globally, this work will positively impact an essential food supply
system. In addition, tilapia can serve as a model system for stress biology in
aquatic vertebrate species. This project generates tools and knowledge shared
with the broader scientific community via pertinent public repositories and
communication platforms. It includes elaborate cross-disciplinary training of
researchers at all career stages, with emphasis on underrepresented minorities,
in cutting-edge experimental and network modeling
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project identifies regulatory networks
that are causally linked to molecular, cellular, and organismal phenotypes
critical for salinity tolerance in tilapia, Oreochromis mossambicus. The
research hypothesis is that NFAT5, a transcription factor, is a central
orchestrator for controlling these networks. Putative causal links between NFAT5
and adaptive phenotypes (tolerance, growth, fecundity) during salinity stress
(hyperosmolality) will be tested. The project is based on prior research
elucidating molecular mechanisms and generating tools for studying mechanistic
causes of adaptive phenotypes in fish. NFAT5 functions will be determined on a
systems-scale, holistic level by investigating molecular networks and cellular
and organismal phenotypes that depend on NFAT5. The emphasis is on linking the
hyperosmotic, NFAT5-dependent regulation of transcriptome and proteome networks
with growth, survival, proliferation, and reproduction. Rules underlying the
extent of coupling of transcriptome versus proteome regulation will be
determined and their universality tested in different cell-/tissue types and
genomic backgrounds. Cell lines will be utilized for high-throughput gene
targeting and cellular phenotyping to identify the best targets for generating
NFAT5+ and NFAT5- transgenic fish for organismal phenotyping. Broader impacts
include the facilitation of prediction and mitigation of consequences of
salinity stress on organisms of high commercial value. General adaptive
strategies used to cope with stress will be revealed and shared broadly. Tools
(engineered cell lines, plasmids, proteomics libraries) and ideas generated will
be shared via communication platforms such as GitHub and at conferences. Cross-
disciplinary training and outreach will be provided to graduate students, REU
students, a postdoc, Sacramento area community college students, K-12 students
and teachers, and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This US/Israel project is
supported by the US National Science Foundation and the Israeli Binational
Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.