* 2209420
* WoU-MMA: Collaborative Research: Advancing the SuperNova Early Warning System
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Shunsaku Horiuchi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2025
* USD 134,210.00

The end of the life of a massive star may result in a core collapse that
produces a supernova. The energy released in these extreme astrophysical events
is primarily carried away in the form of neutrinos produced during the collapse
of the core. Since neutrinos interact only weakly with matter, compared to
photons, they escape the supernova explosion without delay, arriving at Earth
minutes to hours ahead of the optical component of the event. Neutrinos may
therefore be harnessed as an early notification of the supernova that may
trigger extensive follow-up observations of these relatively rare events within
the galactic neighborhood. This award supports a collaborative group of
scientists at several institutions to continue upgrading the SuperNovae Early
Warning System (SNEWS), a state-of-the-art network between neutrino and dark
matter detectors around the globe designed to provide automated prompt alerts of
impending supernovae in our galaxy to the astronomical community. The team,
consisting of experimentalists and phenomenologists with expertise in supernova
physics, will develop optimizations to the SNEWS 2.0 system to enhance the
detection capabilities. The awarded activities include the development of a
follow-up strategy involving the amateur astronomer community, as well as a
topical multi-lingual planetarium show developed for world-wide
distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The onset of the next Galactic core-collapse
supernova will be a rare opportunity to advance knowledge in both multi-
messenger astrophysics and fundamental physics. The SNEWS program provides the
means to observe a galactic supernova in neutrinos and, due to the early alarm,
the onset of the supernova light curve. Benchmarking of the system components
via a series of realtime readiness tests will improve the networkâ€™s robustness,
performance and capabilities. Building on the existing network architecture for
multi-messenger astronomy, the updated system will provide the ability to
identify bursts of pre-supernova and supernova neutrinos, and therefore enhance
the ability to localize the neutrino arrival directions for electromagnetic
follow-up. This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe
Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.