* 2209419
* WoU-MMA: Multi-Messenger and Multi-Wavelength Particle Astrophysics with HAWC
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kirsten Tollefson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2025
* USD 742,507.00

The High-Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC) Observatory is located on the highest
mountain in Mexico and is designed to observe astrophysical sources at the
highest energies of light, called gamma rays. Unlike more traditional ground-
based telescopes that point at a small region of sky on clear nights, HAWC
continuously monitors the full sky above it serving as a finder telescope and an
ideal partner for coincident observations with other observatories. This award
supports scientists at Michigan State University (MSU) to use HAWC to study the
physical conditions and processes in the most extreme environments in the
Universe, as well as test fundamental physics questions such as what’s the
nature of dark matter. The group also participates in studies of multi-messenger
astrophysics using HAWC’s data to search for gamma-ray counterparts to the high-
energy neutrinos detected by the IceCube Neutrino Observatory. The exciting
science capabilities of HAWC are conveyed to general audiences through public
outreach activities and a new workshop on gamma rays for high-school students is
being developed. The research group has a strong tradition of training a diverse
work force and currently includes women and under-represented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HAWC is the world’s most powerful survey
instrument for 1-100 TeV gamma rays. The MSU group has made significant
contributions to HAWC’s construction, operations, and science. HAWC recently
reprocessed 6 years of data with significantly improved reconstruction software.
The improvements will greatly impact all analyses but especially source searches
and analyses looking towards the Galactic Center. HAWC’s wide field-of-view and
continuous operation means it can study very extended regions of gamma-ray
emission and monitor time-varying phenomena nearly-continuously. The MSU group
will use these capabilities as well as capitalize on their unique position of
having members on both HAWC and IceCube simultaneously to perform multi-
messenger searches for time-varying gamma-ray sources correlated with IceCube
neutrino events and combined searches for dark matter. A module on gamma rays
and the HAWC detector will be added to the MSU Masterclass series offered to
high school students. This work directly addresses the goals of NSF's "Windows
on the Universe: The Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics" Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.