* 2209767
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Towards A Scalable Infrastructure for Archival and Reproducible Scientific Visualizations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Jian Huang, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2025
* USD 316,168.00

Today’s science revolves around leading edge datasets – data that scientists
need to carefully analyze so that they can draw reliable scientific conclusions.
The rate at which these leading-edge datasets are becoming larger and more
complex is accelerating every day. In many ways, having access to a dataset does
not equal to, or even come close to, having access to the insights in the
dataset. This nuanced but crucial difference in accessibility creates a deep
barrier to making scientific results reproducible. To this end, “Accessible
Reproducible Research”, published by Science in 2010, presented a system for
reproducible research. A decade later, unfortunately, accessible reproducible
research is still in its infancy. It turns out that this barrier is much more
fundamental than previously believed, even though on the surface it seems
solvable by investing resources and setting guidelines and policies. The real
challenge is that the computing toolsets, the working environments, and the work
processes of the original team of scientists are very difficult for a different
team of scientists to recreate with precision. Such difficulty stems from the
rapid speed at which computing technology is advancing; so that freezing a
computing environment in a practical manner is nearly impossible. In addition,
scientific intuition is difficult to codify, simply documenting a new idea is
not enough to communicate what a scientist saw before pursuing that idea. From
that respect, making accessible reproducible research a reality requires better
methods and tools. In this project, the investigators will focus on the
visualization step of data analysis, which is a central component of scientific
discovery. This project’s aim is to develop an Archiving Infrastructure for
Reproducible Interactive Visualization (AIRIV). Through this infrastructure, the
investigators will demonstrate how visual explorations of large and complex data
can be reliably captured, efficiently stored, easily shared, and freely reused
by any user. This project will improve accessibility of reproducible research
and promote the progress of science. For areas such as medicine and
pharmaceutical research, this project will provide an unprecedented channel to
accelerate translational research and advance the national
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build upon research funded by a
prior NSF CISE Research Infrastructure award. In that previous project, the
investigators found a method to capture interactive user experience of
visualization tools, and to share the captured experience without the need to
share the original software or the original data. Furthermore, during the reuse
of a captured experience, the user has freedom to explore beyond the exact
sequence of how the previous user has used the tool with a method called Loom.
In this new project to create AIRIV, the investigators will focus on web-based
visualization dashboards, which represent the standard way for scientists around
the world to interact with their data and derive insights. This project will
first build a general AIRIV Javascript library that can be imported by any web
browser-based application. Using the AIRIV library, developers of web-based
visual dashboards can easily implement automatic generation of Loom objects into
their dashboards. Developers will be able to instrument their applications to
store new provenance information with Loom objects as well. The investigators
will then conduct performance and scaling tests to understand the tradeoffs
between hosting choices under settings of local, institutional clusters, and
community shared data infrastructures. Operators of scientific facilities can
use the findings to help science communities make informed choices as to where
and how to host scientific visualization archives for better share-ability and
cost efficiency. The investigators will also develop machine learning methods
that can compare Loom objects and externalize commonalities and patterns in an
entire archive of Loom objects. Such new methods will lead to creating a search
by example functionality for AIRIV archives. For requirements collection,
continuous improvement, and deployment testing, the investigators will engage
the Mayo Clinic &amp; Illinois Alliance, which serves as a framework for several
technologies in healthcare, many of which center around the research and
development of dashboard/analytical tools. We target two such analytics efforts,
OmiX and KnowEnG, both of which are developed at National Center for
Supercomputing Applications (NCSA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.