* 2209912
* Elements: An ML Ecosystem of Filament Detection: Classification, Localization, and Segmentation
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Petrus Martens, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2025
* USD 598,489.00

Since object-detection algorithms outperformed humans, one decade has passed.
During this period, the unprecedented achievements of the Computer Vision domain
made many believe that object detection is a solved problem. However, when it
comes to scientific imagery such as microscopic, telescopic, aerial, satellite,
and medical images, the general-purpose object-detection algorithms are far from
perfect. A pixel-precise segmentation of objects and identification of their
physical properties based on their texture features are still outstanding
challenges in many interdisciplinary areas of research. Space Weather is one
such area. Extreme space-weather events, similar to extreme terrestrial events,
can have drastic economic and collateral impacts on mankind. Continuous and
automatic monitoring of solar filaments plays an integral role in achieving
reliable space-weather forecast/prediction systems, which consequently results
in the technical preparedness much needed in many infrastructural aspects of the
society, such as the power grid and the GPS systems. Our Machine Learning
Ecosystem brings automatic, accurate, and reliable analyses of filaments’
dynamic behavior to the experts’ fingertips. The main contributions of this
ecosystem are two data products of annotated filaments, and four software
products which carry out the annotation (localization, identification, and
segmentation) of these filaments. This modular ecosystem can be easily expanded
in the future, beyond the lifetime of the award, as faster and more efficient
modules are expected to be implemented by the community and replace the existing
ones. Throughout the development of this project, we consult with the
instrument/data experts from the National Solar Observatory (NSO) for proper
utilization of the observation images and metadata we integrate from the six
ground-based observatories of the Global Oscillation Network Group, that
together provide a full-disk and continuous (24/7) coverage of the
Sun.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of this project is on the
localization and segmentation of a specific solar event, called a filament, and
the identification of its magnetic field chirality. That said, the novel
concepts investigated in this project, such as the detection algorithm, the
augmentation engine, and the segmentation loss function which is sensitive to
granularities of objects, remain agnostic to the type of the event/object of
interest. Moreover, the released datasets of annotated filaments can serve the
Computer Vision community as a testbed for algorithms that aim at high-precision
segmentation of objects. Our Machine Learning Ecosystem consists of two data
products and four software products. The largest collection of manually
annotated filaments data, and a continuously-growing collection of automatically
annotated filaments are the two main data products. The main software products
are (1) an augmentation engine that provides users with practically unlimited
semi-real filament instances, (2) a deep neural network algorithm for
localization, segmentation, and classification of filaments, (3) a high-
precision segmentation loss function (sensitive to granularities of the observed
filaments) that guides the segmentation task, and (4) a deployable detection
module which carries out the localization, segmentation, and classification
tasks in real time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.