* 2209317
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Investigating the Genetic and Evolutionary Dynamics Producing Patterns of Trade-off Conditionality
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Elisa Visher, Visher, Elisa
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The Fellowâ€™s research will focus on
understanding the genetics of trade-offs in microbes to better understand
patterns of diversity in nature and constraints to adaptation. The research will
therefore have consequences for understanding adaptation to changing
environments, anti-microbial resistance evolution, and disease emergence. The
Fellow will also develop an undergraduate research program to contribute to
training the next generation of researchers in biology, including those
currently underrepresented in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will explore how trade-off shapes change over time, depend on
evolutionary history, and determine coevolutionary diversification. A key goal
of the project will be to understand how genetic processes determine phenotypic
trade-offs, and how these processes might explain observed patterns in the
conditionality of trade-offs. This will be achieved by using barcoding methods
in two model systems (one evolutionary yeast system and one coevolutionary
Pseudomonas and phage system) to conduct high-throughput fitness assays in
multiple environments (or on coevolved partners) and track lineage dynamics. The
first objective will determine how trade-off shapes change over time by further
evolving existing first-step yeast mutants in specialist and generalist
directions and periodically reassessing the Pareto front of evolving genotypes.
The second objective will evolve yeast lineages in fluctuating environments and
determine how environmental heterogeneity influences the joint distribution of
mutational fitness effects. The final objective will determine how trade-off
determines coevolutionary dynamics by developing methods to conduct high-
throughput fitness assays and lineage tracking in Pseudomonas and phage model
systems. The Fellow will gain training experience with computational and genetic
methods that includes high-throughput assays and building barcoded libraries.
Finally, the Fellow will contribute to broadening participation in STEM and
improving undergraduate research training by developing an undergraduate
research program; this will provide transparent, accessible, and supported entry
into biological science research through a centralized portal advertising
research opportunities and cohort-based research and professional skill training
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.