* 2209471
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: A Software Ecosystem for Plasma Science and Space Weather Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2027
* Eroma Abeysinghe Mudalige, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,004,434.00

This project advances the frontiers of global simulations of space and
laboratory plasma systems, and makes these advances accessible to a broad
community of users. The plasma states in such systems are often in weakly
collisional regimes where traditional fluid models break down. To describe such
systems, the project team is developing Gkeyll, a multi-fluid, multi-moment
model that incorporates important kinetic effects. The model can be used for
high-fidelity and accurate predictions for space weather events, and for the
design and study of laboratory experiments engaged in discovery plasma science.
The project will develop comprehensive cyberinfrastructure (CI) to support
professional scientists in the execution of space weather and basic plasma
physics simulations over a wide variety of computing platforms from local
clusters to high-performance computing facilities. Gkeyll CI to be developed
includes (1) providing web-based user interfaces for defining, executing, and
managing simulations, (2) workflows consisting of of pre-defined sequences of
tasks, and (3) user-friendly tools that implement the workflow tasks. Gkeyll
science will be facilitated by algorithmic advances. Gkeyll is open-source and
provides the space and laboratory plasma science communities with a modern and
versatile software ecosystem. The project team is strongly interdisciplinary,
including space and laboratory plasma scientists, applied mathematicians,
computer scientists and software engineers, and the project will promote
diversity in professional training and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CI to
be built in the project is centered on the Gkeyll framework that consists of
advanced plasma simulation models, tools, and automated continuous integration
of new software. The project will provide a uniform and complete open-source
solution with workflow control to model plasma systems from terrestrial
magnetospheres to laboratory experiments in collisionless or weakly collisional
plasma regimes, which are essential for space weather and laboratory plasma
experiments. The project will extend and enhance the core algorithms in Gkeyll
and integrate the software with the NSF Science Gateway Platform as a Service
(SciGaP). Gkeyll science is facilitated by core modeling and PDE discretization
advances, including automated and adaptive gridding for relevant sets of
parameterized geometries that are properly matched to the equation
discretization methods. The project will employ modern software engineering
practices to produce scalable, secure, and high-fidelity physics-based
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Division of Physics within the
NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and the Division of
Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences and the Division of Research, Innovation,
Synergies, and Education within the NSF Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.