* 2209046
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: Gene-Brain-Behavior Phenotypes of Dog Aggression
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Julia Espinosa Grossmann, Espinosa, Julia H
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Over centuries, humans have selectively bred
domestic dogs for appearance and behavioral characteristics. This practice has
reduced genetic variance between breeds and resulted in a “natural experiment,”
providing current researchers with a controlled opportunity for understanding
the role of domestication on behavior and identifying its physiological
underpinnings. Fields such as genetics and neuroscience, which have
traditionally used animals such as mice and rats in controlled laboratory
settings, are now looking to dogs for answers because of their long history of
co-evolution with humans. By investigating the gene-brain-behavior link in dogs,
who live in the same environment as humans, there is greater potential to
understand how physiology and behavior are shaped by living in real-world
environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to very relaxed negative selection and
very strong positive selection, certain traits can become common in domesticated
species. The presence of these deleterious traits has been demonstrated in dog
behavior and cognition using behavioral, genetic, and brain imaging. Uniting
insights from these separate lines of research in a multimethod project, the
Fellow will investigate gene-brain-behavior phenotypes of aggression, combining
behavior assessment surveys with neuroimaging (MRI) and genetic analysis. The
Fellow will investigate if systematic differences in the morphology and
connectivity of aggression-related brain regions, genetic variation, and
individual life histories play a role in aggressive phenotypes in dogs. An
initial sample of pet dogs from the community will participate in behavior
prescreening with C-BARQ (established behavior assessment instrument). Dogs that
score in the top 20% and bottom 20% of aggression scales will participate in
additional screening for adverse life experiences, provide cheek swabs for
genotyping individuals, and be invited for an MRI scan in the lab. The Fellow
will be trained in MRI analyses to investigate differences between and
interactions among brain phenotypes linked to genotype, brain phenotype, and
early adverse experiences. This work will shed light on the gene-brain-
environment interactions that govern aggression, which is important for
improving human-animal relationships, and has implications for understanding
human mental health and social wellbeing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.