* 2209323
* Collaborative Research: Integrative Phylogenomics of Wing Repurposing, Vestigiality and Loss
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Dominic Evangelista, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 12/31/2025
* USD 277,546.00

Insects have become the most evolutionarily successful group of animals on Earth
due, in part, to wings – their most striking adaptation. Wings provide insects
with a myriad of advantages (e.g., in flight, courtship, defense) over their
non-winged relatives. Despite this, there are countless examples of insects that
have evolved to have lost their wings, or have had them reduced to the point
that they are not functional for flight. Cockroaches are a prime example of
this, as it appears that they have lost functional wings dozens of times
throughout their 250 million year evolutionary history. This research will
describe cockroach wing evolution patterns, with the aim of better understanding
the value of having wings, losing them, or repurposing them for new functions.
In particular, this project will examine modifications of wings in the most
specialized subgroup of cockroaches – termites – and their closest cockroach
relatives. Achieving these aims teaches us about the processes that shape
Earth’s biodiversity, how people might conserve those processes, and how
societies can learn from them to better achieve their own aims (e.g.,
bioinspired design of technology). The project will be carried out in a manner
that will bring together international students for collaborative development in
the US and abroad. The grant will also fund a mentorship workshop to maximize
the benefit to project participants and other members of the local academic
community. The workshop will aim to improve mentorship approaches at the pre-
professional and professional stage to generate more equitable academic
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt; This integrated phylogenomic study will assess the macro-
evolutionary dynamics of wing-evolution. The research will integrate
morphological study of the forewing base, and data on wing
presence/absence/vestigiality/mechanical-shedding over a phylogenetic framework
that additionally aims to place important rogue lineages. The resulting
ancestral state reconstruction will address hypotheses about the evolutionary
conservation of mechanical wing-loss, developmental wing-loss, regain,
vestigiality, and correlations among these. This product will further allow
robust placement of controversial fossils and thus improve divergence date
inferences. In all, this study will lend understanding to the evolution of
wings, the origins of phenotypes preceding eusociality in termites, and
evolutionary patterns among cockroaches. Concurrent to the intellectual
component, this grant will fund a mentorship improvement workshop, and other
broader impact activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.