* 2209756
* Frameworks: Cyberinfrastructure for Remote Data Collection with Children
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Laura Schulz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,999,998.00

Lookit/Children Helping Science is a website where families can participate in
research with their infants and children from home. In the past, researchers who
study how children develop and learn have almost always either invited families
to bring their children to a research lab, or else have worked with schools to
conduct studies that take place during the school day. Because participating in
studies can place a big burden on families and schools, many of these studies
have worked with relatively small sample sizes, and often recruit a group of
participants who do not represent the diverse experiences and backgrounds of all
children. The COVID-19 pandemic has also made it impossible to conduct these
kinds of studies for months or years at a time, shutting down much of the
scientific that is designed to improve children’s lives.
&lt;br/&gt;Lookit/Children Helping Science has made it much easier to conduct
studies about how infants and children develop: families don’t need to travel
anywhere, and they can learn about and decide to participate in a research study
(either a video call with a researcher, or a self-paced activity) at a time that
works for them. Now, the website is being expanded so that the same tools and
procedures for doing remote research about how children’s minds develop
(psychological research) can be applied to questions about children’s learning
and experience in schools (educational research). &lt;br/&gt;To do this, the
investigators work with teachers, school administrators, families, and education
researchers to learn what else is needed for the website to work in these new
contexts. For instance, right now, usually parents or guardians are with their
children while they take the study, so they can learn about and decide if their
child should participate at the same time. If a teacher is the one to set up the
study, then the website will need new ways to let both families and teachers
keep track of a child’s information. &lt;br/&gt;Studies with infants and
children are much harder to carry out than similar studies with adults, but
moving this research online can help studies to be better (making fewer
mistakes), more flexible for the questions being asked, and more applicable to
how children from all backgrounds learn and grow. Researcher often make tools
for a specific field like psychology or medicine, but research with children
happens across many different topics. By organizing the tools for researchers
around the needs of families and children, rather than around the needs of a
particular scientific topic, this website will let people from all walks of life
participate in studies from many different perspectives, all aiming to improve
what we know about how infants and children learn and
grow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed cyberinfrastructure is a centralized
platform for online psychological and educational research with children,
directly supporting goals of the Directorates for Education and Human Resources
(EHR) and Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE). Many studies with
children can be translated into online tasks, either “unmoderated” and
administered entirely by computer, or “moderated” via video chat with a
researcher. The popularity of such approaches has exploded during the COVID
pandemic, across nearly every type of research that involves data collection
with human participants.&lt;br/&gt;The present award builds on the success of
the Lookit/Children Helping Science platform with developmental psychology and
simultaneously extend to a new domain, education research, that both has common
constraints and can benefit from shared resources like online participant pools.
In particular, the objectives are: (1) Support additional research types,
including educational research conducted in schools and live interactive
studies. (2) Accommodate a wider range of researchers and participants by
facilitating multilingual studies and providing mobile device support. (3)
Improve the quality and reproducibility of research conducted on the platform.
(4) Facilitate sustained contributions by researchers who use the platform.
&lt;br/&gt;Beyond increasing the speed of research, this infrastructure aims to
unlock advances in educational research that are more robust and generalize more
widely: for example, rather than an intervention being tested in one school in
one location, with corresponding limitations regarding generalizing conclusions,
the intervention might simultaneously be tested across the country, implemented
with perfect consistency at each location. This will increase replicability,
generalizability, and the ability to investigate individual differences across a
broad range of developmental research. &lt;br/&gt;Research with children is
essential for many societal aims, including informing pedagogical practices and
educational policy. This cyberinfrastructure provides these much-needed tools
regardless of geographical location, increasing opportunities for under-
resourced researchers and underrepresented groups and expanding opportunities
for scientific outreach and study participation among diverse populations. In
addition to the impact on the areas of research that the platform will serve
after this phase of investment, this work will also provide key insights,
opportunities, and tools for digital infrastructure in other
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.