* 2209521
* Development of SiPM-based spectrometers for the UCNtau and UCNA+ experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Robert Pattie, East Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2025
* USD 217,102.00

The free neutron radioactively decays into a proton, electron, and anti-
neutrino. The rate at which this process occurs, and the direction of the
ejected particles, is determined by parameters of the weak nuclear force.
Precision studies of these parameters provide a window into the fundamental
physics governing our universe and can identify new physics. The goal of future
experiments is to be sufficiently sensitive to detect new physics that is not
currently part of the Standard Model of Forces and Particles. To increase the
sensitivity of these experiments new modern technologies and techniques must be
integrated into the experimental methods. This award will support the
investigation of Silicon Photomultiplier based neutron and electron detectors
that will mitigate systematic uncertainties in previous iterations of neutron
decay experiments. The project will provide undergraduate researchers with
essential hands-on training in skills that will prepare them for the national
STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In collaboration with the ultracold
neutron physics group at Los Alamos National Laboratory this research will
enable higher precision measurements of the neutron lifetime, the beta-asymmetry
parameter ‘A’, and a new search for the neutron’s electric dipole moment. Three
experimental goals are outlined in this project. First, provide a silicon
photomultiplier-based scintillation detector for a &lt;0.2% measurements of ‘A’
for the UCNA+ experiment. The detector will eliminate the multi-wire
proportional counter used in UCNA that was the source of backscattering and
energy loss systematics. This technology will enable a similar detector scheme
for high rate counting in the UCNtau experiment. Second, provide neutron time of
flight spectrometers for online assess of the ultracold neutron velocity
spectrum which is essential for understanding systematic effects in all the
experiments hosted by LANL. Finally, provide a design of a lightly enriched
uranium insert for the LANL ultracold neutron source capable increasing the
production by a factor of four.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.