* 2209394
* Using sedaDNA from California Holocene and Anthropocene lake sediments to determine drivers of the “Insect Apocalypse”
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Elizabeth Hadly, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Insects represent more than half of described species on earth and play critical
roles in ecological processes, ecosystem function, and human well-being. Insect
declines have been widely documented and causes of these declines are attributed
to human impacts including climate change, habitat loss and degradation,
agricultural intensification including pesticides, and introduction of non-
native species. However, we do not yet understand the relative importance and
synergies of each of these factors. Although we have detailed records of recent
changes in insect diversity and abundance in some regions of the globe, longer-
term records (&gt;50 years) are rare. These long-term records are important for
understanding when large scale insect declines began, how far it has progressed,
and whether recent variations in insect populations are within the range of
normal changes. Our understanding of this biodiversity crisis is also limited
because previous work has mainly focused on certain groups of insects, like
pollinators and butterflies, and we have little or no knowledge of whether or
how other groups have been impacted. This research will analyze insect DNA from
lake sediment cores in California to reconstruct a &gt;1,200-year record of
insect diversity change. By using DNA analysis, the researchers will be able to
study insect species which have not previously received much research attention.
The project will also assemble data on land use change, climate change, and
pesticide applications, to link these human impacts with insect diversity
through time. This research advances biodiversity conservation by improving our
baseline understanding of insect declines, and distinguishing natural changes in
insect diversity from those caused by human impacts over the last century. This
project will contribute to the development of new research techniques and
biodiversity monitoring technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
utilize sediment cores collected from a marsh and hydrologically connected
reservoir at Jasper Ridge Biological Preserve (JRBP) in the San Francisco Bay
Area (California, USA). Together these cores span a period of increasing local
and global human impacts. The researchers will employ both traditional
palaeoecological tools as well as emerging sedimentary DNA (sedaDNA) techniques.
To characterize insect diversity through time, the researchers will analyze
sedaDNA from the sediment cores using metabarcoding and high-throughput
sequencing. To develop high-resolution records of insect diversity change, the
researchers will use geochemical and microfossil analyses, sedaDNA, and
historical records. This multi-proxy, high-resolution data set will then be
statistically queried using several multivariate modeling
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.