* 2209185
* Unravelling the Origin of the Matter-Antimatter Asymmetry in the Universe
* MPS,PHY
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Andrea Shindler, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 10/31/2025
* USD 270,000.00

Even with the extraordinary success of the the Standard Model of Particle
Physics (SM), certain phenomena observed in the Universe that have profound
consequences to life as we know it, such as the matter-antimatter asymmetry, the
hierarchy problem, and the existence of dark matter and dark energy, remain
unexplained. Therefore any physical description of such phenomena requires a
theory that goes beyond the Standard Model (BSM), while at the same time
encompassing the Standard Model and its predictions related to ordinary matter.
A physical quantity potentially sensitive to the source responsible of the
matter-antimatter asymmetry is the electric dipole moment (EDM) of particles
such as the neutron and proton. The PI will study the impact of theories beyond
the Standard Model to the matter-antimatter asymmetry in the universe by
calculating the electric dipole moments of protons and neutrons induced by such
theories. In addition to investigating the role played by theories beyond the
Standard Model to the observed matter-antimatter asymmetry in the universe,
which is one of the biggest unanswered questions in particle and nuclear
physics, the PI will mentor a student engaged in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a new method, based on the so-
called gradient flow, for the determination of the Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD)
component of key BSM matrix elements related to quark and strong theta-CP
violations. This set of matrix elements impacts the understanding of electric
dipole moments (EDMs) within nucleons and nuclei (a key signature of BSM
physics), and their determination will lay the foundation for extraction of BSM
observables from future low-energy, high-intensity experimental measurements.
The use of the gradient flow will circumvent some of the big challenges posed by
the determination of the above-mentioned matrix elements by introducing a new
scale, the flow time, that will mitigate divergences present in the
calculations. Additionally the gradient flow is perfectly suited to be adopted
to QCD calculations on the lattice. Lattice QCD is, as today, the only robust
and theoretically sound approach to non-perturbative QCD calculations. The new
method the PI has developed is ideally suited for calculating all the CP-
violating contributions to the EDM of nucleons and light nuclei. Most of the
tools and technique developed in this project are alternative to traditional
methods and can be easily applied to other matrix element calculations
contributing to the study of dark matter candidates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.