* 2209138
* RUI: Nuclear Science with Undergraduate Researchers: Studies of Nuclei at the Extremes and New Applications of Nuclear Techniques
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Paul DeYoung, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Alfredo Galindo-Uribarri
* 07/31/2025
* USD 374,577.00

Fundamental nuclear physics deals with questions related to the structure and
behavior of nuclei. In particular, questions about the specific form of the
nuclear force and questions about how heavy elements are formed in the universe
are of interest. One component of this work will involve measuring the structure
of very neutron-rich, unstable nuclei at the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams as
part of the MoNA (Modular Neutron Array) collaboration. These measurements allow
theorists to refine models of the nuclear force. A second component will be to
measure how radioactive neutron-rich nuclei decay with CARIBU as part of the SuN
(Summing NaI) collaboration at Argonne National Laboratories. This information
is needed for a complete understanding of how heavy elements are formed in
neutron star mergers and supernovas. A range of applied questions will be
investigated with the Hope College 1.7 MV particle accelerator, which is capable
of particle-induced x-ray spectroscopy, particle induced gamma-ray spectroscopy,
and Rutherford backscatter spectroscopy. These analytic tools can be applied to
measure the elements present in and overall structure of a wide variety of
liquid and solid samples. Lastly, this award will support a nuclear science
educational outreach program to area under served K-12
students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hope College Nuclear Group is very involved
with two large collaborations: One is the Modular Neutron Array (MoNA)
collaboration (led by Paul Gueye and other FRIB researchers along with
researchers from a number of PUI institutions) and the other is the Summing NaI
(SuN) group (led by Artemis Spyrou, FRIB researchers, and other national and
international collaborators). The Nuclear group will also collaborate with the
LPC-Caen Nuclear Structure Group (part of the SAMURAI collaboration at RIKEN) as
part of the scope of this work. Hope undergraduates will participate in
planning, running experiments, data analysis, detector development, detector
construction, multi-neutron identification algorithm development, and manuscript
preparation. In particular, the Nuclear Group has major responsibility for MoNA
trigger logic and SuN tape target control. Currently there are two PAC-approved
MoNA experiments upcoming at FRIB: one focused on unbound 30F and the other on
unbound states in 53Ca. In addition to a number of SuN experiments to be
conducted with CARIBU at Argonne National Laboratories, of special note is a
Modular Total Absorption Spectrometer (MTAS) based experiment with beams around
128Ag at FRIB (PAC1 ) and a ReA experiment, based on 73As, of which part of the
setup, the anti-cosmic ray shield, was previously constructed at Hope College.
Student researchers at Hope College will continue to participate, analyze
(specializing on extraction of beta intensity functions), and publish results
from these opportunities. The Nuclear Group will also work with other research
groups, inside and outside of Hope, to characterize samples with Particle
Induced X-ray Emission spectroscopy (PIXE), Particle Induced Gamma-ray Emission
spectroscopy (PIGE), and Rutherford Backscatter spectroscopy (RBS) along with
the Hope 1.7 MV accelerator, which includes microfocusing ability. This will
include attempts to improve detection limits of PFAS contamination in water with
PIGE. Lastly the PIs will partner with the ExploreHope Academic Outreach to work
with K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the objectives of
"Windows on the Universe: the Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the
10 Big Ideas for Future NSF Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.