* 2209456
* PM: Search for a Cosmologically-Relevant Boson in Antimuon Decay
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Juan Collar, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kaushik De
* 07/31/2024
* USD 411,735.00

Experiments performed at particle accelerator facilities typically involve the
generation of very large signals in the detectors employed. This is the result
of the high energies imparted to the accelerated projectiles, which in turn
produce very energetic fragments in their collisions. Unexpected products of
particle interactions in such experiments are the harbingers of new physics
theories. When looking for these signatures of new physics, the traditional
concentration has been to push towards higher and higher energies in the sought
signals. This award will support an innovative departure from this trend, by
concentrating instead on the observation of the smallest possible energies
following the impact and decay of a beam of anti-muons striking germanium
detectors built specifically for this purpose. The data collected will permit
the team to significantly expand the present sensitivity to exotic modes of this
decay, specifically one in which an unexpected new particle (a boson) is
created. Such bosons have been predicted by many extensions of the Standard
Model of particle interactions, a theory now known to be incomplete. By
concentrating on low-energies, the search supported by this award will explore,
for the first time, the possibility that these bosons are created with slow-
enough speeds to be gravitationally bound to galaxies. This would enable them to
play interesting roles in cosmological scenarios, including the still unresolved
dark matter problem. This award will also support one graduate student towards
the completion of their studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specialty germanium
detectors will be developed with the characteristics required to investigate the
mode of decay of an antimuon that generates the new boson and a tell-tale
monochromatic low-energy positron. These devices will then be exposed to the
M15/M20 surface muon beams at TRIUMF, the Canadian accelerator center. TRIUMF is
one of two sources, both outside the US, able to provide the required muon
energies for this search. Following short (one week) beam exposures, the
pertinent region of boson phase space can be probed down to branching ratios as
small as 1E-7, a vast advance with respect to previous searches of this type.
Two main factors contribute to this excellent expected sensitivity: an
improvement by more than three orders of magnitude in detector energy resolution
with respect to previously employed large scintillator calorimeters, and the
modest background rate expected in the tiny detectors to be
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.