* 2209192
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: The genetic and molecular rules of trait expression
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Jay Falk, Falk, Jay J
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/28/2026
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research seeks to understand and identify
the “rules” of male/female trait expression. Across the animal kingdom, the
degree to which males and females differ from each other is profoundly variable.
Despite this, the genetic and molecular processes by which these male/female
differences are expressed remain largely mysterious. In this project, the fellow
will study a fascinating species that is uniquely able to address these
questions, the white-necked jacobin hummingbird (Florisuga mellivora). White-
necked jacobin males have very different coloration from most females, yet 20%
of females are male-like in coloration and are indistinguishable from males in
the field. These differences are both expressed in the same species, allowing
the fellow to detect the genetic factors underlying male/female difference while
controlling for other factors. The project will take place in both the United
States and Panama, aiming to build an international collaboration between
scientists from diverse cultural backgrounds. By training the fellow in cutting-
edge genomic and microscopy techniques, this fellowship will forge an
integrative framework for understanding male/female diversity, coloration, and
evolutionary biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To identify the evolutionary rules of
male/female dimorphism the project will use an investigative framework that
spans genomic, developmental, and phenotypic levels of biological organization.
First, the fellow will test whether the female polymorphism is linked to genetic
variation by performing a genome-wide association study. Second, because gene
expression and regulation are ultimately responsible for producing these
phenotypes, transcriptomics will be used to identify genes associated with
feather coloration. By collecting and analyzing feathers during their growth,
the fellow will distinguish genes associated with color in male vs. female
individuals. Third, organisms often use tiny structures invisible to the human
eye to produce coloration, yet surprisingly little is known about the process by
which genes regulate variation of these structures. The fellow will use electron
microscopy techniques to identify the structures that vary across and within
males and female feathers, thereby connecting genome to phenotype. Inspired by
the white-necked jacobin, this project will also cultivate spaces to expand a
welcoming place in science for people from a diversity of
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.