* 2209578
* Nuclear, Particle, and Weak Interaction Physics of the Big Bang and Stellar Collapse
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* George Fuller, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2025
* USD 330,000.00

The research supported in this Project will provide insights into how atomic
nuclei and elementary particles and radiation behave in the conditions of
extreme temperature and density found in the cosmos. This research will seek to
use these insights to provide important clues about the nature of elementary
particles, the mysterious neutrinos in particular, and about how the elements
are synthesized in nature, for example, the heaviest elements in the fiery
interiors of collapsing stars or colliding neutron stars, and the lightest in
the first seconds in the history of the universe. In turn, these considerations
could yield clues about new physics, clues that may complement insights gleaned
from terrestrial experiments. The calculations to be done in this project will
involve honing humanity's fundamental theory of nature, i.e., Quantum Mechanics,
into a tool capable of modeling the behavior of neutrinos and atomic nuclei in
the extreme environments of the cosmos. Another key product of this Project will
be the training of young nuclear physicists, at both the graduate and
undergraduate levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported in this
Project will be directed toward probing the fundamental physics of neutrinos and
nuclei by exploiting the intersection of exciting new developments in nuclear
physics and neutrino physics on the one hand, with the explosion of new data and
insights from the advent of multi-messenger astronomy and precision cosmology on
the other. A key issue in this enterprise will be studying how neutrinos
interact in dense matter and how these interactions may cause these particles to
change their flavors (e.g., electron type neutrinos changing to tau type and
vice versa). This can be a fiercely nonlinear problem because the flavor content
of the neutrino component in part determines how neutrino flavors change!
Research in this project will target (1) Understanding and modeling nonlinear
neutrino flavor evolution and assessing the impact of this process on compact
objects (collapsing stellar cores; merging binary neutron stars) dynamics and
nucleosynthesis; (2) Using the insights from these and other considerations to
turn our models of, and observational constraints on compact object environments
and the early universe into insights into beyond standard model physics, dark
matter, and dark sector physics; (3) Understanding nuclear structure, neutrino-
nucleus interactions, nuclear partition functions, and nuclear weak strength
distributions in high temperature environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project advances the objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of Multi-
Messenger Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.