* 2209402
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Linking Mammalian Omnivore Ecological Traits to Biogeography and Morphology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Dana Reuter, Reuter, Dana Marie
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

Fellow's name: Dana Reuter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
2209402&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research title: NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in
Biology: Linking Mammalian Omnivore Ecological Traits to Biogeography and
Morphology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sponsoring scientist(s) and host institution(s):
Dr. Robert Guralnick, Florida Museum of Natural History; Dr. A. Michelle Lawing,
Texas A&amp;M University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action funds an NSF
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2021, Integrative Research
Investigating the Rules of Life Governing Interactions Between Genomes,
Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship supports research and training of the
fellow that will contribute to the area of Rules of Life in innovative ways. One
of the main goals of ecology is to understand the rules that underly how species
respond to environmental change, and specifically whole community response to
resource shifts. A large proportion of mammals are omnivores (that is, they eat
both plant and animal-based foods), but we do not know linkage between
omnivorous dietary traits, key physical traits such as jaw shape, and the
environment. This lack of knowledge also prevents paleontologists from
reconstructing omnivorous diets in the fossil record, ultimately limiting more
complete understanding of long-term processes underlying biological innovation.
This project aims to better understand linkages between omnivorous diets and jaw
and dental shape and how diet and shape are structured across communities and
landscapes. The results of this project will help inform future estimates of how
mammals and communities will respond to environmental
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two main objectives: 1)
Characterize omnivore biogeography by assessing species richness, phylogenetic
diversity, and functional diversity in mammalian omnivores on the North American
landscape; 2) Determine morphological adaptations tied to consuming different
food materials in omnivorous mammals. These objectives will be accomplished by
first developing a new database of North American mammalian diets that focuses
on omnivore diet variation and the metadata of the primary data sources. The PI
will use the newly developed diet database, species range maps, vegetation
indexes, and previously published mammalian phylogenetic trees to test whether
omnivore diet type and body mass limits omnivores to certain habitats or
regions. Additionally, the PI will collect 3D scans of mammalian jaws and use
machine learning approaches to test whether jaw morphology and dental topology
vary in predictable ways among omnivores with differing diets. The fellow will
receive training in bioinformatics and database development, phylogenetic
comparative methods, and ecomorphological data collection techniques. The fellow
will also mentor undergraduate students using biological collections and engage
the broader public in biological inquiry through involvement in K-12 classrooms
and outreach events and videos at Natural History
Museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.