* 2209217
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Symbiosis as a Means of Survival for Biological Soil Crust Microbes
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Erin Carr, Carr, Erin Claire
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

Fellow's name: Erin Carr&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number: 2209217&lt;br/&gt;Research
title: Symbiosis as a Means of Survival for Biological Soil Crust
Microbes&lt;br/&gt;Sponsoring scientist(s) and host institution(s): Steven
Harris, Iowa State University; and Wayne Riekhof, University of Nebraska-
Lincoln&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship in Biology for FY 2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules
of Life Governing Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The
fellowship supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to
the area of Rules of Life in innovative ways. This project aims at understanding
how microbes growing in desert soils can use chemical interactions to obtain
vital nutrients and withstand the extreme stress of desert ecosystems.
Microorganisms living in desert soils include bacteria, algae, fungi, and
lichens. Most research attention has focused on photosynthetic bacteria and
algae, as well as nitrogen-fixing bacteria. These microbes provide a source of
nutrients such as carbon sugar and ammonia nitrogen, respectively, to the entire
community. However, the role of fungal species in these communities is still
unknown. This work aims to increase understanding of desert microbial
communities by determining the role of these fungal species, which is believed
to include providing melanin for increased ultraviolet and stress resistance for
the whole community. This research will help provide new knowledge that will
make it possible to use these microbial communities to perform soil metal
removal, increase agricultural soil nutrients, retain soil moisture in droughts,
and prevent desertification of non-desert
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological soil crusts (or soil crusts) are
microbial communities that form biofilms on the surface of nutrient-deplete
desert soils. It is hypothesized that the microbes residing in the soil crust
engage in transient interactions akin to that of a lichen symbiosis, to obtain
nutrients and survive extreme abiotic stress. To investigate this hypothesis,
novel microbial species isolated from a soil crust will be used to: 1) show that
non-lichenized melanized fungi can establish mutualistic interactions with
bacteria and algae; 2) observe how fungal melanin affects microbes from the soil
crust, to determine if melanin can be considered a “public good” for abiotic
resistances and used as a carbon source; and 3) identify metabolites produced
and gene regulation differences during multi-species cultures to determine how
these microbes interact. The fellow has additional goals to improve both
representation and experience in undergraduate research by 1) recruiting
undergraduate researchers from underrepresented groups and 2) developing a
monthly basic lab techniques workshop to provide free lab experience to all
undergraduates. Additional use of funds from this fellowship will be put towards
increasing collaborations with fellow researchers in this field by developing a
virtual conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.