* 2209103
* WoU-MMA: Particle Astrophysics with HAWC
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jordan Goodman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,724,893.00

Gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation, and their
astrophysical observation provides the means to study the processes of extreme
astrophysical environments in the Universe. The High Altitude Water Cherenkov
(HAWC) Observatory, located in the Sierra Negra in Mexico, is a high-
sensitivity, wide field-of-view, continuously operating teraelectronvolt (TeV)
gamma-ray telescope. HAWC is designed to explore the origin of cosmic rays,
study the acceleration of particles in extreme physical environments, and search
for new physics at the TeV-scale and beyond. This award supports scientists at
the University of Maryland (UMD), College Park, in operating and performing data
analyses with the HAWC observatory. HAWC data will be used to provide a new look
at the TeV sky, discovering new sources and source classes, setting new limits
on dark matter, and playing a key role in multi-messenger/multi-wavelength
observations. The team will participate in mentoring activities, including the
UMD GRAD-MAP program, creating research opportunities for students from local
HBCUs and community colleges, and broad outreach with educational institutions
from elementary school students, to undergraduate students, to senior citizens
in the US and Mexico. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HAWC observatory consists of 300
large water Cherenkov detectors (WCDs) surrounded by an outrigger array of 350
smaller WCDS located at an altitude of 4100 m in Mexico. HAWC’s wide field-of-
view and greater than 95% up-time simultaneously monitors the same sky observed
by Fermi, LIGO/Virgo, and IceCube to search for transient phenomena like gamma-
ray bursts and flaring active galactic nuclei. HAWC sends alerts to other
observers, triggering multi-wavelength and multi-messenger observations, as well
as provides maps of the TeV sky to other observatories. HAWC’s discoveries of
extremely high-energy sources, such as galactic PeVatrons, TeV Halows,
microquasars, and the Cygnus Cocoon, have led to follow-up observations by other
groups. Improvements in the HAWC data analyses will provide detailed source
morphology and spectra, leading to the discovery of new sources and enhanced
searches with improved sensitivity to transient phenomena at higher energies.
This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.