* 2209208
* 2022 Photonuclear Reactions: Frontiers in Nuclear and Hadronic Physics GRC will be held at the Holderness School in Holderness, New Hampshire, August 7 – 12, 2022.
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Marc Vanderhaeghen, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 05/31/2023
* USD 6,000.00

This award provides support for students to participate in the 2022 Gordon
Research Conference (GRC) on “Photonuclear Reactions: Frontiers in Nuclear and
Hadronic Physics GRC”, which will be held at the Holderness School in
Holderness, NH, August 7 – 12, 2022. These meetings bring together scientists
from around the world to focus on research at the forefront of photonuclear
reactions. The conference is organized in a way to promote significant
discussion and time for collaboration throughout the week.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide partial support for a limited
number of junior researchers to attend the 2022 GRC. The support for the
participants will be selected by the chairs based on submitted abstracts of
their research. This support will allow participants to attend these meetings
who may otherwise not be able to attend. Participation of young researchers in
these meetings plays a large role in the development of the future leaders of
nuclear science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.