* 2209111
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: The Effects of Microbiome Ecological and Evolutionary Origin on Plant-Microbiome (Co)Evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Tiffany Batarseh, Batarseh, Tiffany N
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2021, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The fellow will research the evolution and
ecology of microbiomes, which are complex microbial communities critical for
proper ecosystem functioning and the health of the complex organisms they often
associate with. In agriculture, plant-associated microbiomes have been
demonstrated to influence plant health and response to environmental factors.
This project will work towards establishing the modes of microbiome evolution
and their consequences on plant fitness in order to establish agricultural
practices that maintain both plant and microbiome health for greater crop
management and food production. Currently, the global demand for food is
expected to increase by 35-56% in the next 30 years, highlighting the need for
the reevaluation of agricultural practices such that plant-microbiome fitness as
well as agricultural productivity and sustainability are maximized. To this end,
it is imperative that we understand the factors that influence microbiome
evolution and their effects on plant-microbiome interactions, adaptation, and
fitness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By leveraging experimental coevolution approaches,
this project will determine whether a microbiome’s previous selection
environment influences microbial community assembly, function, and adaptive
potential when associated with a new plant host. Specifically, the fellow seeks
to answer two questions: (1) does a microbial community’s previous associations
with heterospecific or conspecific plant hosts influence community adaptation on
subsequent hosts?; and (2) what are the consequences of microbiome adaptation to
common agricultural chemicals on microbiome function and plant host fitness? To
do so, a synthetic microbial community composed of bacteria isolated from the
tomato phyllosphere will be evolved on conspecific, heterospecific, or
alternating plant hosts with or without common agricultural chemicals before
returning to its conspecific host. After coevolution, the genetic and functional
changes of the microbial community and the fitness of the host plant will be
evaluated to uncover how and when microbiome origin and interaction history will
affect microbiome evolution and plant-host fitness. Additionally, the proposed
research will allow for training opportunities for undergraduate students
through their involvement in experimentation, data analysis, and research
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.