* 2209404
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: Functional morphology and performance of filter feeding giants
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Shirel Kahane-Rapport, Kahane-Rapport, Shirel R
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Some of the largest creatures on the planet
(whales and sharks) are filter feeders. Interestingly, filter feeders with
enormous body sizes have evolved numerous times. This research seeks to explore
the functional performance of oral filters in baleen whales and basking sharks.
Both lineages filter using bristle-like filters composed of mineralized keratin
to capture small prey items from the water. Baleen whales and basking sharks
provide invaluable test cases for understanding the relationships between body
size and foraging strategy. This work will provide new insights into the
physiology of ecologically important and endangered
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work represents an integrative approach using
engineering, physics, and biology to identify the filtration mechanisms used by
giant bristle-filter feeders. The project will investigate the filter
performance by performing a hierarchical investigation, beginning with detailed
anatomical descriptions. Based on the filter anatomy, the fellow will perform
investigations to identify the flow around the filter and the mechanisms and
performance of the filter. This will provide critical information for bio-
inspired designed efforts which have the potential to lead to major advances in
industrial filtration systems. Furthermore, these tests will clarify why the
biggest vertebrates to have ever lived are filter feeders and will provide
insight into their role as ecosystem engineers. Taken together, these proposed
studies will deliver key insights into the convergent evolution of massive
filter feeders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.