* 2209684
* Cell-Matrix Memory and Remodeling in Cross-Environment Cell Invasion
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Amit Pathak, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2025
* USD 419,750.00

This award will study how living cells move across dissimilar physical
environments. Cells can sense and respond to their current surrounding
environment. However, it is currently unclear whether cells remember the
physical properties of their prior environment, and whether this mechanical
memory dictates how they move through new environments. This gap in knowledge
prevents understanding of whether cells that leave tumors or diseased tissues
continue to retain those mechanical memories. The objective of this research is
to integrate experiments and computational modeling that combines two
mechanically different environments through which cells migrate. This project
will reveal how forces generated by cells modify their surroundings, and how the
memory of these modifications regulates cell movement through new environments.
Better understanding of cells and their mechanical memory could enable more
effective therapies for cancer and fibrosis that account for both the current
and past physical environment of cells. This research project combines
methodologies from mechanical engineering, biomaterials, physics-based modeling,
and cell biology. This project will train graduate students in multidisciplinary
research, provide training and education opportunities to undergraduate
students, and disseminate scientific findings to broader society through
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells adopt different modes of
mechano-sensing and migration through environments of varying mechanics – e.g.,
fast motility on stiff surfaces, amoeboid squeezing through confinement, and
force-based mesenchymal migration through fibrous collagen. In addition, it has
been shown in stem cells that cell fate can be reprogrammed using a stored
mechanical memory of past environments. However, in these studies, elastic
hydrogels are passive providers of mechanical cues. In contrast, fibrous
collagen matrices can undergo active remodeling. Because memory-laden cells
remain mechano-activated even after leaving their priming environment, this
project investigates whether high forces of stiff-primed cells result in greater
collagen remodeling, thus encoding a ‘matrix memory’ for follower cells to
exploit for invasion. These questions are addressed through spatiotemporal
invasion measurements of primed cells implanted in collagen and in silico
modeling with a systems-based model for memory regulation combined with a
lattice-based framework for cell invasion. Such findings would generate new
knowledge in a variety of biological contexts – from tumor invasion, wound
healing, regeneration, and development – in which cells move across
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.