* 2209645
* Elements: Kingfisher: Storage Management for Data Federations
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Miron Livny, Morgridge Institute for Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 06/30/2025
* USD 599,261.00

A cornerstone of translating the raw capacity of a distributed system into an
effective source of shared computing power is the methodical management of all
the resources. Historically, previous work to manage computations on shared
systems across multiple users and workloads has focused on processing resources:
CPUs, GPUs, and RAM (main memory). As the amount of research data that needs to
be produced and processed is ever increasing, the Kingfisher framework addresses
an important missing link in the chain of distributed capacity management: data
storage space. Kingfisher provides abstractions that offer researchers and
system administrators semantics for managing the sharing of storage spaces
across competing workloads. Once storage can be effectively shared, providers
across the nation can allocate storage to the commons through entities such as
the OSG Consortium’s Open Science Data Federation, enabling researchers to
harness the power of distributed computing in support of data intensive
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the development and
integration of the first element of the Kingfisher framework - the LotManager
library. To advance the national CI ecosystem, the storage space management
capabilities of the LotManager are integrated with an array of distributed
software tools. These tools include the widely adopted HTCondor Software Suite
and the XRootD software framework which are used by the OSG Consortium to
provide data delivery to the nation’s Science and Engineering (S&amp;E)
community. The LotManager is designed to facilitate the sharing of a finite
amount of storage capacity across users and projects. Sharing of computing
capacity, across administrative and physical boundaries, has been proven to
advance scientific discovery via Distributed High Throughput Computing (dHTC) at
the national and international scales. Such work indicates the value that
effective federation of storage capacity can bring to the NSF S&amp;E community.
The storage management abstractions and capabilities embodied by LotManager are
developed in the context of, and with the feedback from, the OSG's production
compute and storage services with real-life experimental data. Consequently,
these abstractions and principles result in translational computer science
research generally applicable to multi-tenant storage systems beyond the
specific system developed in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.