* 2209625
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Enriching Scholarly Communication with Augmented Reality
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Joshua E.G. Peek, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2025
* USD 60,750.00

Today’s online shoppers can use augmented reality (AR) to aim their smartphones
at an empty corner of their living room to see how a particular new lamp might
look there, and diners can instantly see a restaurant's menu on their phones
just by scanning a QR code posted at their table. This project will leverage the
tremendous investments in AR made by the corporate world over the past several
years, and the familiar ease of QR codes, to allow astronomers to see and
explore the 3D Universe just as easily as they might shop for a new couch.
Building on their 2021 success in publishing the first AR-enhanced figure in an
American Astronomical Society Journal, the funding from this award will be used
to create a robust system allowing any author to publish figures showcasing
high-dimensional data in augmented reality environments. No expensive equipment
beyond the same smartphones and tablets used by online shoppers will be needed.
Astronomers will be able to see and explore their data in "3D" by walking around
projections of it hovering above flat surfaces, or holding in their hands using
AR target devices. Imagine, for example, a jet from a black hole, spewing out
material from the center of a simulated galaxy, projected just above a
researcher’s kitchen table, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the course of the
project, the team will design, repeatedly test, and ultimately deploy an
efficient and effective end-to-end system for embedding augmented reality
figures in scholarly journals. By enriching scholarly communication, this new
AR-based system is expected to accelerate the pace of scientific discovery. The
system created will extend across multiple modular cyberinfrastructure
components, including: data format standards; data analysis software; 3D
conversion tooling; AR integration pipelines; visual ID encoding infrastructure;
and the publication process. The system for authoring and deploying AR figures
created and tested under this proposal represents cyberinfrastructure innovation
that will ultimately open completely new channels for communication amongst all
who rely on effective communication of high-dimensional
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information Science
&amp; Engineering and the Division of Astronomical Sciences in the Directorate
for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.