* 2209230
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: The Roles of Gene Flow and Local Adaptation in Driving Fitness in a Genetically Depauperate Fish
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Morgan Sparks, Sparks, Morgan
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 05/31/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research addresses how isolated
populations with low genetic diversity persist with focus on a subspecies of
cutthroat trout: the greenback cutthroat. The greenback cutthroat, despite being
Coloradoâ€™s state fish, was nearly extirpated and has been reduced to a single
surviving population and a handful of reintroduced populations founded from that
one population. This project seeks to compare genetic diversity between
greenback cutthroat and a close relative at the landscape and population levels
and then link those data with the ability for recovery populations in new
habitats. The project leverages a past experiment in which the two subspecies
were crossed to identify genomic features that contribute to fitness and boost
the genetic diversity of greenback cutthroat without swamping the genetic
features that are specific to the subspecies. The project will also bring these
methods into the classroom at a local minority serving college to help train
students in these cutting-edge technologies.

The goal of this project is to link the genetic basis of phenotypic traits to
their interaction with the environment for a genetically depauperate and
isolated fish. This research will provide a predictive framework in which
genomic features identified with whole-genome sequencing at three ecological and
demographic scales are linked to individual fitness. First, it will assess
standing genetic variation in two subspecies, the greenback and the closely
related Colorado River cutthroat trout, and identify loci correlated with key
environmental features using genetic-environmental analyses. It will then focus
on recently reintroduced populations to measure how genetic diversity at
introduction predicts the populations persistence via phenotypic plasticity or
rapid adaptation. Lastly, genomic data from the two subspecies and their hybrids
will be used to identify loci associated with inbreeding load and negative
fitness in greenback cutthroat. These data will inform how genetic variation and
environmental attributes manifest as individual fitness and the relative ability
of each subspecies to adapt to changing conditions as a function of genetic
diversity. Finally, the Fellow will lead both field and bench modules at a
local, minority serving institution with the goal of introducing skills
beneficial to career development and in pursuit of advanced degrees in STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.