* 2209183
* Investigation of Chirality, Vorticity and Spin Polarization in Heavy ion Collisions
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Jinfeng Liao, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2025
* USD 329,999.00

Nuclear matter is at the heart of all visible matter in our universe. While it
is known to be built from fundamental particles called quarks and gluons,
precisely how the structures and properties of nuclear matter arise from the
quarks and gluons remains a big question in fundamental physics. An important
way to explore the question is through nuclear collision experiments, ongoing at
the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) and the Large Hadron Collider (LHC),
that create a hot "subatomic soup" called quark-gluon plasma (QGP). This project
helps understand the QGP by examining its behavior under extremely strong
magnetic and vorticity fields. The PI accomplishes this by developing the
theoretical description of QGP spin transport under such fields, performing
phenomenological simulations to calculate observables, and analyzing the
implications from comparison with experimental data. In addition to extracting
QGP properties from such study, which is one of the major frontiers in todayâ€™s
nuclear science, this project provides opportunities for engaging and mentoring
graduate and undergraduate students in research as well as for carrying out a
variety of public outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this project is to investigate novel transport arising from interplay between
microscopic particle spin and macroscopic chirality, vorticity and magnetic
fields of the bulk matter created in heavy ion collisions. The first component
is to quantitatively understand the so-called chiral magnetic effect and
associated background correlations. This is done by utilizing the anomalous-
viscous fluid dynamics simulation framework, with an emphasis on analyzing the
influence of initial nuclear structure inputs. The goal is to achieve an
explanation of the latest high-precision isobar collision measurements as well
as a coherent interpretation for the signal/background evolution from isobar to
gold-gold collisions. The second component aims to advance the hydrodynamic
framework with angular momentum as well as to phenomenologically compute spin
polarization observables using a combination of hydrodynamic and transport
models for a wide range of beam energies. The results offer insights into the
latest STAR and HADES data at a few GeV collision energy as well as the
similarity and difference between low and high energy collisions. More broadly,
the project outcome helps expand our knowledge frontier on spin quantum
transport under chirality, vorticity, and magnetic fields for general many-body
systems across different disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.