* 2209313
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Kirsten Verster, Verster, Kirsten Isabel
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Studies of
extremophiles – organisms that live in extreme environments can provide insights
into the boundaries of where life is possible. Climate change is expected to
cause more extreme environments, highlighting the importance of understanding
mechanisms to counter ecological challenges. One predicted impact of climate
change is increased salinity of continental water sources, which may lead to the
extinction of species due to significant osmotic stress. “Brine flies” are
adapted to extreme aquatic habitats, occupying extremely hot, acidic, and salty
water bodies in the western USA. This makes them an excellent system to study
extremophile evolution. For this research, the fellow will characterize the
evolutionary history of the brine flies, as well as sequence their genomes to
discover the genetic changes responsible for their unusual adaptation to extreme
conditions. To broaden the impact of the work, the fellow will recruit and fund
undergraduate mentees from minority-serving programs, and also host community-
building short courses in field genetics and entomology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the proposed project, the fellow will characterize the
evolutionary history of brine flies (Diptera: Ephydridae), generating a dated
molecular phylogeny of the 34 identified Ephydra species using “barcode” genes.
Each species’ tolerance to various water chemistries (e.g. pH, salinity,
turbidity, temperature) will be collected to determine natural thresholds for
each species, and ancestral character state reconstructions for each
characteristic will enable the fellow to characterize how Ephydra evolved to
occupy diverse and extreme water chemistry niches. Following this, they will
sequence the genomes and transcriptomes of representative Ephydra species in
order to determine if expansions, duplications, SNPs, or differential regulation
in candidate gene families may have facilitated their adaptation to extreme
aquatic niches. This research program will lay the groundwork for future studies
that could be approached from a variety of biological disciplines, including
population genetics, phylogenetics, experimental evolution, gene editing, and
structural biology. To accomplish this goal, the fellow will recruit
undergraduate mentees, who will largely be hired and funded from minority-
serving programs both at Stanford and the Bay Area community college community,
as well as a proposed field genetics module that will aim to build community and
thus increase participation and retention of current and future individuals from
historically excluded groups in biological research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.