* 2209370
* RUI: Casting Light On A Semi-Visible Higgs Boson With Novel Triggers At ATLAS
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Benjamin Carlson, Westmont College
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

This award will provide support for work on the ATLAS experiment at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, a particle physics laboratory in Geneva,
Switzerland. The LHC machine and ATLAS, a large particle detector facility, were
built as basic science tools using funds from NSF and other agencies around the
world. The 2012 discovery, at the LHC, of a Higgs boson with mass close to 125
GeV represents both the crowning achievement of the Standard Model of particle
physics and a hint beyond it - how can a light Higgs boson possibly survive
huge, destabilizing quantum effects without new, undiscovered physics? The next
step in the experiments is to look for evidence for physics Beyond the Standard
Model (BSM) that might, for instance, account for the presence of the mysterious
"Dark Matter" that makes up so much of the mass of the universe. The LHC is
currently just starting a new phase, Run 2, at higher energy and increased event
samples. It is possible that evidence for BSM physics could emerge in the next
couple of years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will develop tools for
detecting new BSM physics by improving the trigger selection using machine
learning (ML) techniques. These new triggers will improve the selectivity of the
ATLAS detector for BSM physics in the Higgs decays to two photons and other
channels where new BSM particles could show up. This RUI will allow students to
directly take part in the analysis of the LHC data and learn new ML techniques.
They will also develop outreach programs with local high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.