* 2209220
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY22: Breaking the Symmetry: Dorsal-Ventral Domain Establishment in the Floral Meristem in Mimulus
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Ya Min, Min, Ya
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Flowers that appear similar in shape in both
the front and back of the flower are called bilaterally symmetrical. These shape
of flower is one of the most common floral forms (e.g. orchids and legumes).
During flowering plant evolution, there have been at least 130 independent
transitions in to this form, and these transitions are associated with
specialized flower-pollinator interactions and the rapid appearance of new plant
species. The molecular mechanisms defining this flower arrangement, however, is
poorly understood, mainly due to the lack of appropriate functional tools in
most systems with bilaterally symmetric flowers. This project aims to address
this fundamental question by employing a newly developed model system, the Great
Purple Monkeyflower Mimulus lewisii. Results from this project will be important
from both developmental and evolutionary perspectives. Moreover, this project
will provide molecular lab training opportunities for undergraduate students,
workshops and publications to disseminate resources developed for this flower to
the broader scientific community, and outreach activities to local communities
about the diversity and importance of flowering plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although it is well known that differential organ
elaboration along the dorsal-ventral (D-V) axis in many taxa is controlled by a
developmental program dependent on the CYCLOIDEA (CYC) gene, what establishes
the D-V domains at the earliest developmental stage and what activates the
expression of CYC specifically in the dorsal domain remain unknown. This project
will focus on two M. lewisii mutants with altered CYC expression patterns and
will use multiple approaches to characterize the underlying molecular pathways
upstream of CYC, including using genetic crosses to dissect the genetic
relationships among the key regulatory genes; high resolution live imaging to
reveal the spatiotemporal dynamics of gene expression patterns; and co-
immunoprecipitation to identify interacting protein partners and downstream
target genes. Results from this project are not only significant for
understanding how floral symmetry is established at the earliest developmental
stages, but also crucial for understanding mechanisms underlying convergent
evolution in floral forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.