* 2209553
* Research in High Energy Physics on the CMS Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Neeti Parashar, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kaushik De
* 08/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

This is a project to carry out fundamental research with the Compact Muon
Solenoid (CMS) experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN. The
discovery of the Higgs mechanism at the LHC motivates new questions about the
universe: Why is the Higgs boson so light? Is there more than one Higgs Boson
particle? Is the Higgs boson produced and does it decay at the rate predicted by
the Standard Model of particle physics? Motivated by these questions, this
project will include searches for new particles in the Compact Muon Solenoid
(CMS) experiment at the LHC. Over the next 5 years, CMS detector components will
be replaced to cope with the high radiation environment at the upgraded High
Luminosity LHC, which will deliver an extremely high rate of proton-proton
collisions. This project also includes contributions to the construction and
testing of a new pixel detector, which is both necessary and critical for CMS to
perform its physics goals after the upgrade. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The upgrade
of the CMS Forward Pixel detector will require the development of innovative
radiation-tolerant technologies, which have the potential to directly enhance
the lifespan of detectors used in space research and in medical applications.
The PNW group will continue its commitments to undergraduate research, community
outreach, K-12 engagement, and teacher training. Through their participation in
the LHC upgrades they will engage undergraduate students in detector
construction and testing efforts. The PNW QuarkNet center will host an annual
Masterclass, where students from local high schools will have the opportunity to
visit the university and analyze real CMS data, and an annual K-12 teacher
training workshop. Through their research program, courses, and QuarkNet center,
they plan to enable the participation of underrepresented groups in physics
research, and to inspire and train the next generation of young scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high energy physics group at Purdue
University Northwest (PNW) focuses their effort on the Forward Pixel detector
subsystem for the CMS experiment. After their contributions to the construction
of the Forward Pixel detectors, their current thrust is on the assembly and
testing of the high luminosity upgrade and assuring the quality of physics
datasets to the CMS experiment. Building on the discovery of the Standard Model
Higgs boson, the PNW group is also working on searches for new heavy particles
that decay to a top quark pair, new spin-2 heavy particles that decay to two Z
bosons, and a new search for a new heavy resonance decaying to intermediate
resonances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.