* 2209293
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: Evolution of Innate Predator Avoidance Behavior in Flies
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Andrew Legan, Legan, Andrew Wesley
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The fellow will study the insect sense of
smell. Insects rely on their sense of smell to survive and reproduce. More than
three quarters of all animals are insects, and among these are important
pollinators as well as damaging agricultural pests. Therefore, it is important
to understand how the insect sense of smell works, as well as how it changes
over the generations. The fellow will investigate how changes in genes lead to
changes in insect responses to smells, especially responses to threatening
smells associated with predators and parasites. A corresponding broader impacts
program will prioritize mentorship, public communication of science, and
production of resources useful to outside researchers and educators. The fellow
will be trained in cutting edge research methods and will develop collaborations
with researchers at the University of Arizona, the USDA, and elsewhere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will investigate the origin of phenotypic
change in the insect olfactory system during the evolution of innate predator
avoidance behavior. Drosophila flies offer a unique opportunity to study the
evolution of innate avoidance behavior using advanced laboratory methods. Flies
rely on olfaction as they avoid threats. In the Sonoran Desert in Arizona, USA,
cactophilic flies interact with many other insect species that utilize necrotic
cactus tissue, including predatory mites. The fellow will characterize fly
olfactory pathways driving innate behavioral responses to predatory mites and
will examine patterns of molecular evolution in innate olfactory avoidance
circuits. The fellow will test hypotheses explaining the origin of phenotypic
variation in predator avoidance behavior, including the hypothesis that odorant
receptor gene duplication causes selectively neutral threat overestimation
errors. This work will engage undergraduate researchers, who will learn methods
in functional genetics and computational biology. The fellow will receive new
training in behavioral analysis, analytical chemistry, electrophysiology,
functional genetics, and comparative genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.