* 2209424
* Mapping the Structure of Hadrons with Lattice QCD
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Huey-Wen Lin, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Understanding the innermost structure of visible matter is an important research
area in nuclear physics. The basic building blocks of the atomic nucleus,
protons and neutrons, are composed of elementary quark and gluon constituents
governed by the theory of the strong interaction, quantum chromodynamics (QCD).
Our knowledge has advanced greatly over the last six decades but many puzzles
remain: How do these quarks and gluons make up the masses of composite
particles? How do they contribute to their spin? How can a pion, composed of one
fewer quark, have mass roughly 10 times lower? Many experimental facilities are
also racing to answer these questions, such as the Jefferson Lab accelerator
12-GeV program and the planned Electron-Ion Collider. These experiments will
advance the tomography of nucleons and other particles. At the same time, high-
performance computing allows the direct simulation of QCD directly, providing
information about aspects that are hard to access via experiments.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Lattice QCD (LQCD) is a theoretical method to directly simulate QCD
on four-dimensional spacetime lattices using supercomputers. Using this
technique, the properties of hadronic systems can be studied from first
principles (that is, from the underlying quark and gluon degrees of freedom)
with fully controllable numerical and systematic uncertainties. In the past
decade, there has been significant progress in the development of efficient
algorithms for generating ensembles of QCD configurations and tools for
extracting relevant information from LQCD correlation functions. In some cases,
LQCD calculations have reached a level where they not only complement, but also
guide experimental programs. Two main research directions are being pursued. The
first is to provide precision LQCD calculations of nucleon couplings and moments
with full studies of lattice systematics, including multiple lattice spacings
and volumes, directly at physical pion mass. Combining precision LQCD inputs
with ongoing and upcoming precision low-energy experiments can help set limits
for new physics. The second direction is to investigate non-singlet hadron
structure using quasi- and pseudo-PDF methods. Focus is on one of the biggest
theoretical uncertainties in most global fits, the assumption of strange-
antistrange symmetry and the gluon structure of nucleons and
mesons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.