* 2209955
* Elements: Adaptive End-to-End Parallelism for Distributed Science Workflows
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Won Yim, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 10/31/2025
* USD 466,000.00

Technological advancements in sensing and computing technologies have led to an
unprecedented increase in the amount of data generated by scientific
applications. As science projects are increasingly distributed in nature, the
increase in data sizes in turn results in an increased volume of traffic that
needs to be moved across geographically distributed locations. Although
significant investments have been made to build high-speed networks to
facilitate data movements between research and education institutions, it is
difficult for domain scientists to efficiently utilize this available capacity
mainly due to the lack of scalable data transfer services. This project
addresses this need by developing a scalable and reliable data transfer service.
It further integrates the data transfer service into elastic workflow management
systems to achieve end-to-end optimization for distributed science
workflows.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project makes three novel contributions to
the field: (i) it innovates scalable integrity verification and encryption for
file transfers to ensure the reliability of file transfers without sacrificing
performance. It takes advantage of computing resources available at data
transfer nodes to scale the performance of integrity verification and channel
encryption features. (ii) It innovates end-to-end parallelism for distributed
workflows by integrating an online transfer optimization service into elastic
workflow management tools. Unlike existing workflow management solutions, which
merely focus on the optimization of computing tasks, the proposed integration of
online transfer optimization services into elastic workflow schedulers enables
true end-to-end parallelism for distributed workflows. (iii) Finally, it
demonstrates the performance of the developed service on a real-world bioscience
workflow that streams a large volume of sequence read archive data from the NCBI
database to extract computation-ready SAM/BAM files.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.