* 2209199
* Nuclear Physics Experiments with the Electro-Weak Probe
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Julie Roche, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfredo Galindo-Uribarri
* 08/31/2025
* USD 218,477.00

The medium-energy nuclear experimental program planned by the Ohio University
group aims to answer the questions: How does subatomic matter organize itself
inside a proton or neutron? and are the fundamental interactions relating to the
structure of proton or neutron fully understood? The 2013 report of the National
Research Council on the Assessment of and Outlook for Nuclear Physics recognizes
both of those questions as central to today’s nuclear physics. Specifically, the
PI’s research focuses on studying the internal structure of protons and
neutrons. The strong force, one of Nature’s four fundamental forces, governs
this internal structure. The PIs will also study the limits of our understanding
of Nature’s fundamental forces by looking for physics beyond the Standard Model
of particle physics. They will work with an electron beam colliding with a
nuclear target at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (JLab). PIs
Roche and King, three graduate students, and three undergraduate students will
perform the research supported by this award. The broader impacts of the program
are multifold, including training the next generation of scientists, raising the
profile of minority scientists (especially mentoring women in STEM), and
engaging the public through STEM education for High School students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ohio group will work on two experiments dedicated to
the study of the internal structure of the nucleon using the Generalized Parton
Distribution framework. Experiment E12-19-006 measures L-T separation in charged
pion production: the group will analyze its data acquired in 2021 and 2022.
Experiment E12-13-010 will measure the electroproduction of a photon using the
Neutral Particle Spectrometer; Roche is a co-spokesperson of this experiment.
Its data-taking will start in 2023. The group will take data and perform their
early analysis during this award. In addition, King will coordinate the analysis
software development for the next generation of Parity Violation experiments
known as MOLLER. Members of the group will also participate in the Hall A SBS
experimental program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.