* 2209144
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: Disentangling the diversity of synovial joint form and function
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Armita Manafzadeh, Manafzadeh, Armita Razieh
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Vertebrate animals display an exceptional
diversity of joint shapes and motions, ranging from the jaw joints that enable
snakes to engulf massive prey to the wing joints that enable birds and bats to
take flight. This research aims to understand when and how these differences in
joint shape arise as an animal grows, and how differences in joint motion enable
animals to successfully occupy habitats across the globe. The fellow will take
advantage of new technologies for visualizing joint formation in embryos and for
measuring joint motion from juvenile and adult animals to explore these
questions. The project will also result in educational materials for use in K-12
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because birds – the most speciose group of
living tetrapod animals – use their hindlimbs to interact with a wide variety of
habitats in behaviors such as walking, wading, and perching, they offer an ideal
focal group for this work. The fellow will integrate techniques and perspectives
from developmental biology, biomechanics, and computational modeling to (1)
investigate the pre-hatching origins of diversity in avian hindlimb joint
morphology, (2) characterize the post-hatching connection between avian hindlimb
joint morphology and function, and (3) develop a predictive model of avian
hindlimb function, within the context of locomotor ecology. This work will thus
directly shed light on functional diversification in the modern avian radiation,
but will also translate experimental data into a predictive model of the
relationships among joint form, function, and environmental adaptation that will
be transferable to other groups across the vertebrate tree. While engaging in
this research, the fellow will receive training in embryological imaging and
motion comparison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.