* 2209438
* The 2024 American National Election Studies (ANES)
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Shanto Iyengar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 06/30/2026
* USD 5,693,759.00

The 2024 American National Election Study (ANES) will occur at a moment of great
uncertainty and change in American politics. The public is divided over long-
standing political norms involving executive power, electoral legitimacy, the
rule of law, and societal norms such as the proper balance of public health
concerns with individual freedoms. Since 1948, the ANES has been the gold
standard for measuring public opinion and understanding voting behavior in the
United States. The 2024 ANES maintains the tradition of a nonpartisan,
scientifically valid survey while adding cutting-edge innovations. New and
existing questions on the ANES survey allow researchers to understand the
sources of political discontent, explain misunderstandings between elected
officials the public, and identify opportunities for bridging the country's
political and social divisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2024 ANES continues the
ANES tradition of administering both pre- and post-election interviews,
producing several new data products including the first-ever eight-year panel in
the ANES time series, spanning the 2016, 2020, and 2024 election cycles. This
data set allows researchers to break fresh ground on topics including opinion
dynamics during a period of extreme volatility, the spread of misinformation,
support for political violence, affective polarization, racial conflict, and
threats to the legitimacy of our electoral institutions. The 2024 study also
delivers a Social Media Study panel spanning 2020, 2022, and 2024, providing
data on the electoral consequences of news use and political advertising on
social media by merging respondent attitudes to behavioral data. Ongoing
collaborations with General Social Survey and the Comparative Study of Electoral
Systems yield new datasets of interest to scholars in sociology, economics,
political communication, comparative politics, and international relations.
Methodological innovations include a non-response follow-up study, new
instrumentation probing critical threats to democracy, video interviewing, and
the use of a mixed-mode design to yield further insights about survey mode
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.