* 2209216
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Statistical Physics as a Lens to Illuminate the Evolution of the Genetic Code and Aging
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Dylan Suvlu, Suvlu                   Dylan          J
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The complexity
of living systems makes the development of universal theories about the history
of life on Earth very challenging. All living systems use a genetic code and all
age with timeâ€”this project will investigate the origin of the genetic code and
how changes in the way the code is used relate to aging. The Fellow will use new
methods to investigate the molecular mechanisms that may have led to an early
version of the genetic code and examine the evolutionary forces underlying
biological aging. To increase the participation of groups underrepresented in
science, the Fellow will collaborate with experts in STEM education to develop a
place-based curriculum for students in Utqiagvik, Alaska, the Fellow's hometown.
The curriculum will interweave traditional ecological knowledge, climate
science, and modern data analysis methodology to foster STEM engagement in
middle school children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research for this Fellowship
will focus on the evolutionary origins of the genetic code and biological aging,
two universal features of life on Earth that are not well understood. The Fellow
will utilize statistical physics and high-performance computational modeling to
investigate how an early version of the genetic code may have emerged from the
complex principles that govern phase separation in mixtures of catalytically
active molecules thought to be present on early Earth. Statistical models of the
epigenome also will be developed to investigate epigenetic changes that occur
during aging. The Fellow will receive training in cutting-edge computational
biology, curriculum development, STEM outreach, and strategies for effective
scientific communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.