* 2209873
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Cybershuttle: An end-to-end Cyberinfrastructure Continuum to accelerate Discovery in Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2027
* Anton Arkhipov, Allen Institute
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2027
* USD 488,725.00

Science depends critically on accessing scientific and engineering software,
data repositories, storage resources, analytical tools, and a wide range of
advanced computing resources, all of which must be integrated into a cohesive
scientific research environment. The Cybershuttle project is creating a
seamless, secure, and highly usable scientific research environment that
integrates all of a scientist’s research tools and data, which may be on the
scientist’s laptop, a computing cloud, or a university supercomputer. These
research environments can further support scientific research by enabling
scientists to share their research with collaborators and the broader scientific
community, supporting replicability and reuse. The Cybershuttle team integrates
biophysicists, neuroscientists, engineers, and computer scientists into a single
team pursuing the project goals with a grounding in cutting-edge research
problems such as understanding how spike proteins in viruses work, how the brain
functions during sleep, and how artificial intelligence techniques can be
applied to modeling engineering materials. To meet its ambitious goals, the
project is building on over a decade of experience in developing and operating
the open-source Apache Airavata software framework for creating science-centric
distributed systems. Cybershuttle is providing a system that can be used as a
training ground to educate students in concepts of open-source software
development and applied distributed systems, fostering a globally competitive
workforce who can move easily between academic and non-academic careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cybershuttle is creating a new type of user-facing
cyberinfrastructure that will enable seamless access to a continuum of CI
resources usable for all researchers, increasing their productivity. The core of
the Cybershuttle framework is a hybrid distributed system, based on open-source
Apache Airavata software. This system integrates locally deployed agent programs
with centrally hosted middleware to enable an end-to-end integration of
computational science and engineering research on resources that span users’
local resources, centralized university computing and data resources,
computational clouds, and NSF-funded, national-scale computing centers.
Scientists and engineers access this system using scientific user environments
designed from the beginning with the best user-centered design practices.
Cybershuttle uses a spiral approach for developing, deploying, and increasing
usage and usability, beginning with on-team scientists and expanding to larger
scientific communities. The project engages the larger community of scientists,
cyberinfrastructure experts, and other stakeholders in the creation and
advancement of Cybershuttle through a stakeholder advisory board. Cybershuttle's
team includes researchers from Indiana University, the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, the University of California San Diego, the San Diego
Supercomputer Center, and the Allen Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.