* 2209058
* Focused CoPe: Heat waves in the Southern California coastal zone: Their oceanic and atmospheric drivers, human health impacts, and sustainable adaptation
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Nancy Owens Renner, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2027
* USD 4,997,039.00

Focused CoPe: Heat waves in the Southern California coastal zone: Their oceanic
and atmospheric drivers, human health impacts, and sustainable
adaptation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Hub will study how the ocean influences
extreme heat waves that impact the coastal region of Southern California,
presently and in the future. Efforts will concentrate on the linkage among the
atmosphere, ocean, and land, while trying to understand the role of coastal
clouds on the heat waves. Emphasis will also be on the relationship between heat
waves and human health and how the effects can be mitigated equitably with
greening strategies in coastal areas of Southern California. Greening strategies
will be guided by studies of interactions among plants and freshwater resources
under a changing climate. The study will involve different non-academic sectors
to plan strategies for heat wave adaptation and to assess how these strategies
can be equitable and sustainable. Findings should be transferrable to other
coastal regions in the world. The Hub will train more than 100 high school
teachers around San Diego, CA, and will provide internships to disadvantaged
high school and community college students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed
Hub will study the spatial and human-dimension dynamics of extreme heat waves,
originating from the ocean, as part of climate change (i.e., in the present and
future). Research on the atmosphere-land-ocean linkage will a) increase
understanding of the interaction between coastal cloud processes and
marine/terrestrial heat waves; b) create a data product capable of resolving
weather patterns influencing heat waves in coastal regions; c) examine the
impact of heatwaves on people’s health through environmental-focused
epidemiological research; and d) advance ecohydrological research by examining
how interactions among plants, hydrology and climate change affect greening
zones. The study will further explore the sustainability and equity of decisions
designed to combat heat waves in the coastal zone of Southern California. The
Hub will result in co-produced research and outputs that will be based on
science and that will be driven by data. Co-produced results will guide planning
strategies for heat adaptation in Southern California. Activities should be
transferable to other coastal regions in different parts of the world. The Hub
will provide professional learning for ~125 local high school teachers in the
San Diego, CA, area. It will furnish internships to underrepresented high school
and community college students to participate in climate research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.