* 2209654
* AF: SMALL: Relational Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Kirk Pruhs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2025
* USD 258,780.00

The use of relational databases, which store data in relational form in multiple
tables, is a ubiquitous technology among American businesses and organizations.
The four most commonly used databases (Oracle, MySQL, Microsoft SQL Server,
PostgreSQL) are all relational. The use of machine learning to glean competitive
insights from their data is also a ubiquitous technology among American
businesses and organizations. Thus machine-learning tasks on relational data are
ubiquitous. However, essentially all standard machine-learning algorithms
require the input be in the form of a single table, and thus these algorithms
can not operate directly on data hat is stored in relational form. Further, it
is far from obvious if and how one can adapt many of these machine-learning
algorithms to efficiently operate on data in relational form. Thus the standard
practice is to first join together multiple tables inside the relational
database into a single larger table, and then export this table to a standard
machine-learning package. Joining tables is a time-consuming operation,
requiring exponential time and memory in the worst case. The goal of this
project is to develop relational algorithms, which are efficient algorithms that
work directly on the relational tables and thus avoid expensive join operations,
for common machine-learning problems. More efficient algorithms for standard
machine learning problems on relational data would allow American companies and
organizations to more efficiently glean competitive insights from their
relational data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are four goals for this project.
The first goal is to develop relational algorithms for basic geometric problems
that underlie many common machine-learning problems. These algorithms can then
be used as the building blocks to develop relational algorithms for more
complicated machine-learning problems. The second goal is to develop relational
algorithms for standard machine-learning problems. Plan A is to design a
relational implementation of the standard algorithm, plan B is to design an
alternate relational algorithm with the same performance guarantee as the
standard algorithm, and plan C is to design a relational algorithm with an
alternate reasonable performance guarantee. The third goal is to develop
foundational algorithmic-design and -analysis techniques. The fourth goal is to
understand the limitations of relational algorithms as there may well be
problems where relational algorithms are not possible. The investigators will
determine which of the myriad algorithmic tools in the standard algorithmic
toolkit are of utility in developing relational algorithms. In some cases the
application of a known technique will require some novelty. In some cases no
existing algorithmic tool will do the job, and the investigators will invent new
algorithmic-design and -analysis techniques. As is the norm in algorithmic
foundations research, the recognition that a particular algorithm-design or
-analysis technique is of wide applicability, and the understanding of the
limitations of these techniques occurs naturally during the process of the
design and analysis of algorithms for specific
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.