* 2209852
* Frameworks: Target and Observation Manager Systems for Multi-Messenger and Time Domain Science
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Rachel Street, Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Network
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,509,363.00

Current and near-future U.S.-led astronomy surveys offer a revolutionary
opportunity to explore physical phenomena through multiple messengers and
instruments, associating gravitational wave detections with neutrino signatures
and electromagnetic counterparts. The combination provides powerful new insights
relevant to a broad range of research in the astrophysical and physics
communities. The scale of these surveys means that unprecedented, petabyte scale
data volumes and their rapid delivery must be managed effectively to fully
realize their scientific potential, but these data alone cannot fully
characterize the discoveries. Additional observations from facilities with
complementary instrumentation are normally required, but obtaining these in a
timely manner can present serious technical challenges, both to researchers
trying to identify and characterize time-sensitive targets of interest, and to
the infrastructure of these facilities. Innovative new software tools enable
researchers to easily build a database to manage all aspects of their science
projects, including conducting observations, through a single programmatic
interface. The capabilities of these tools are expanding to ensure that they are
seamlessly integrated with other, rapidly developing linchpin scientific
software services, especially the range of facilities where follow-up
observations are conducted. This provides a critical link in the chain of
discovery and characterization for many landmark surveys. Yet historically, such
sophisticated database-driven systems have only been available to larger
projects and institutions with in-house software teams. This perpetuates
inequitable access to the scientific potential of major taxpayer-funded
facilities. The well-documented open source software package to be developed in
this project, called the TOM (Target and Observation Manager) toolkit, and an
associated community development program, will make these professional research
tools accessible to everyone, including educators and citizen scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ensuring that researchers can receive information on new
discoveries rapidly, manage and evaluate all relevant data on targets of
interest, and conduct follow-up observations in a timely and effective manner,
is essential to realizing the scientific potential of modern major astronomical
surveys and missions. Petabyte-scale data products, delivered in real-time, are
useful only if we can adequately handle the data rate. Recognizing this, much
effort has been invested in generating the survey data products, but the tools
used by most researchers to do science investigations with these products are
often an ad hoc combination of text files, spreadsheets and other applications
that do not scale well and are not designed to operate with other key services.
The Big Data era demands scientific project management software that interface
with existing services, such as discovery alert brokers and telescopes, to
enable scientists to effectively collate information relevant to their
interests, and to manage all aspects of follow-up observing programs. Modern,
browser-based data exploration and visualization tools enable a diverse range of
science, and well-designed public software can ensure that researchers spend
time using these tools for science instead of repeatedly re-inventing them. A
partnership between researchers and software engineers ensures that science can
take advantage of the latest developments from industries where handling Big
Data is already standard. The TOM software package provides this critical tool
set, ensures that it remains fully integrated with the evolving services in the
field, and expands its capabilities to meet the needs of users. This project
advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.