* 2209946
* Elements: Basil: A Tool for Semi-Automatic Containerization, Deployment, and Execution of Scientific Applications on Cloud Computing and Supercomputing Platforms
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Walter Ermler, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 02/28/2023
* USD 570,787.00

The "containerization" of software applications future-proofs them, helps in
their long-term preservation, makes them portable across different hardware
platforms, ensures reproducible results, and makes them convenient to
disseminate. Docker and Singularity are two popular software technologies for
containerizing scientific applications and are widely supported on different
hardware platforms. However, their adoption involves a steep learning curve,
especially when it comes to developing secure and optimized images of the
applications of interest. A large number of domain-scientists and scholars are
usually not formally trained at containerizing their applications with Docker
and Singularity, and spend a significant amount of their time in porting their
applications to different cloud computing and supercomputing platforms. The
process of porting applications having multiple software dependencies and
sensitivities to specific software versions can be especially arduous for such
users. To assist them, this project is developing BASIL - a tool for semi-
automatically containerizing the scientific applications, frameworks, and
workflows. This project will deliver BASIL through a web portal, as a command-
line tool, and through APIs. BASIL has a broad applicability across multiple
domains of deep societal impact such as artificial intelligence, drug discovery,
and earthquake engineering. By enabling the preservation of valuable legacy
software and making them usable for several years in future, BASIL will save
cost and time in software rewriting and software installations, and thus
contribute towards advancing the prosperity of the society. The project will
result in educational content on “Introduction to Containerization” and students
engaged in the project will develop valuable skills in the areas of national
interest such as supercomputing/High Performance Computing (HPC) and cloud
computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BASIL will be the first tool of its kind that
can semi-automatically generate secure, optimized, and trustworthy container
images with clear information on how to use the images under appropriate
licenses. The rules for optimizing the images will be derived from expert
knowledge and best practices, such as multi-stage builds and reordering the
sequencing of commands to take advantage of caching so that the overall time
involved in building the images is reduced. Users of the BASIL tool will provide
the recipes for building their applications/workflows in one of the following
forms (1) Makefiles/CMakefiles, (2) scripts, (3) commands, or (4) a text-file
with predefined keywords and notations using templates provided by the project
team. These recipes will be parsed, and Dockerfiles or Singularity definition
files will be generated. The parser developed in this project will be another
novel contribution of the project. Using a generated Dockerfile or Singularity
definition file, a Docker or Singularity image will be built. Next, the image
will be scanned for any vulnerabilities, signed, and if the user desires,
released in public registries with appropriate licenses. These container images
can be tested using the BASIL web portal, and can be pulled to run or deploy on
diverse hardware platforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Physics at the
Information Frontier in the Division of Physics within the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.