* 2209481
* Studies in Nuclear Physics and Fundamental Interactions at Indiana University
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* William Jacobs, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,421,378.00

New information on the behavior of protons and neutrons, the building blocks of
the atomic nuclei, can advance physics and clarify the interpretation of
astronomical observations. The PIs will conduct a focused set of precision
measurements involving protons and neutrons to probe the poorly-understood
internal dynamics inside the proton, search for new forces of nature, and
quantify some of the key nuclear reaction rates which test the predictions of
the Big Bang theory of the universe. These research activities develop new
technologies and educate the next generation of skilled PhD scientists for jobs
in research and teaching universities, industry and national labs, and medical
and computer technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs study the poorly-
understood dynamics of how the proton's spin angular momentum is built from
quarks and gluons and their orbital motion and how the quarks and gluons
`fragmentâ€™ into the particles that are observed in detectors. The PIs measure
the size of constructive interference in neutrino scattering from protons and
neutrons in the nucleus to test the Standard Model of particles and to calibrate
supernova neutrino detectors. The PIs measure different types of spin-dependent
neutron interactions with matter, some which can only be caused by new types of
forces, and measure the rates of certain nuclear reactions which are known to be
important to understand the dynamics of the early
universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.