* 2209792
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Simulating Autonomous Agents and the Human-Autonomous Agent Interaction
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Daniel Goldman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 06/30/2025
* USD 100,000.00

This project augments the Chrono computer simulation platform in transformative
ways. Chrono's purpose is to predict through simulation the interplay between
mechatronic systems, the environment they operate in, and humans with whom they
might interact. The open-source simulation platform is slated to become a
community-shared virtual investigation tool used to probe competing engineering
designs and test hypotheses that would be too dangerous, difficult, or costly to
verify through physical experiments. Chrono has been and will continue to be
used in multiple fields and disciplines, e.g., terramechanics, astrophysics;
soft matter physics; biomechanics; mechanical engineering; civil engineering;
industrial engineering; and computer science. Specifically, it is used to
engineer the 2023 VIPER lunar rover; relied upon by US Army experts in
evaluating its wheeled and tracked vehicle designs; used in the US and Germany
in the wind turbine industry; and involved in designing wave energy conversion
solutions in Europe. Upon project completion, Chrono will become a simulation
engine in Gazebo, which is widely used in robotics research; operate on the
largest driving simulator in the US; empower research in the bio-robotics and
field-robotics communities; and assist efforts in the broad area of automotive
research carried out by a consortium of universities and companies under the
umbrella of the Automotive Research Center. The educational impact of this
project is threefold: training undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral
students in a multi-disciplinary fashion that emphasizes advanced computing
skills development; anchoring two new courses in autonomous vehicle control and
simulation in robotics; and broadening participation in computing through a
residential program on the campus of the University of Wisconsin-Madison that
engages teachers and students from rural high-schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovation and discovery are fueled by quality data. At
its core, this project seeks to increase the share of this data that has
simulation as its provenance. In this context, a multi-disciplinary team of 40
researchers augments and validates a physics-based simulation framework that
empowers research in autonomous agents (AAs). The AAs operate in complex and
unstructured dynamic environments and might engage in two-way interaction with
humans or other AAs. This project enables Chrono to generate machine learning
training data quickly and inexpensively; facilitates comparison of competing
designs for assessing trade-offs; and gauges candidate design robustness via
testing in simulation of corner-case scenarios. These tasks are accomplished by
upgrading and extending Chrono to leverage recent computational dynamics
innovations, e.g., a faster index 3 differential algebraic equations solver; a
new approach to solving frictional contact problems; a real-time solver for
handling flexible-body dynamics in soft robotics via nonlinear finite element
analysis; a best-in-class simulator for terradynamics applications; reliance on
just-in-time compiling for producing executables that are both problem- and
hardware-optimized; a novel way for using mixed data representations for
parsimonious storing of state information; and a scalable multi-agent framework
that enables geographically-distributed, over the Internet, real-time simulation
of human-AA interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.