* 2209026
* Collaborative Research: Rare Earth Materials Under Extreme Conditions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Alexandra Navrotsky, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2026
* USD 311,277.00

Non-technical summary &lt;br/&gt;Rare earths are a group of chemical elements
used extensively in batteries, cell phones, protective coatings, and high
melting ceramics. Their stability and suitability for such applications are
governed by their physical, electrical, magnetic, and thermodynamic properties,
all of which are closely related to their structure. With support from the
Ceramics Program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research, this project brings
together computational theory and experimental structural and thermodynamic
measurements to provide fundamental data and predictive understanding of the
behavior of high-melting solid rare earth compounds containing oxygen, nitrogen,
and carbon. The experiments are guided by computational predictions of stability
and structure made by state-of-the art physical theory and machine learning.
High pressure is used as a tool to discover and synthesize new rare earth
materials. Specialized high temperature calorimetric techniques measure
thermodynamic properties. The thermodynamic data will be made available in a
database for use by both academic and industrial scientists. The new knowledge
obtained enables future design of more efficient and earth-friendly materials
and devices containing rare earth elements. Additionally, students are trained
through this project in a variety of techniques, preparing them for careers in
many fields, including materials science, ceramics, semiconductor technology,
and aerospace science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;Continuing a long-standing collaboration between experimental
and computational scientists, this project, supported by the Ceramics Program in
NSF’s Division of Materials Research, focuses on the thermodynamic and
structural properties of refractory rare earth containing ceramic materials.
Computations using ab initio thermodynamics at high temperature and pressure
combined with machine learning approaches will guide synthesis experiments at
atmospheric and high pressures. High pressure samples are synthesized in a
multi-anvil apparatus at Arizona State University (ASU). Thermodynamic
properties are determined by oxide melt solution calorimetry, high temperature
scanning calorimetry, and drop and catch calorimetry. High temperature phase
transitions are studied by synchrotron diffraction techniques. Specific systems
of interest include rare earth monoxides, oxycarbides, and sesquioxides, with
emphasis on their structure and properties at high temperature and pressure. A
database of thermodynamic properties will be developed and disseminated. Thereby
thermodynamic data will be made available in a database for use by both academic
and industrial scientists. The new knowledge obtained enables future design of
more efficient and earth-friendly materials and devices containing rare earth
elements. Additionally, students are trained through this project in a variety
of techniques, preparing them for careers in many fields, including materials
science, ceramics, semiconductor technology, and aerospace
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.