* 2209776
* IUCRC Phase III Binghamton University: Center for Energy-Smart Electronic Systems (ES2)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Bahgat Sammakia, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 08/31/2027
* USD 50,000.00

With the proliferation of automation and electronic devices throughout most
major industries, the amount of data being produced and the need to
process/manage that data continues to grow. Automated management of data
centers, addressing their emerging thermal challenges and improving their energy
efficiency form the key to addressing this demand. The Center for Energy-Smart
Electronic Systems (ES2), an NSF Industry University Cooperative Research Center
(IUCRC), was established in 2011 to address these needs for data centers. This
award provides a Phase III renewal for this 3-site IUCRC, which consists of
Binghamton University, Villanova University and University of Texas at
Arlington. ES2's vision is to develop systematic methodologies for operating
electronic systems, including data centers, as dynamic, self- sensing and
regulating systems that are predictable and verified in real time. The focus in
Phase I and Phase II has been to develop new energy-optimization and thermal
management models and designs, as well as tools and algorithms enabling
electronic data systems to operate more efficiently and securely. Phase III will
further expand on these methodologies to progress closer to a full realization
of the ES2 vision. The Center brings together computer scientists, electrical
engineers, and mechanical engineers in a synergistic multidisciplinary team to
advance industrially relevant research in this area. ES2, in promoting
significant reductions in energy consumption in electronic systems, will
contribute to the national agenda of eventually reaching net-zero carbon
emissions. Reducing energy costs in data centers will help to allow computing
services to be more deployable and accessible for a larger population segment.
ES2 continues to attract a diverse group of students at the undergraduate and
graduate levels and provides industrially relevant training in their careers
beyond graduation. ES2 has also integrated a variety of mechanisms across the
partners universities and industry members to increase participation by women
and underrepresented students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the Binghamton site,
which serves as the lead site for the Center, ES2’s research activities focus on
smart workload prediction to allocate IT, cooling and energy resources
dynamically and thus realize holistic energy-management methodologies for data
centers at different scales. This holistic management of IT, cooling and energy
sourcing is key to realizing sustainable, reliable, and available data centers
of the future. The activities on sustainability also include the incorporation
of renewable energy sources into data centers. At Binghamton, the research on
cooling systems addresses the emerging cooling needs of high-power footprint
servers and racks typical of data centers that cater to the HPC and
intelligence-on-demand segments by focusing on single and two- phase cooling
technologies and model-based development of cooling system control. Advanced
air-cooling systems, including direct and indirect evaporative cooling, are also
investigated. ES2 continues to work closely with its broad industry base of
partners, including data center intensive businesses, data center hosting and
service providers, data center design and infrastructure providers and data
center equipment suppliers. Researchers at Binghamton University contribute to
the center in the areas of thermal analysis and heat transfer, as well as power-
aware systems and high-performance computing. Binghamton’s infrastructure
includes a dedicated data center research laboratory. This data center
laboratory has the scale of a mid-range data center but unlike a production data
center, it permits disruptive experiments to be carried out. In addition to two
fully contained cold aisles, the laboratory houses various types of cooling
facilities (traditional chilled air cooling, rear door heat exchangers using
chilled water and warm water cooling) to support experiments involving different
cooling technologies that are seen in legacy as well as state-of-the-art data
centers. Inherent inefficiencies and sustainability needs within the cooling, IT
and power delivery components are addressed through investigations centered on
new and emerging technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.