* 2209307
* Enhancing The MIGDAL Experiment's Sensitivity in the Low Energy Regime Relevant to Dark Matter Searches
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Dinesh Loomba, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2025
* USD 455,451.00

Over the past few years, an obscure quantum mechanical prediction made by Arkady
Migdal in the late 1930’s has revolutionized the search for dark matter (DM).
The Migdal effect has been invoked, based on theoretical arguments alone, to
improve the DM mass-sensitivity of the world-leading DM experiment by 2 orders
of magnitude. The effect predicts that an atomic nucleus receiving a small
“kick” can result in the emission of an atomic electron. When the kick is from
very light DM particles, the energy deposited in the detector by the recoiling
nucleus is too small to detect, but the accompanying electron emission is
detectable. The effect, however, has not been observed in this regime, raising
questions on the validity of these interpretations. Given the potential impact
of the Migdal effect on DM detection, an experimental verification of the effect
is very much needed. This award will be used to make an unambiguous detection of
the Migdal effect for a number of atoms of interest for DM searches. The method
leverages recent progress in the PI’s group on developing detectors to image and
resolve low energy particle tracks. With this capability, a Migdal event can be
clearly identified by reconstructing the electron and nuclear recoil tracks
diverging from a common interaction point. As a member of the international
MIGDAL collaboration, the PI will participate in experiments to detect the
effect at a specially designed facility in the UK. The detailed studies based on
the first detection will be used to constrain theoretical predictions at
energies above those being exploited in DM experiments. Novel detectors needed
to extend the search to lower energies are being developed at UNM and, if
successful, will be deployed in the second phase of this project. The project
will train and involve undergraduate and graduate students in all aspects of the
experiment. This will include hands-on experience in designing, testing and
operating small table-top detectors and developing novel image processing
techniques to simulate and analyze the data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will evaluate the validity of using the Migdal effect for setting dark matter
(DM) limits by detecting and studying it in neutron-induced nuclear recoils in
target atoms of interest for DM. It leverages recent progress in the PI’s group
demonstrating high spatial resolution and high signal-to-noise imaging of low
energy ionization tracks in an optical time-projection chamber (OTPC), which
enables particle identification and reconstruction of its direction of motion
along the track. With this capability, the Migdal event topology can be clearly
identified by reconstructing the electron and nuclear recoil tracks diverging
from the interaction point. These preliminary findings are the basis of a funded
European MIGDAL experiment to begin in the Fall. This award will provide support
to actively participate in all phases of the experiment, from data taking to
simulations and analysis. A key goal of the project is to expand the search to
lower energies, approaching those of interest to DM. This will involve
developing novel image processing techniques and a novel negative ion OTPC with
the exquisite spatial resolution needed for the low energy regime. If
successful, this technology will be implemented in the second phase of the
MIGDAL experiment. This award will also support training and a wide range of
research experience to a diverse set of undergraduates and graduate students in
increasingly rare small-scale experiments. With its novel capabilities, the NID
OTPC promises to impact a broad range of applications across the sciences. These
include X-ray polarimetry, dark-photon and double-beta searches, rare nuclear
decays, low background alpha and neutron measurements and
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.