* 2209893
* IUCRC Planning Grant Carnegie Mellon: Center for Quantum Computing and Information Technologies (Q-CIT)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Ryan O'Donnell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 07/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

Carnegie Mellon University is proposing the formation of a Center for Quantum
Computing and Information Technologies (Q-CIT). The mission of the proposed
Center is to collaborate with industry and government stakeholders in
identifying applications that advance quantum computing and information
technologies in the solution of challenging real-world problems proven to be
intractable by classical computing methods. Computing has had a profound and
transformative impact on society; quantum computing and information technologies
will have even greater impacts. Q-CIT will work with the stakeholders to create
a research ecosystem where companies, government labs, and federally funded
research and development centers with interests in quantum computing collaborate
with faculty, research staff, and students on practical use-case problems to
move the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Q-CIT will convene planning meetings with
interested companies, government labs, and other entities to discuss critical
areas with technical problems whose solution methods and algorithms might be
adapted to run on current, noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) hardware in
the absence of fault-tolerant quantum computing machines. Such problems could
include, among others, computation of materials properties via Hamiltonian
simulation, and solution of general optimization problems as is often done, for
example, in machine learning. These types of problems fall under the rubric of
variational optimization. In the long run, Q-CIT expects to work and interact
with industry and government members in identifying canonical benchmark problems
in selected areas that could be investigated to assess whether use of NISQ and
future fault-tolerant quantum computing machines brings quantum advantage(s)
over classical computing hardware. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the current
multiplicity of approaches to quantum computing and information technology
hardware, one of the roles of the Center will be to create an ecosystem for free
exchange of information on the different approaches, while fostering
interactions among diverse technical groups championing the approaches. Q-CIT
potentially has a unique opportunity to develop an innovative education and
training program relevant for implementation of the quantum computing paradigm.
The education program will be the key for the training of a diverse, future
quantum workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.