* 2209030
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: The endocrine and neurogenomic regulation of male parental care strategies
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2024
* Samuel Lane, Lane, Samuel Joseph
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 10/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Songbirds express a latitudinal gradient in
paternal care, with southern males providing more care for offspring than
northern males. This research will leverage this natural variation in behavior
to address the physiological and neurological control of paternal care. The
fellow will compare male paternal behavior across latitudes as it relates to two
hormones known to regulate parental behaviors, and will investigate the
neurological control of these behaviors between more paternal and less paternal
males. This research will add insight into the evolution of paternal care and
how these behaviors are governed within and across populations with changing
ecological conditions. The fellow will achieve these goals by mentoring
volunteers, technicians, and graduate students from underrepresented groups that
will assist with these research goals while developing and executing independent
research projects at four research sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will
investigate how variation in testosterone and prolactin mediate variation in
male life history strategies and identify potential gene networks governing
paternal behaviors in male house sparrows (Passer domesticus). To relate natural
variation in these two hormones to male incubation behavior, males will be
sampled at four sites along a latitudinal gradient from ND to TX. Northern males
are predicted to have elevated testosterone, suppressed prolactin, and reduced
parental care relative to southern males. To establish causal roles of these
hormones in influencing parental behavior, testosterone and prolactin will be
experimentally manipulated across sites. Experimentally blocking testosterone
and increasing prolactin is predicted to increase parental behavior. Finally,
brain tissue will be collected from incubating males, males that spend little to
no time incubating, and incubating females to identify potential gene networks
in the hypothalamus that govern male incubation behaviors and determine if they
are similar across sexes and populations. The fellow will recruit technicians
and volunteers from a diverse group of applicants by engaging with the North
Dakota’s Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research organization and
NDSU’s ROPES program. Participants will assist the fellow with research goals
while developing and executing independent research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.