* 2209643
* Conference: Equity and Inclusion in Open Access Publishing: Workshop to explore barriers and solutions
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Catherine O'Riordan, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Robyn Smyth
* 04/30/2024
* USD 99,549.00

Three significant and intertwined changes in the ecological research landscape
are occurring: new commitments to removing barriers that exclude scientists of
diverse backgrounds, availability of open data streams, and a shift towards Open
Access (OA) publishing through author-pays models. Given the importance of
scholarly publishing in hiring and promotion, barriers to publishing could
undermine or negate other interventions and programs to recruit and retain
diverse scholars in environmental biology. Therefore, the Ecological Society of
America (ESA) proposes a community survey and a workshop to explore barriers to
full participation of a wide diversity of Ecology and Environmental Biology
scientists in publishing research, with particular attention to potential
impacts of the shift to Open Access publishing models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this workshop and community
survey are to 1) raise awareness of the intersection between open science and
diversity, equity, and inclusion, 2) evaluate the current state of diversity,
equity, and inclusion in publishing (including identifying data gaps), 3) gather
data about potential barriers to publishing Open Access, and 4) provide a forum
for stakeholders to identify solutions to potential barriers. The goals of the
workshop are to convene society and publishing leaders to examine the current
status of diversity, equity, and inclusion in the publishing process, to explore
rising concerns that transitioning to Open Access could exacerbate inequalities
in scholarly publishing and to discuss strategies to alleviate financial burden
associated with publishing. This workshop will have significant broader impact
on the Ecology and Environmental Biology community by 1) Facilitating networking
and conversation around diversity, equity, and inclusion in publishing in the
Ecology and Environmental Biology society and publishing leaders, 2) Providing
additional data on the impact of author publishing charges and how the charges
affect authorsâ€™ decisions on where and when to publish, 3) Identifying best
practices and pitfalls when moving towards fully Open Access publishing models,
and 4) Identifying characteristics of different funding models to support
authors publishing Open Access articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.