* 2209821
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks for Intelligent Adaptive Experimentation: Enhancing and Tailoring Digital Education
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Jeffrey Carver, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 07/31/2027
* USD 400,000.00

People are constantly learning – whether formal education of homework problems
&amp; videos, or reading websites like Wikipedia. This project develops the
Experiments As a Service Infrastructure (EASI), which lowers the barriers to
conducting randomized experiments that compare alternative ways of designing
digital learning experiences, as well as analyzing the data derived from the
systems to rapidly change what future people receive. It does this by bringing
together multidisciplinary researchers around the shared problem of testing
ideas for improving and personalizing educational resources. The research also
advances (1) the science of learning and instruction; (2) methods for analyzing
complex educational data, and (3) machine learning algorithms that use data to
improve educational experiences. Improving learning and teaching increases
people's knowledge and gives them the ability to solve problems they care about,
driving their personal and career success and increasing society's human
capital.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Instructional decisions about digital educational
resources impact all students, from practice problems in K12 systems to tutorial
webpages in university and community college online courses. The current
versions of resources are too infrequently compared against alternative
resources, which may provide better learning. With this in mind, the project has
the goal of using data to test hypotheses about what is most helpful to
students, and then use that data to change the experience for future students.
The Experiments-As-a-Service-Infrastructure supports three complementary types
of multi-disciplinary, collaborative research. A–Design: the infrastructure
helps researchers investigate theories of learning and discover how to improve
instruction by designing randomized field experiments on components of real-
world digital educational resources. This provides more ecologically valid
research on learning and instruction, in subfields of education, psychology,
policy and discipline-based education research. B–Analysis: the infrastructure
facilitates sophisticated analysis of experiments in the context of large-scale
data about student profiles, such as to discover which interventions are
effective for different subgroups of students. This can advance the use of
innovative data-intensive methods for gaining actionable knowledge in education,
learning analytics, educational data mining, and applied statistics.
C–Adaptation: the infrastructure enables research into adaptive experimentation
by providing a testbed for algorithms that dynamically analyze data from
experiments, to enhance learning by presenting future students with whichever
version of a resource (condition) is more effective, or to personalize learning
by presenting different subgroups of future students with the version of a
resource that is most effective for their subgroup. The infrastructure provides
a testbed for empirical evaluation of which algorithms enact effective adaptive
experimentation in education to inspire the development of new algorithms.
Finally, the work aligns many educational communities around the shared problem
of enhancing and personalizing education through experimentation and spurs
multidisciplinary research by providing extensive support for collaboration and
sharing of designs, data, analysis scripts and algorithms while fostering an
online community for training and collaborations, to promote high-quality,
innovative, impactful experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.