* 2209576
* Collaborative Research: Novel Cavity Haloscopes for Axion Dark Matter at CM-Wavelengths
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Chao-Lin Kuo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 07/31/2025
* USD 449,946.00

Astronomical observations have established that the Universe is primarily “dark”
with approximately 85% of the matter made of yet unknown particles. Uncovering
the nature of this dark matter will have far reaching consequences in cosmology,
astrophysics and particle physics. The quantum chromodynamic (QCD) axion arises
in an extension of the Standard Model of particle physics that would
simultaneously solve the mystery of dark matter and the long-standing strong
charge-parity problem. This award supports researchers at Stanford University
and the University of Washington in the development of a novel axion detector
called a haloscope that will improve the scan rate of axion dark matter
experiments by more than three orders of magnitude at frequencies between 4 – 7
GHz. The awarded activities include outreach and education via a Summer Research
Program for Teachers, and a mentorship program for graduate students in the
training of undergraduate researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Above frequencies
of approximately 4 GHz , corresponding to an axion particle mass of a few tens
of micro-electronvolts, there exists a large sensitivity gap between current
measurements and the theoretical benchmarks. Improving the scan rate at these
frequencies is crucial to enhancing the reach of axion search experiments. The
large gain of the new haloscope design is achieved by implementing a space-
filling thin-shell cavity that decouples the resonator’s volume from its
resonant frequency. A full-sized science-grade cavity will be fabricated and
installed in an existing 250mK testbed to demonstrate tunability and high
quality factor under cryogenic conditions. The cavities will also be integrated
with a Josephson Junction-based amplifier and a digitizer to obtain new
exclusion limits on searches for dark photons. These developments establish key
preparations for future axion searches involving large-volume solenoid magnet
systems like those currently utilized for the ADMX
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.