* 2209159
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Developmental Determinacy as an Adaptation to a Stable Environment: Characterizing Distinct Life History Strategies in the Monkeyflowers
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Jesus Martinez-Gomez, Martínez-Gómez, Jesús
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2025
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2022. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Jesús Martínez-Gómez is “Developmental Determinacy as an Adaptation to a Stable
Environment: Characterizing Distinct Life History Strategies in the
Monkeyflowers”. The host institution for the fellowship is the University of
California, Berkeley and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Benjamin Blackman
and Yun Song.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological lineages at all levels, from
cancer cells in a tumor to the giant fungi of the late Devonian, are
continuously buffeted by evolutionary forces. Predicting how natural populations
respond to these forces is a fundamental challenge both for extending our
understanding of the principles of life as well as for many applied biological
research programs. Inferences from evolutionary biology inform development of
management plans to conserve threatened species in the face of anthropogenic
induced climate change. Inferences also have the power to identify causal
genomic variants that underlie complex crop traits in plants. This project will
employ both natural populations and experimentally evolved populations of the
genus Mimulus (monkeyflowers) with novel methods in population genetics and
genome sequencing to understand how changes to genomic architecture resulted in
transitions between two distinct forms of the annual life history through
evolution. Broader impacts include mentoring and training undergraduate students
as well as partnering with the UC Botanical Garden of Berkeley to develop a
self-guided tour through the Garden as well as curricula for a new discovery-
based undergraduate research course that will introduce students to observation-
based research focused on plant-pollinator interactions. Training objectives
include obtaining expertise in computational methods, modeling, and ecological
and quantitative genomics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on two
quantitatively distinct types of the annual life history strategy in the genus
Mimulus: opportunistic annuals, where new flowers develop and fruits matures
while resources allow, and deterministic annuals, where all flower and fruit
develop in tandem. The former is hypothesized to be better suited in more
unpredictable environments, and the latter to be better adapted to more
predictable environments. To provide a framework for predicting population
responses to climate change, the project will take two complementary approaches.
First, novel machine-learning based approaches in population genomics will be
applied to jointly infer historic demographic parameters and targets of
selection. This work will leverage genome resequencing data obtained for several
hundred individuals sampled from populations that differ between these life
history strategies to identify putative regions of the genome that underlie this
phenotypic variation. The second aim will take an ‘evolve and resequence’
approach to ‘re-evolve’ the deterministic annual strategy from the opportunistic
annual strategy in a greenhouse setting by selecting for both earlier flowering
and faster fruit maturation. Selected individuals in each generation will be
sequenced, and sequence data will be used to validate machine learning based
population genomic models. All project outcomes will be made available through
long-term public repositories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: Mimulus,
experimental evolution, population genomics, life
history&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.