* 2209290
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Lillian Padgitt-Cobb, Padgitt-Cobb, Lillian
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2022. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Lillian Padgitt-Cobb is "Single-cell Study of Gene Expression and Regulatory DNA
in the Glandular Trichomes of Hemp (Cannabis sativa) Flowers". The host
institution for the fellowship is the Salk Institute for Biological Studies and
the sponsoring scientist is Dr. Todd Michael.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hemp
(Cannabis sativa) is a plant of cultural and economic significance that is
highly valued for the array of molecular compounds it produces. Much of the
agronomically-valuable chemistry of hemp occurs in specialized structures of
female flowers, called glandular trichomes. Glandular trichomes are
multicellular factories that create and store a small number of molecular
compounds in large abundance, making it an excellent system to study cell-based
chemistry and gene regulation. The key outcomes of this project will focus on
determining how molecular compounds are produced in the glandular trichomes,
including the location of their production, and the genetic basis controlling
the quantity of their production. This is an important area of research for the
hemp bioeconomy because growers and stakeholders require hemp plants with a
consistent profile of specific molecular compounds, which has implications for
cultivation strategies related to how hemp plants are grown. This project
includes novel approaches, including the application of single-cell experiments
in hemp, which is an opportunity to discover how metabolism is coordinated in
glandular trichomes. The first Broader Impacts component of this project will
include a collaboration with the San Diego Botanical Garden to develop
educational materials for a workshop about principles of plant breeding,
focusing on hemp. The workshop will be an opportunity to train the public about
the manipulation of plant genetics through breeding. The second Broader Impacts
component will include the mentorship of three undergraduate students from local
minority-serving universities in San Diego to broaden participation in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hemp produces cannabinoid and terpenoid compounds in its
glandular trichomes. In contrast to high-THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) cultivars of
C. sativa (marijuana), hemp is defined as having a THC content of less than 0.3%
by dry weight and is cultivated specifically for its fiber and oil. The
regulatory mechanisms that govern biosynthesis, transport, and signaling, and
allow C. sativa to devote such a large percentage of its flowering biomass to
the synthesis of a few metabolites, remain unclear. The key outcomes of this
research project will focus on uncovering mechanistic insights about the
regulation of metabolite biosynthesis at a single-cell level, including 1)
identification and characterization of cell types in glandular trichomes based
on gene expression and accessible chromatin regions from an integrated single-
cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and single-cell assay for transposase-accessible
chromatin (scATAC-seq) experiment; 2) identification of de novo and known
regulatory motifs, focusing on regulatory motifs in accessible chromatin
regions; 3) assessment of sequence variation in accessible chromatin regions and
regulatory motifs using genotype and chemotype data available for multiple
cultivars of C. sativa; and 4) quantification of a core set of cannabinoids and
terpenoids to assess the association between metabolite abundance, regulatory
DNA, and expression of key enzymes and co-regulated genes. Sequencing reads from
the single-cell experiments will be deposited in the National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Sequence Read Archive (SRA). Scripts and
analysis pipelines will be available on GitHub. Results and findings will be
shared via peer-reviewed scientific publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.