* 2209115
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Understanding cetacean morbillivirus transmission in the Pacific basin
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Nelmarie Landrau Giovannetti, Landrau Giovannetti, Nelmarie
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2026
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The focus of
this study is on a deadly infectious agent, Cetacean morbillivirus, which has
emerged as a serious threat to dolphins, whales, and porpoises and has been a
cause of severe outbreaks in cetacean populations around the world in the last
30 years. Many of the cetacean populations in Hawai’i are small and resident and
an outbreak from this infection could be especially devastating in this region
of the world. Little is known about the exposure and transmission of this virus
among marine mammals. This research seeks to better understand the exposure and
transmission of Cetacean morbillivirus and will focus on the testing of humpback
whales that travel between Hawaiʻi and Alaska and other species of dolphins and
whales that are resident to Hawaiʻi. Understanding the exposure and transmission
of this virus in marine animals will provide insights into designing strategies
to mitigate disease and aid in the management of Hawaiian populations that may
be especially vulnerable disease outbreaks. This research’s broader impact
includes providing underrepresented undergraduate students the opportunity to
perform scientific research and outreach activities that will target a diverse
audience in both the Pacific and Atlantic regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aerosolization is thought to be the main route for
Cetacean morbillivirus (CeMV) transmission in cetaceans. The proposed work will
use serology to conduct antibody testing of fluids taken from 20 species of
stranded Hawaiian cetaceans to assess exposure rates. The project will also
utilize social networking analysis with data obtained from two decades of
cetacean sightings in Hawaiian waters to document mixed-species interactions.
This will be paired with exposure data to simulate CeMV spread among Hawai'i's
cetacean populations. The fellow will be trained in a foreign laboratory and
will have access to a comprehensive training program that includes new
laboratory techniques (for example, virus isolation and serology), field-work
collection efforts to sample humpback whale exhaled breath, modeling exposure
through social networking analysis, classroom teaching, mentoring of summer
intern undergraduate students, and communication in science education and
outreach. Additionally, one episode of the award-winning Pacific regional TV
series Voice of the Sea will be created and broadcast in the Pacific basin and
on the island of Puerto Rico in the Caribbean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.