* 2209377
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Viral-microbial Founder Effects, Horizontal Gene Transfer, and Adaptation on Successional Coral Reefs
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Mark Little, Little, Mark Jeffrey
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 09/30/2025
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research project will contribute crucial
techniques and information which include improving the health of the marine
environment and increasing food security for human populations. The overarching
goal is to build healthy coral reef habitat in order to increase marine food
resources and other ecological goods and services. Indeed, bacterial and viral
community composition and its trajectory determines whether a coral reef thrives
or dies. This study will help to shed light on the ecological role of coral
microbiome in the context of rebuilding coral reefs. Therefore, this work will
be important in monitoring the health of these reefs and understanding their
capacity to increase ecosystem services. It will also include mentoring students
and outreach that will extend to a diverse public audience on these global scale
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine molecular and ecological
approaches with coral reef restoration technologies to understand how
environmental and macro-/micro-organismal components of coral reefs lead to
success of ecosystem functioning. The experiment will be conducted in Ranobe
Bay, a 32 km coastline that is home to 13 villages in southwest Madagascar. This
consists of investigating the microbial and viral dynamics of the coral
microbiome and local environment using an in situ before-after-control-impact
study design assessing the effectiveness of seeding eight artificial reefs from
a healthy common garden. Using a combination of microbial/viral genomic
techniques, coral reef microbiome selection, microbial function, and horizontal
gene flow will be quantified and assessed. This study highlights the rules of
life using coral reefs as a model ecosystem to investigate the interactions
between genomes (coral reef organisms and their microbes), their environment,
and their phenotypic response in the context of rebuilding reefs for
restoration. Training objectives will consist of teaching, engagement, and
working alongside local communities and institutions in the study region. This
includes mentoring and training Malagasy students in marine molecular research,
increasing racial and cultural diversity in marine science, public
communication, building data resources for reef and human health monitoring,
developing reef restoration tools to improve food security for malnourished
human populations, and monitoring water quality for human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.