* 2209410
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Alayna Mead, Mead, Alayna
* Fellowship Award
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 12/31/2025
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2022. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Alayna Mead is "Leveraging genomic and phenotypic data to characterize local
adaptation to drought across the range of a model tree species." The host
institution for the fellowship is Pennsylvania State University and the
sponsoring scientists are Drs. Jill Hamilton, Stephen Keller, and Matthew C.
Fitzpatrick.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trees are ecologically important species that
shape ecosystems, and carbon sequestration is among the many benefits they
provide to people. The health and persistence of trees is threatened by climate
change, particularly by the more frequent and severe droughts that are already
occurring in parts of North America and are predicted to increase. Because trees
are long-lived and can only shift their range through the movement of seeds and
growth of new individuals, their response to changing climates is likely to be
slow. However, not all trees within a species will respond to climate change in
the same way: for example, trees that come from drier areas may be naturally
more drought-tolerant because they have adapted to the local climate.
Identifying genetic variation that makes individual trees more or less drought
tolerant will enable us to predict which populations are more at risk, and
develop management strategies to conserve them. This project will focus on Black
Cottonwood, or Populus trichocarpa, a tree native to the western United States
and Canada that is ecologically, scientifically, and economically important.
This project will train the Fellow in a range of skills that will be broadly
useful in forest genomics and conservation, including measurement of drought-
related traits in the field and analysis of genomic data. In addition, the
Fellow will mentor undergraduate students from multiple universities, with a
particular focus on providing training in coding and bioinformatics to students
without previous experience in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
the genetic basis of climate-related traits is important in order to identify
genotypes or populations that will be maladapted or well-adapted to future
climate, and to devise management plans to conserve species. This project will
focus on identifying alleles involved in drought tolerance in Populus
trichocarpa, a model tree species. Previous work in P. trichocarpa has been able
to identify genes involved in climate adaptation among populations. However,
sampling in the southern part of the range has generally been sparse, despite
these populations occurring in drier environments and potentially harboring more
genetic variation than the better-studied northern populations. This project
will use two whole-genome datasets to identify alleles that likely confer
drought adaptation in P. trichocarpa. First, in conjunction with the PopUp
Poplars Project, drought-related traits will be measured in common gardens that
include P. trichocarpa and P. balsamifera hybrids, and alleles that are
associated with variation in these drought tolerance traits will be identified
using a genome-wide association analysis. Second, using a dataset of P.
trichocarpa individuals collected across California as part of the California
Conservation Genomics Project, this project will use a genotype-environment
association analysis to identify alleles that are associated with local water
availability in the southern, drier part of the species range. Additionally,
candidate genes will be used to predict how P. trichocarpa will respond to
climate change across its range, and to identify genotypes that are likely to be
well-adapted to drought and would be ideal for restoration
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.