* 2209522
* Collaborative Research: HAYSTAC Quantum Enhanced
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Konrad Lehnert, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2025
* USD 421,862.00

Under the award "HAYSTAC Quantum Enhanced", the University of California
Berkeley and the University of Colorado participate in one of the forefront
experiments in the world seeking to discover the identity of the dark matter of
the universe. This experiment searches for a hypothetical elementary particle,
called the axion, which is predicted to be extremely light, perhaps a trillionth
of the mass of an electron, and extremely weakly interacting. The principle of
the experiment is that in the presence of a strong magnetic field, axions can
convert to microwave photons, which can be detected by quantum-sensitive
amplifiers and receivers. The conversion process can be resonantly enhanced in a
tunable microwave cavity; the R&amp;D, production and operation of these
microwave cavities is the responsibility of the UC Berkeley group. The
University of Colorado team develops the quantum sensors. The other institutions
involved are Johns Hopkins University and Yale University, where the experiment
is sited. HAYSTAC has been the world leader in the application of quantum
sensing to dark matter searches. Under previous NSF funding, HAYSTAC was the
first dark matter experiment to evade a fundamental theorem of quantum mechanics
on the irreducible noise of amplifiers, the Standard Quantum Limit, by a
sophisticated technique known as squeezed-vacuum states. Discovery of dark
matter would constitute a revolution in our understanding of cosmology, and
excite generations of young students to pursue careers in physical science and
engineering. HAYSTAC has also been a driver for breakthroughs in quantum
information science, and advanced microwave concepts, and has trained several
Ph.D. students who have gone on to careers in the fields of quantum computing
and accelerator science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under NSF funding, a Yale-
Berkeley-Colorado collaboration came together in 2011 to design, build and
operate HAYSTAC (now joined by Johns Hopkins), a small experiment serving both
as an innovation test-bed to develop new cavity designs and quantum-enhanced
photon detection schemes, and as a pathfinder to take first data in the 10–50
micro-eV mass range. Immediately upon commissioning in 2015 with the first-ever
use of a Josephson Parametric Amplifier (JPA), HAYSTAC achieved essentially
quantum-limited operation. In the past three years, the collaboration
successfully implemented a two-JPA squeezed-vacuum state receiver, circumventing
the Standard Quantum Limit (SQL) entirely and establishing an exclusion limit
around 17 micro-eV; these results being published in Nature in February 2021.
HAYSTAC is the only dark matter experiment to employ a squeezed-state receiver
(SSR), and along with LIGO one of only two experiments exploiting squeezed
states for data production in the world of fundamental physics. In parallel with
the development of quantum-enhanced receivers, the collaboration has pursued
similar advances in microwave resonators. Under this proposal, the team will
complete and analyze the ongoing long run with the current squeezed state
receiver, which is operating with a scan rate further improved from the first
SSR. Berkeley will then deploy a new and improved symmetrized-tuner design
cavity, and another long run will commence to move upwards in frequency toward a
recent theoretical prediction. Colorado will develop and test a prototype of
their cavity entanglement and state-swapping concept (published in Physical
Review X Quantum), which should be complete within this grant period; whereas
the current SSR yielded a factor of ×2 in scan rate, this new scheme is expected
to produce a ×15 speedup. Colorado and Berkeley will jointly carry out the
integration and commissioning in HAYSTAC. Berkeley will continue R&amp;D on
Photonic Band Gap resonators for TE-mode suppression, metamaterial resonators to
reach much higher frequencies, and continued mitigation of the anomalous thermal
noise contribution. Each of these innovations dramatically enhance the discovery
potential of HAYSTAC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.