* 2209480
* Research and Education with GlueX
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Richard Jones, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2025
* USD 134,396.00

One goal of the experimental program in nuclear physics at Jefferson Lab in
Newport News, Virginia is to look for new resonances, or states reinforced at
certain energies, that may exist at the deepest level of the nucleus within the
web-like fields known as gluons, which are the primary energy stores in the
nucleus. At present, the best evidence for the existence of gluonic resonances
is theoretical, but the PI and his students at the University of Connecticut are
seeking experimental proof of their existence, working together with a team of
150 physicists on the GlueX experiment in Hall D at Jefferson Lab. The UConn
group is responsible for the source of polarized gamma rays, which are produced
by passing the 12 GeV electron beam from the Jefferson Lab accelerator through a
carefully crafted and oriented diamond crystal. Polarized gamma rays from the
source are directed onto a liquid hydrogen target where resonances are produced,
whose subsequent decays are picked up and identified in the GlueX Spectrometer,
an apparatus surrounding the target, to uncover new information about the
organization of quarks inside the proton and other
nuclei.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GlueX experiment aims at clarifying the role
played by gluonic degrees of freedom in the excitation spectrum of light-quark
hadrons. Data collected in pursuit of this goal also shed light on a number of
additional topics in nuclear physics, including near-threshold J/psi
photoproduction, rare decays of the eta(550) meson, the 2gamma decay width of
the eta and eta prime mesons, and the polarizability of the charged and neutral
pions (CPP, NPP). GlueX has now completed 30% of its approved data collection
for GlueX Phase 2, and is quickly reaching the point where systematic effects
take over from statistics as the primary source of experimental uncertainty for
many studies. The UConn group is playing a critical role in quantifying and
reducing systematics related to the properties of the photon beam, in addition
to supporting the ongoing operation of the photon beamline and tagger. Support
under this grant enables the PI and two PhD students to provide and enhance the
quality of diamond radiators for Hall D experiments, maintain and operate the
tagger microscope, and lead the ongoing development of the physics simulation
for the GlueX experiment. In parallel with these efforts, UConn students will
also carry out physics analysis in line with the primary GlueX physics program
in hybrid spectroscopy and related topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.