* 2209064
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Importance of monsoon rains for songbird migration and stopover refueling in the American desert southwest
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Michael Griego, Griego, Michael
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Each fall,
billions of migratory birds cross through the Sonoran, Mojave, and Chihuahuan
deserts during their southward migration to their wintering grounds in Mexico
and Central America. These habitats are drastically different from their summer
breeding grounds in temperate northern latitudes of Canada and Alaska. The heat
and aridity presents new challenges to birds as they stop to refuel in the
desert southwest prior to continuing their journey south. The Fellow will
investigate how seasonal monsoon rains in the desert southwest can assist
songbirds passing through the region each fall. The annual monsoons have the
potential to provide birds with cooler temperatures, greater availability of
surface water, and an abundance of insects and seeds for food. These resources
are critical for refueling migratory birds as they prepare to fly nonstop over
thousands of kilometers of arid lands prior to reaching central and southern
Mexico. The best current climate change models for the desert southwest all
indicate that total monsoon rainfall will be reduced, and the timing of the
storms will become more erratic over the coming century. Understanding precisely
how wildlife currently utilize monsoon resources is essential to predict how
these changing weather systems can impact species in the future. Additionally,
this award will support the Fellow in developing a broadly accessible training
workshop directed at diverse applicants wishing to pursue academic postdoctoral
fellowships which will be presented at the National Diversity in STEM
conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this research is to
determine if monsoon weather events assist songbird recovery at stopover sites
in the Chihuahuan desert. The Fellow will quantify the contributions that
periodic monsoon rains have endogenous water reserves of migrants and determine
if whole-animal performance is constrained by water balance in songbirds at arid
land stopover sites. Quantifying the contribution of monsoon rainfall to
animals’ water reserves depends on being able to measure a nuanced exchange of
oxygen neutrons in a complex biogeochemical system. The research will use an
isotopic assay which allows for the reliable detection of the monsoon rain pulse
in the tissues of animals. This method will be a revolutionary tool for
ecologists, and the Fellow will be one of the first to apply this technique in
the field. Additionally, the Fellow will measure whole-animal metabolic
performance using standard respirometry, and refueling performance by analyzing
plasma metabolites using minimally invasive techniques on free-living
birds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.