* 2209769
* Discovering True Muonium
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Philip Ilten, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kaushik De
* 07/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date has been confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the CERN laboratory near Geneva, Switzerland.
However, the Standard Model as it currently exists leaves open many questions
about the universe. These include why matter dominates over anti-matter in the
Universe (CP violation), the values of the masses of the fundamental
constituents of matter, the quarks and the leptons, the size of the mixings
among the quarks, and separately among the leptons, and the properties of dark
matter. Most explanations require the presence of new forces and the development
of concepts that now constitute what we call physics Beyond the Standard Model
(BSM). This award supports research that addresses those questions that dominate
BSM physics. The research will be carried out at the LHC, which is the premier
High Energy Physics particle accelerator in the world and one of the foremost
facilities for answering these BSM questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LHCb is the
first experiment designed specifically to study the decays of hadrons containing
b or c quarks at a hadron collider. The goal of LHCb is to identify new physics
in nature by examining the properties of hadrons containing these quarks. New
physics, or new forces, are manifest by particles, as yet to be discovered,
which would modify decay rates and CP violating asymmetries, and thus allow new
phenomena to be observed indirectly. This award will allow the study of rare
decays of heavy quark systems in LHCb. The work will concentrate on low mass
electron and muon pairs where BSM could manifest itself. The newly upgraded LHCb
detector now allows unprecedented data levels providing new paths to
understanding recent anomalies in lepton universality. This new data set will
allow a search for dark photons and other new light particles and possibly
discover true muonium, a bound state of a muon and an anti-muon. This award will
also allow the development of a novel curriculum for understanding implicit
bias, both in the context of particle physics and society. This course will be
taught to high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.