* 2209877
* Elements: Simplifying Compiled Python Packaging in the Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Henry Schreiner, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2025
* USD 580,377.00

Python is the most popular language in the sciences, and compiled extensions for
it are at the core of almost all scientific packages for Python. The process to
build an extension has traditionally been complex. Even a simple extension is
challenging and making a complex extension like NumPy requires thousands of
lines of code just for compilation. Scikit-build provides access to CMake, the
most popular and powerful build system for compiled languages, for Python users
in a native and natural way. Scikit-build is being redesigned on top of
standardized packaging procedures that were not yet written when scikit-build
was started in 2014. This will establish Scikit-build as the reference
scientific Python community solution for the future, as well as provide many new
features to users, including much simpler configuration, much better stability,
cross-platform compilation, and much more. A collection of popular scientific
libraries are adapting the new Scikit-build core infrastructure and providing
feedback on what features need to be made available. Extensive tutorials,
examples, and training sessions are being held during the course of the project
to make binary extensions available to far more users than ever
before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scikit-build was designed as a wrapper around
distutils, the standard library package for building extensions, which was the
only option in 2014. It is being rewritten on published PEPs (Python Enhancement
Proposals) to avoid usage of distutils before distutils is removed in 2023 in
Python 3.12. The rewritten Scikit-build will also provide a configuration system
that conforms to modern best practices, an improved developer experience, and
increased stability by avoiding the fragile distutils private internals. New
features include a new library discovery system integrated with CMake to make
reusable compiled libraries shareable through Python distribution channels like
PyPI and conda-forge, cached builds, better CUDA and Fortran support, cross-
compilation, and more. Scikit-build is collaborating with NumPy and SciPy on
documentation, US-RSE for tutorials and workshops, and RAPIDS, PyArrow, PySTAN,
Awkward Array, ITK, 3D Slicer, CERN ROOT, ATLAS, OSQP, and Bézier for initial
integration and testing of Scikit-Build’s redesigned
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.