* 2209806
* Elements: Innovating for Edge-to-Edge Climate Services
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Stephanie McAfee, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 07/31/2025
* USD 589,234.00

Environmental sciences have enormous potential to provide real-time community
hazard information because of advances in cyberinfrastructure (CI) and the
Internet of Things (IoT). Real-time systems that observe and monitor hydrology,
climate, geology, and ecology have historically been difficult to design,
implement, and maintain, with challenges ranging from equipment cost to data
management. To make it easier for everyone to access the environmental data they
need, this project focuses on “democratizing” portions of an existing regional
earthquake and wildfire science network in Nevada by integrating new IoT
technologies and cutting-edge cloud-ready CI. Together, these create
transformative real-time “crowd-participating” environmental data services,
assembled on a new Nevada Weather “edge-to-edge” platform, or “NevWx,” developed
as part of the project. These elements become community-centered solutions, in
which any individual or organization can easily incorporate new sensors in the
NevWx scientific platform. The project’s science application aims to shed new
light into temperature patterns in and around mountain communities. This
interdisciplinary work contributes new science and engineering knowledge along
with new physical resources, which helps move forward the adoption and
scalability of IoT in regional research and monitoring networks. Given its
emphasis on involving the public and local agencies in science, the project also
offers an example for transforming societal engagement with research data
networks. By incorporating research results in undergraduate and graduate
courses at UNR and in training materials at the Nevada State Climate Office
(NSCO), the project also provides substantial and unique educational and
workforce development opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To “democratize” the
existing regional science network, this project integrates Low Power Wide Area
Network (LPWAN) wireless and IoT-focused streaming data CI to create crowd-
participatory environmental hazard data on the new NevWx workflow platform. The
software and networking solutions are designed to enable any interested
individuals to connect new sensors to the project’s infrastructure, register
metadata, and freely access and share the data collected from them. System
testing consists of installing temperature sensors and network enhancements in
urban and wildland areas in the Lake Tahoe Basin. The main components of this
project are: (1) CI research, design &amp; implementation, to facilitate data
acquisition from sensors, conduct quality control, and make the data available
through a web portal. Specific CI goals are: application of IoT topologies on
regional infrastructure; development of containerized microservice-based
software architecture to support data collection, storage, processing, and
curation; and creation of crowd-participatory data services that incorporate
FAIR data principles; (2) Research into how disturbance and development
influence temperatures in the Lake Tahoe Basin. This includes measuring urban
heat island effects in a mountain community, comparing temperatures in recently
burned areas to unburned forest, and tracking freezing levels along a major
highway into the Lake Tahoe Basin. Tightly connected with CI research and
development, the science applications allow testing the NevWx platform in a
range of environments and seasons, while providing real-time information
pertinent to public health and safety; and (3) Science stakeholder meetings,
which are designed to evaluate their interests and preferences about the
proposed sensor data and deployments. Through its modern, flexible and adaptable
solutions, available to a wide spectrum of researchers, individuals, and
organizations, the project has the potential to advance the current state-of-
the-art in CI and environmental sciences, help expand our national
cyberinfrastructure on regional networks, and contribute to making significant
steps towards “sensing by the public,” with benefits for many science
communities and public service agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.