* 2209151
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: The role of genomic preadaptation and physiological state in modulating bacterial invasion success
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Elijah Mehlferber, Mehlferber, Elijah C
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. In this work, the Fellow will investigate the
complex interactions between genetics and the environment that allow a bacterial
species to successfully invade a new environment. Bacteria usually fail to
invade a host and cause disease, but sometimes they succeed and can cause severe
infections when they do. The traits these bacteria have, and conditions which
help them achieve this invasion are not well-understood, especially because
studies usually only focus on successful invasion without comparing to failed
invasions. The Fellow will quantify invasion success across a diverse set of
bacteria isolated from different environments, determine the influence of growth
conditions, and develop a machine-learning approaches to link invasion outcomes
to genetics. The project aims to predict invasion success in un-tested strains.
The Fellow will also broaden participation in science through the recruitment
and training of undergraduate students, specifically targeted towards providing
equitable access to research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to better understand the genetic and environmental interactions underlying
transitions to pathogenicity by studying the variation in invasion success
across strains of the phylogenetically diverse opportunistic pathogen
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The Fellow will first determine this variation in
invasion outcomes by quantifying the bacteria’s ability to establish in a novel
environment containing a competitor species and will assess the role of
phylogenetic relatedness and genomic factors in predicting that success. Next,
they will quantify the impact of different physiological states, induced by the
bacteria’s growth conditions before introduction to their novel environment, on
invasion outcomes. Finally, the Fellow will integrate these data to compare
general and specific predictive models to quantify the potential for future
invasion success in un-tested strains. Throughout the project, the Fellow will
gain skills in bacterial genetics, quantifying bacterial traits, and will learn
to develop machine learning models to predict phenotypic outcomes from genomic
information. In addition to mentoring undergraduate students, the Fellow will
engage in scientific outreach aimed at fostering understanding and appreciation
for science, with a specific focus on historically underserved
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.