* 2209530
* Nuclear Experimental Probes of Neutrino Mass
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Walter Pettus, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2025
* USD 429,118.00

Much remains to be learned about neutrinos despite their great abundance in the
universe. Chief among their unknown properties is their mass - a quantity that
is relevant to physics at all scales: from the formation of the structure of the
cosmos down to the minutest particle nature. Two parallel lines of investigation
related to this question are pursued with this award. In the first, a precise
measurement the highest-energy decay electrons of tritium beta decay can infer
the neutrino mass with no model dependence or theoretical uncertainty. In the
second line of investigation, the nature of neutrinos and whether they might
uniquely be their own antiparticles will be probed by searching for neutrinoless
double beta decay (0νββ). Both experiments are pushing the frontiers of detector
technology to achieve their science goals, and graduate students will be
supported and trained in these techniques. Additionally, this award will support
outreach as the Great American Eclipse of 2024 passes through Bloomington,
IN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A next-generation concept for a tritium endpoint
neutrino mass experiment is being pursued with Project 8 using the novel
Cyclotron Radiation Emission Spectroscopy (CRES) technique. During the award
period, work will focus on scalability of CRES towards the required
multi-m^3-scale for the ultimate experiment. The research team will lead the
experimental controls systems of new demonstrator apparatuses, as well as
contribute to other aspects of the project. In 0νββ, this award supports work on
the 76Ge experiments, Majorana Demonstrator and LEGEND. Final science results of
Majorana are expected early in the award period, with LEGEND-200 commissioning
concurrently. The research team will focus on pulse shape analysis towards
improved characterization and rejection of
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.