* 2209205
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: A New Paradigm for Symbiosis, Immunity Tradeoffs in a Coral Model System, Astrangia poculata
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Erin Borbee, Borbee, Erin M
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 07/31/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The research supported by this fellowship will
investigate the energetic tradeoffs associated with symbiosis and immunity in
corals. Hard corals form the structural foundation of coral reef ecosystems
which are some of the most biodiverse ecosystems on the planet and represent
vital food and economic resources for many countries. The recent increase in
frequency of coral disease outbreaks has led to mass mortality of corals and
threatened the overall health of these ecosystems. Coral survival on reefs in
the tropics is partly dependent on the relationship between the coral and an
algal symbiont which provides the coral with energy through photosynthesis.
Recent studies have established that the relationship between corals and their
symbionts results in a higher overall energetic budget, but at a cost to coral
immunity. However, the increased availability of energetic resources should, in
turn, augment the coral’s ability to mount a response to an immune challenge.
The Fellow will recruit undergraduates of diverse backgrounds to mentor in this
research as well as creating a professional network that supports women
interested in marine science. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research challenges
the existing paradigm that symbiosis comes at a net cost to immunity and disease
resistance in corals. Using the temperate coral model system, Astrangia
poculata, the research will integrate transcriptomic, metabolomic, and
traditional immune assay data to understand how the symbiont’s state impacts
baseline energetic budget and immunity in this coral as well as its ability to
respond to a pathogen. In addition to evaluating those parameters in symbiotic
and aposymbiotic A. poculata colonies, the project will also examine the same
parameters in the A. poculata symbiont Breviolum psygmophilum. This integrative
approach will generate quantitative and qualitative data to investigate the
hypothesis that symbiont state impacts gene expression, metabolic profile, and
immunity in coral and symbiont. The findings will inform models for
understanding how corals respond to disease as well as identifying reefs
susceptible to disease outbreaks. Furthermore, by conducting this research at a
Hispanic-serving institution, this project will broaden participation by
recruiting undergraduates to work on the research while simultaneously providing
training for the Fellow in mentoring these students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.