* 2209892
* Frameworks: Garden: A FAIR Framework for Publishing and Applying AI Models for Translational Research in Science, Engineering, Education, and Industry
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Ian Foster, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 06/30/2026
* USD 3,496,454.00

Harnessing powerful new advances in machine learning (ML) and artificial
intelligence (AI) is key to 1) maintaining and building national competitiveness
in the sciences and engineering, 2) realizing breakthroughs in health and
medicine, 3) enabling the creation of industries of the future, and 4)
increasing economic growth and opportunity. Today, researchers are achieving
exciting results with these new ML/AI methods in applications ranging from
materials discovery, chemistry, and drug discovery to high energy physics,
weather prediction, advanced manufacturing, and health. Yet, much work remains.
These new methods and results are not easily applied by others due to the
specialized expertise and resources needed to understand, develop, share, adapt,
test, deploy, and run the resulting ML/AI models. To overcome these barriers to
progress, this project seeks to develop methods and tools for constructing and
creating Model Gardens, collections of curated and tested ML/AI models linked
with the data and computing resources required to advance the work of a specific
research community. Such new methods, software, and tools can make it simple for
model producers to publish models in forms that are easily consumed by others,
and for model consumers to discover published models and integrate them into
their applications in academia or industry. The project connects researchers in
materials science, physics, and chemistry enabling the establishment of Model
Gardens for their communities and empowering key research centers to collect and
provide broad access to new methods and models resulting from their work.
Further, the project facilitates the connection of aspiring researchers with
scientific problems, engaging hundreds of students from diverse backgrounds
(including rural community college partners) in learning and contributing to
software development, model publication, development of new AI/ML applications,
and training of a next-generation ML/AI-empowered workforce through hosted
workshops, open office hours, and development of a new engagement
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project overcomes the barriers to the
dissemination and application of new ML/AI methods by creating a new CSSI
frameworkâ€”the Garden Framework to support the construction and operation of
Model Gardens: collections of curated models linked with the data and computing
resources required to advance the work of specific communities. By reducing the
friction associated with model publication, discovery, access, and deployment;
providing for the disciplined and structured organization and linking of data,
models, and code; associating appropriate metadata with models to promote reuse
and discoverability, and applying quality assessment measures (e.g., automated
testing, uncertainty quantification) to support model comparison; supporting the
development of communities around specific model classes and research
challenges; and permitting easy access to models without (and with) download and
installation, established Model Gardens reduce barriers to the use of ML/AI
methods and promote the nucleation of communities around specific datasets,
methods, and models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.