* 2209401
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* CLARA WILLIAMS, WILLIAMS, CLARA
* Fellowship Award
* Kan Wang
* 12/31/2025
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2022. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Dr. Clara Williams is “Coordinated epigenetic changes during regeneration of
callus using tomato as a model species.” The host institution for the fellowship
is the University of California Berkeley and the sponsoring scientists are Dr.
Ben Williams and Dr. Siobhan Brady.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global food insecurity
is a pressing issue that humans face due to an increasing population and is
further exacerbated by climate change and war leading to disrupted and reduced
supplies. A vast majority of plant improvement efforts involve the propagation
of elite cultivars via tissue culture— regardless of whether they were generated
by traditional breeding or genetically modified. Yet, the regeneration of organs
and whole plants from tissue culture remains the crux of plant engineering,
propagation, and breeding. The research addresses this issue using tomato— the
most consumed fruit in the world— as a model species. It will investigate how
plants propagated from the same clone can accumulate genetic differences from
the parental plant, thereby altering desirable traits. Furthermore, the research
aims to elucidate how genetically similar species can possess remarkably
different regeneration capacities. To solve this, the project seeks to determine
the genes and protein modifications that enable plasticity under different
stages of the regenerative process. Additionally, the research seeks to identify
underlying heritable non-genetic differences in the DNA of several tomato
varieties and species that help to determine the respective disparities in their
regenerative capacity. Once these differences are determined it will shed light
on specific mechanisms that hinder or improve the propagation of plants in
tissue culture. Unlocking the ability to regenerate a wider variety of plant
cultivars and species would therefore provide a much-needed boost to our ability
to improve and innovate crops to meet global challenges. The PI will mentor high
school students in the Bay Area, through the program Oakland Serves, providing a
positive influence on students to enter and continue with their education in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While regeneration is usually feasible, the capacity
for callus to initiate the growth of new organs and regenerate is strongly
influenced by the species, genotype, tissue, and culture conditions. Most recent
advances that enhance the regeneration of recalcitrant plants have focused on
altering the composition of growth media or ectopic expression of developmental
regulators. However, the precise role of epigenetic information—chemical
modifications to DNA or histones that alter gene expression but not the genomic
sequence—on regeneration is less understood. To address this, the research will
profile how transcriptional expression is driven by changes in chromatin
accessibility in cultivated tomato, its wild predecessor, Solanum
pimpinellifolium, and a recalcitrant species, Solanum hirsutum. It will also
uncover how DNA damage proliferates during regeneration, a likely cause of
somaclonal variation using the in situ DNA-protein complex assay CUT&amp;RUN.
The project will generate comprehensive and publicly accessible data sets—on
NCBI Sequence Read Archive— profiling DNA damage, chromatin accessibility, and
gene expression during regeneration in the commercially relevant crop tomato.
These data sets can be used to understand the temporal and spatial regulation of
the chromatin landscape during regeneration in a lineage that possesses both
capable regenerators and recalcitrant strains. This will shed light on the
effects epigenetic regulation of the genome has on the generation of
transgenics, which may be generally applied to all
eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.