* 2209857
* Collaborative Research: Elements: GPU-accelerated First-Principles Simulation of Exciton Dynamics in Complex Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Andre Schleife, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The development of societally-important energy harvesting approaches, such as
photocatalysis or photovoltaics, requires detailed understanding of fast
dynamics of electrons coupled with ions in novel materials. Modern
supercomputers can help obtain such an understanding using sophisticated
quantum-mechanical simulations. However, such a scientific effort requires
accurate simulation techniques to be developed and efficient use of the
underlying supercomputer hardware is crucial. This project meets these
outstanding challenges by implementing novel techniques to describe the quantum-
mechanical electron-electron interaction and interactions of electron dynamics
with ions. Using and testing these new developments on graphical processing
units advances science as it prepares quantum-mechanical simulations for next-
generation supercomputers. Applying these advanced simulations to model complex
systems of great importance for energy harvesting furthers the computational
science community towards the goal of advancing national prosperity and welfare.
The project makes these techniques freely available for a broad community,
including documentation and tutorials, and trains the next generation of
computational researchers through organizing summer schools and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages a multi-organizational
team to benefit from synergies that emerge from two possible solutions to
current scientific barriers: Descriptions of exchange and correlation based on a
long-range correction and on hybrid functionals that can scale favorably even
for large systems with thousands of electrons are implemented and applied.
Descriptions of non-adiabatic dynamics are implemented and applied to study
long-term dynamics of excitons during which the interaction with the nuclei
becomes important. Doing so within a cutting-edge electronic-structure code that
runs efficiently on graphics processing units, provides a unique opportunity to
compare accuracy, applicability to a broad range of systems, and computational
cost. Knowledge on the reliability of these approximations and their
computational cost for extended systems of practical relevance, including
complex heterogeneous systems like semiconductor-molecule interfaces, are
advanced by this research. The efforts include building, increasing, and growing
a skilled community especially of US based researchers in a recurrent summer
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal receives funds through the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Computer and Information Science and
Engineering Directorate and the Division of Materials Research in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.