* 2209500
* Zwitterion-Decorated Silica Nanoparticle Networks in Ionic Liquid Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Matthew Panzer, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2025
* USD 369,350.00

Part 1: Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Safe, reliable batteries are
critically needed for future mobile devices and wearable electronics. Both
lithium and sodium ion-based batteries can provide high operating voltages and
large energy densities, but many of the ion-transporting electrolyte materials
used today are flammable and may present a safety hazard if the battery fails. A
class of room temperature molten salts, known as ionic liquids, can eliminate
flammability concerns, but a fundamental challenge remains in how to promote the
selective motion of the targeted cations (Li+, Na+) over that of the other ions
also present in the electrolyte. This project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program and the Polymer program in the Division of Materials
Research at NSF, aims to address this challenge by creating inorganic oxide
materials that are coated with zwitterionic chemical groups. Zwitterionic groups
contain an equal number of both positively- and negatively-charged atoms,
separated by a distance of just a few bond lengths, which are known to interact
strongly with electrolyte ions as well as with one another. This project tests
the hypothesis that zwitterion-decorated oxide nanoparticle networks can
selectively enhance Li+ and Na+ transport in ionic liquid-based electrolytes.
The research generate needed insights into the design of safer future battery
electrolytes and reveal new fundamental information about zwitterion-ion
interactions in nonaqueous, ion-dense electrolytes. A new K-12 outreach activity
is also developed as part of this project. The activity will inform pre-college
students about future energy storage technologies, connect them to the research
findings of this study, and foster their interest in pursuing a career in
science or engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:
Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project is
to selectively enhance the transport of Li+ and Na+ ions within ionic liquid
electrolytes using organic zwitterionic (ZI) functional group-decorated silica
nanostructured networks. Two different manifestations of this unique materials
class will be pursued: (1) ZI group-decorated oxide nanoparticles (ZIONs), and
(2) ZI group-functionalized mesoporous oxide networks (zwitterionosilicas). A
key hypothesis of this study is that ZI group-functionalized silica
nanostructures assembled into a continuous three-dimensional network within an
ionic liquid electrolyte can enable a substantial improvement in selective
alkali metal cation transport (Li+ or Na+) compared to that in the liquid
electrolyte itself, while also creating a robust composite gel electrolyte layer
that can prevent leakage. By spatially defining the region of ZI group/alkali
metal cation interaction to be located along the exposed surfaces of the ZIONs
or zwitterionosilicas, it is posited that this approach can effectively maximize
the ability of ZI units to enhance Li+/Na+ conductivity within these inherently
safer electrolytes. This project, funded by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program and the Polymer program in the Division of Materials Research
at NSF, encompasses the synthesis of ZIONs and zwitterionosilicas featuring
different ZI chemistries and the measurement of relevant ion transport metrics
for their combinations with ionic liquid electrolytes. Additionally, the work
provides mentored undergraduate and graduate research experiences for a diverse
group of students, supporting their goals of future employment in U.S.
industrial research and development, academia, and national
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.