* 2209011
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Evolution of Drosophila wing spot: mechanisms of phenotypic divergence
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Erick Bayala, Bayala, Erick Xavier
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The Fellow
aims to understand how animal pigmentation patterns are generated in nature—from
the colored scales in butterfly wings to the stripes on the fur of mammals. This
research in animal coloration will provide more information about the genes
regulating pigmentation patterns. In this project, an insect, Drosophila, one of
the most genetically tractable systems for understanding animal pigmentation,
will be used to analyze how specific genes generate color patterns and how the
genes themselves are controlled and organized into functional processes. The
broader impacts of this project include creating a Hispanic and Latino open
online forum for Postdoctoral researchers and early Faculty across multiple
Institutions in the Midwest. This will fill a gap by providing a supportive
community for recruitment and retention to counter the “leaky pipeline” and
enhance representation in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Project will use
melanin patterns on fly wings from the genus Drosophila as a system for
understanding how pigment patterns develop and evolve. Some of the better-
understood genes involved in fly wing pigmentation include yellow (controls
black melanin) and ebony (promotes a yellow pigment). Recently, genetic mapping
has shown that the primary switch between the presence and absence of a male-
specific wing spot in some fly species is not controlled by either of these
genes but instead appears to be controlled by a gene called optomotor-blind
(omb). Given that this transcription factor controls pigmentation in other parts
of the fly body, the Fellow aims to elucidate when and where this gene is
expressed in wings. The fellow will also determine whether omb is sufficient to
guide the formation of the melanic spot or if other components are required.
This project will support the scientific development of the Fellow by providing
opportunities for developing new experimental skills in a genetic model system,
which complements previous work in non-models, supporting the Fellow’s
aspirations to become a Professor. The Fellow will also create online resources
to promote professional development of other scientists from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.