* 2209920
* Collaborative Research: Sustainability: A Community-Centered Approach for Supporting and Sustaining Parsl
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Daniel Katz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 240,000.00

Modern research computing requires orchestration of complex computational
workflows across diverse research computing infrastructure. To meet this
requirement, Parsl, an open source software package, enables scientists and
engineers to parallelize Python programs and run them scalably and efficiently
on small to very large local and remote resources (e.g., laptops, clusters,
clouds, and supercomputers), while also moving data as needed. Parsl effectively
democratizes access to NSF's increasingly broad and powerful cyberinfrastructure
resources by enabling researchers to work in the familiar and productive Python
programming language and environment while also allowing them to easily scale
and distribute their work to fully use today's cutting-edge cyberinfrastructure.
Parsl is a key tool used by researchers to tackle some of the world's most
significant challenges: from understanding the beginning of the universe to
exploring an enormous molecular search space to identify viable therapeutics.
This project is laying the foundation for the sustainability of this crucial
tool, enabling new long-term science advances and thereby benefiting society.
Participation in several education programs is exposing a diverse group of
students to the increasingly important area of parallel and distributed
computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is transitioning Parsl to a
community-governed and community-supported open source project, with future
income to be managed by a nonprofit organization under the direction of an
elected Parsl Coordination Committee. The project is delivering a sustainable
Parsl community by a) targeted technical activities that reduce costs and
barriers for contribution, reducing future maintenance costs; b) building the
Parsl community via outreach, engagement, and education programs, increasing
potential future contributors; and c) establishing pathways and incentives to
convert users to contributors and contributors to leaders, growing the next
generation of the community. The project takes a data-driven approach by
measuring effort and funding across the project to reveal insights about where
effort is spent, how it is supported, and how these factors can be balanced. The
lessons learned in this project are being converted to a blueprint for similar
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.