* 2209043
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Biogeography and community assembly of North American Carboniferous ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Benjamin Otoo, Otoo, Benjamin K
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 02/28/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This project
will investigate the time in Earth’s history when forests first appeared, and
tetrapods (limbed vertebrates) originated and diversified into the ancestors of
living land animals. Using the fossil record and approaches including anatomy,
geology, and ecology the fellow will analyze the ancient origins of modern land
ecosystems, to determine how ecosystems respond to changes in environment and
biodiversity. It is important to understand the history of life on Earth up to
the present, as this knowledge will inform how to become better stewards of the
natural and built environments. The fellow will increase the diversity of
paleontology and earth sciences and serve as a role model and mentor for
students from underrepresented groups. Public outreach events will further
broaden the impact of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Tetrapods originated
in the Late Devonian approximately 370 million years ago. By 30 million years
ago, in the Early Carboniferous, they had expanded beyond the obligately
aquatic, fish-like Devonian forms into a great range of body forms, sizes, and
both aquatic and terrestrial modes of life, spanning both the lissamphibian and
amniote total groups. The increasing diversity of terrestrial tetrapods
throughout the Carboniferous and into the Permian has been characterized as a
transition from ‘primitive’ food webs dependent on aquatic activity to ‘modern’,
wholly land-based communities. However, this hypothesis is based on assumptions
of a linear, adaptive process of tetrapod terrestrialization which is
increasingly challenged by fossil data, and the continental structure during the
Devonian-Carboniferous period. This study will combine anatomical description of
fossils, geological and geographic data, and comparative food web modeling to
investigate the process and context of tetrapod terrestrialization. The fellow
will be trained in the conduct of fieldwork and the use of comparative
paleoecological methods. Findings will be shared at scientific conferences,
through publication in open-access journals, and with the broader public via
community outreach events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.