* 2209695
* Collaborative Research:CPS:Medium:SMAC-FIRE: Closed-Loop Sensing, Modeling and Communications for WildFIRE
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Arnold Swindlehurst, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,049,087.00

Increases in temperatures and drought duration and intensity due to climate
change, together with the expansion of wildlife-urban interfaces, has
dramatically increased the frequency and intensity of forest fires, and has had
devastating effects on lives, property, and the environment. To address this
challenge, this project’s goal is to design a network of airborne drones and
wireless sensors that can aid in initial wildfire localization and mapping,
near-term prediction of fire progression, and providing communications support
for firefighting personnel on the ground. Two key aspects differentiate the
system from prior work: (1) It leverages and subsequently updates detailed
three-dimensional models of the environment, including the effects of fuel type
and moisture state, terrain, and atmospheric/wind conditions, in order to
provide the most timely and accurate predictions of fire behavior possible, and
(2) It adapts to hazardous and rapidly changing conditions, optimally balancing
the need for wide-area coverage and maintaining communication links with
personnel in remote locations. The science and engineering developed under this
project can be adapted to many applications beyond wildfires including
structural fires in urban and suburban settings, natural or man-made emergencies
involving radiation or airborne chemical leaks, "dirty bombs" that release
chemical or biological agents, or tracking highly localized atmospheric
conditions surrounding imminent or on-going extreme weather
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system developed under this project will enable
more rapid localization and situational awareness of wildfires at their earliest
stages, better predictions of both local, near-term and event-scale behavior,
better situational awareness and coordination of personnel and resources, and
increased safety for fire fighters on the ground. Models ranging from simple
algebraic relationships based on wind velocity to more complex time-dependent
coupled fluid dynamics-fire physics models will be used to anticipate fire
behavior. These models are hampered by stochastic processes such as the lofting
of burning embers to ignite new fires, that cause errors to grow rapidly with
time. This project is focused on closing the loop using sensor data provided by
airborne drones and ground-based sensors (GBS). The models inform the sensing by
anticipating rapid growth of problematic phenomena, and the subsequent sensing
updates the models, providing local wind and spot fire locations. Closing this
loop as quickly as possible is critical to mitigating the fire’s impact. The
system we propose integrates advanced fire modeling tools with mobile drones,
wireless GBS, and high-level human interaction for both the initial attack of a
wildfire event and subsequent on-going support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.