* 2209866
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: DeCODER (Democratized Cyberinfrastructure for Open Discovery to Enable Research)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Robert Thomas, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 510,004.00

Scientific research in most scientific fields today involves significant amounts
of data as well as software to operate on that data. Furthermore, research
increasingly requires data from across a number of sources, perhaps even fields.
This is a significant challenge for the scientific community, and better
solutions are needed in order to enable new discoveries and accelerate the
societal impacts from those discoveries. The approach in this project is to
follow in the footsteps of the web and it aims to standardize how scientific
data is described, allowing for tools addressing the above challenges, such as
search engines for scientific data that not only support discoverability but
also facilitate the usage of the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DeCODER project
will expand and extend the successful EarthCube GeoCODES platform and community
to unify data and tool description and re-use across geoscience domains.
Building on the NSF CIF21 vision, the EarthCube program was formed to address
the technological challenges surrounding data and software within the
geosciences. Through extensive interaction with the community this culminated in
two key activities around data discovery and reuse. First, the promotion,
refinement, and adoption of schema.org to annotate geosciences metadata within
distributed repositories so that datasets can be crawled. Second, the promotion
and support for the adoption of notebooks to document, share, and reuse software
as peer reviewed scholarly objects. A rallying point around these activities was
the GeoCODES platform, which allows communities to stand up instances of
scientific search engines specific to their domains, while building a community
of geoscience data users and developers and, ultimately, reducing the time to
science. This project will leverage this effort in the DeCODER platform to
enable similar activities and outcomes across scientific communities. This work
will continue the endeavor to support the scientific community in the adoption
of schema.org and notebooks, facilitating this by providing DeCODER as an open
source resource that can be customized by a given scientific community to create
lightweight scientific gateways that bring together relevant distributed
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.