* 2209639
* Elements: Scalable and Automated Atomic Portal - Bridging the Gap Between Research Codes and User Community
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Rudolf Eigenmann, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

In a number of present applications, ranging from studies of fundamental
interactions to the development of future technologies, accurate atomic theory
is indispensable to the design and interpretation of experiments, with direct
experimental measurement of relevant parameters being impossible or infeasible.
These data are also in high demand by broader atomic, plasma, astrophysics, and
nuclear physics communities. The need for high-precision atomic modeling has
increased significantly in recent years with the development of atomic-base
quantum technologies for a wide range of fundamental and practical applications.
Starting from the prototype codes developed by our group, we will develop open-
access atomic software with a user-friendly interface capable of calculating a
large volume of high-quality atomic data for various atoms and ions. We will
develop a scalable and automated data portal with a convenient interface that
will allow for easy addition of data for new elements and updates of data
already provided by the portal. Beyond the immediate research and
cyberinfrastructure aims of the proposed effort, this project will impact
student learning, the broader knowledge base of atomic physicists, the
productivity of the larger science community, and the competitiveness of the
private sector in atomic physics engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to bridge the gap between the development of atomic physics research codes
and the need for data and software by the user community. Further rapid advances
in applications involving complex atoms will require accurate knowledge of basic
atomic properties, most of which remain highly uncertain and difficult to
measure experimentally. Moreover, the lack of a reliable theoretical framework
hinders the search for further applications of rich, complex atomic structures.
This project provides high-quality atomic data and software in several
scientific communities. To meet the needs of the community, we will (1) develop
a scalable and sustainable online data portal with an automated interface for
easy update and addition of new data, (2) continue the development of open-
access atomic software based on our research codes that allow generating large
volumes of data with automated accuracy assessments. The portal will provide
energies, wavelengths, transition matrix elements, and rates for various
transition types, branching ratios, lifetimes, polarizabilities, hyperfine
constants, and other data. We plan to make data for over 100 atoms and ions,
including high-charged ions, available for the user community by the end of this
project. Significant scaling of the portal will require a new level of both
atomic code and portal automatization. The new interface will allow easy
addition of data for new elements and updates of data already provided by the
portal by the physics team of the PI and collaborators to ensure that the portal
is sustainable beyond the funding period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Physics at
the Information Frontier in the Division of Physics within the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.