* 2209190
* Large-scale CoPe: Coastal Hazards, Equity, Economic prosperity, and Resilience (CHEER)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Sarah DeYoung, University of Delaware
* Cooperative Agreement
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2027
* USD 10,750,000.00

Community resilience remains challenging to achieve in practice in part due to
constraints imposed by the parallel, and sometimes competing, objectives of
equity and economic prosperity, particularly in the context of climate change.
To address this challenge, the Hub research goals are to: (1) Identify, explain,
and quantify interactions and tradeoffs among the coastal community goals of
equity, economic prosperity, and resilience to hazards; (2) Develop methods to
model long-term hurricane hazards that account for climate change and integrate
multiple hazards—wind, rain, storm surge, waves; and (3) Develop a computational
framework to design and evaluate policy interventions that can achieve
sustainable equity, economic prosperity, and coastal resilience in the context
of climate change. The new dynamic and spatial computational framework will
consist of seven interacting modules describing the interactive decision-making
of three stakeholder types--(1) households, (2) insurers, and (3) three levels
of government; and the natural, built, and economic environments in which those
decisions are made—(4) hazards, (5) damage/loss, (6) buildings, and (7) economy.
The framework results will include: (a) recommended government policies designed
with an awareness of how insurers and households are likely to respond; (b)
outcomes for each stakeholder type including uncertainty and heterogeneity
within them; and (c) based on those stakeholder-specific outcomes, assessments
of community equity, economic prosperity, and resilience over time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hub research will focus on three case study
areas—Eastern North Carolina; Port Arthur, TX; and Houston, TX. The
computational framework will serve as the basis of a decision support tool,
which will propel implementation of coastal resilience forward by addressing
impediments that interactions with equity, economic prosperity, and climate
change create, and capitalizing on the opportunities they present. Close
collaboration with practitioner and community partners will ensure the decision
tool is useful to practitioners and advances the interests of communities. Just
as the regional loss modeling framework provided a structure that has guided
research for decades, the Hub’s framework can facilitate future
interdisciplinary research that makes loss modeling dynamic and includes a rich
representation of decision-making embedded in the relevant social and economic
context. More specific disciplinary advances include understanding how wind,
rain, inland and coastal flooding hazards dynamically interact, including
potential impacts under future climate scenarios; developing an automated,
scalable method for creating a high resolution, detailed inventory of
residential buildings; enhancing understanding of hurricanes’ effects on
regional economies’ evolution; modeling interactions among levels of government;
operationalizing multiple concepts of equity and their implications; and
expanding understanding of renters’ and mobile home residents’ experiences with
risk and risk management. The Hub will implement a comprehensive, research-based
mentoring program, including quick response fieldwork training, and will broaden
participation of students through partnerships with the McNair Scholars Program
and Bill Anderson Fund, national organizations supporting graduate students from
underrepresented groups. The Hub will engage other researchers and the public
through development of discipline primers and DRC IT! modules; workshops within
the case study communities; and the HurriCon II conference. Partnerships with
SimCenter, DesignSafe-CI, and the Disaster Research Center will help ensure
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Coastlines &amp; People (CoPe) program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.