* 2209673
* IUCRC Planning Grant Old Dominion University: Center for Wireless Innovation towards Secure, Pervasive, Efficient and Resilient Next G Networks (WISPER)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,10/31/2022
* Hongyi Wu, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 10/31/2022
* USD 20,000.00

The proposed Center for Wireless Innovation towards Secure, Pervasive,
Efficient, and Resilient Next Generation Networks (WISPER) will coordinate
academia, industry, and government to pioneer transformative next generation
(NextG) wireless technologies for key industry verticals. Our missions include:
(1) growing the U.S. innovation capacity in the next-generation wireless
networks; (2) catalyzing breakthrough pre-competitive research for enabling
NextG wireless communications; (3) contributing to the emerging North American
vision for the next-generation wireless networks; (4) providing guidance to
standardization bodies and cooperation partners; and (5) producing a workforce
prepared to tackle complex next-generation wireless
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WISPER will focus on developing transformative
wireless innovations. Areas of research include but are not limited to: (1)
exploration of new spectrum bands for the NextG wireless networks through a
holistic lens by considering performance, efficiency, resilience, and security
and privacy; (2) deep integration of artificial intelligence in wireless
networks; (3) softwarization and virtualization of NextG network
functionalities; (4) development of advanced solutions based on quantum and
blockchain technologies to support NextG wireless communications; (5)
demonstration of NextG wireless networks in diversified industrial applications;
and (6) development of an industry-guided workforce development program in the
context of next-generation wireless networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
WISPER Center will contribute significantly to the country's future
communication infrastructure, with broader impacts on diversity and inclusion,
workforce development, and technology transfer. A Diversity &amp; Inclusion
Committee will be formed to review the current diversity and inclusion profile
and develop specific measures and plans for inspiring the participation of
underrepresented groups. WISPER will prepare students to become proficient in
NextG techniques, leading to transformative changes in the state of wireless
workforce preparedness. WISPER will enable seamless integration of the center's
discoveries into NextG wireless systems, accelerating technology transfer,
enhancing the competence of the industrial members, and contributing to the
Nation's leadership in NextG technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All data,
software, and artifacts produced in this project will be archived and preserved,
according to standard institutional security and privacy practices and policies,
for at least five years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.