* 2209329
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: How will climate change influence how endophytes decompose plant litter?
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Austen Apigo, Apigo, Austen
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Predicting how
carbon moves through ecosystems is a major challenge in the face of global
climate change. These predictions are dependent on understanding how changes in
climate influence the microbial communities that release carbon from decomposing
plant litter. Studies on plant litter decomposition tend to focus on fungi that
live freely in the soil because they are known to produce enzymes that breakdown
plant cell walls. Yet mounting evidence suggests that fungal endophytes (fungi
living inside plants) can also significantly decompose plant litter. This
project seeks to understand how changes in climate, the fungal endophyte
community and the chemical composition of plant litter influences litter
decomposition rate. Findings from this study will illuminate how fungal
endophytes affect the movement of carbon at the scale of whole ecosystems. The
fellow will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups through data
science workshops and will engage with local middle school students through an
interactive climate change curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fungal endophyte
communities will be reciprocally transplanted between environments that are
either hot and dry or cold and wet to understand how changes in climate
influence litter decomposition by fungal endophytes over the course of one year.
This project will test three hypotheses that predict how (1) climate, (2) the
fungal endophyte community and (3) their interaction influence litter mass loss,
a measure of decomposition, by leveraging high-throughput molecular methods. To
do this, climatic variables (precipitation, temperature) and features of the
fungal endophyte community (biomass, species composition, enzyme activity, gene
expression) will be correlated to the loss of litter mass or specific carbon
compounds to identify the factors that best explain differences in litter
decomposition rate across a climate gradient. This project will identify the
genetic, ecological or biogeochemical factors that govern how fungal endophytes
- ubiquitous symbionts of the plant kingdom - decompose plant litter and
contribute to the terrestrial carbon cycle. The fellow will receive mentoring
related to the characterization of fungal endophyte gene expression and litter
chemistry through the sponsoring scientists as well as facilitate the broader
participation of underrepresented groups through mentorship, workshops and
climate science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.