* 2209024
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: Mechanisms of phenotypic novelty: biomechanical, sensory, and genetic drivers of ongoing rapid evolution in cricket song
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Jason Dinh, Dinh, Jason P
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/28/2026
* USD 0.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Animals have evolved behaviors and
morphologies to attract mates. These traits are often extreme and elaborate,
from deer horns and beetle tusks to bird songs and spider dances. Yet, it is not
entirely clear how these traits emerge and diversify. This project will leverage
a rapidly evolving mate-attraction signal in crickets to understand the physics,
physiology, and evolution of these traits. This study will provide novel and
pressing insight into how some of nature’s most charismatic traits evolve in
real time. The fellow will amplify their societal impact by developing evolution
games for K-12 classrooms, mentoring undergraduates and high schoolers from
underrepresented groups, and establishing digital infrastructure for scientists
to transparently and equitably recruit undergraduate researchers at the
University of Denver. This will promote equity in STEM by reducing the social
capital required to attain undergraduate research
positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will integrate computational and
experimental tools to elucidate the mechanisms and mechanics of signal evolution
in the Hawaiian field cricket, Teleogryllus oceanicus. Field crickets sing
intense pure-tone songs. In Hawaiian populations, a lethal parasitoid fly (Ormia
ochracea) eavesdrops on singing male crickets, imposing a massive fitness cost.
This push-and-pull of naturally selected costs (parasitism) and mating selected
benefits have driven the evolution of novel signals that allow covert
communication. Indeed, within the last few years, a novel purring cricket morph
evolved that attracts female conspecifics but not parasitoid flies. The fellow
will 1) perform artificial selection experiments to quantify the genetic
architecture of song structure and female preference, 2) build finite element
models to determine how acoustic biomechanics generate novel song features, 3)
perform physiological assays to test sensory capabilities in females and
parasites, and 4) build agent-based models to test how songs evolve as different
selection pressures vary. The fellow will receive training from experts in
evolutionary biology, psychoacoustics, and biophysics from the University of
Denver, St. Olaf College, and the University of Western Ontario (Canada). The
fellow will also develop K-12 educational tools, mentor high school and
undergraduate research, and establish lasting infrastructure to promote equity
and transparency in undergraduate research opportunities at the University of
Denver.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.