* 2209320
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Evaluate how the spatial distribution of discrete genetic patterns influences ancestry estimation in spatial and nonspatial methods
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Leonard Jones, Jones, Leonard N
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. This research
will evaluate the performance of methods for estimating ancestry using a
nontraditional animal system, garter snakes. The research will investigate how
genetic variation within species can change across space and complicate ancestry
estimation. The last two decades have seen rapid advances in human genomics, the
rise of the commercial genealogy industry, and a reassessment of global human
diversity and migration history. This project will contribute to the general
understanding of evolutionary principles and their applications across the tree
of life. The broader impacts of the project include developing a foundation to
teach broader audiences the complexity of population identification in light of
the social consequences of categorization and workshops designed for scientists
to increase knowledge of computational and statistical analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding population structure requires disentangling
patterns of continuous variation across space from discrete population
structure, which can be caused by any combination of demography, introgression,
and natural selection. Only recently have ancestry estimation methods begun to
jointly consider these two patterns. However, their behavior in complex
scenarios, in particular in response to underlying phylogenetic structure and/or
genetic contribution from unsampled lineages, is unclear. Using simulated and
high-throughput sequence data generated from three sympatric hybridizing garter
snakes (Thamnophis) with different distributions, the Fellow will assess how the
spatial extent of discrete genetic patterns across space influence ancestry
estimation in spatial and nonspatial methods. The Fellow will also extend
spatial modeling to jointly infer phylogenetic structure and ancestry amidst
continuous variation, therefore advancing methodological tools for the field.
The data generated will be amenable to questions beyond the scope of this
project and population genetics, making the products of this work valuable to
multiple disciplines in biology. The Fellow will use a background in teaching
and outreach to disseminate the research to broad audiences. The Fellow will
also explore the broad implications of public understanding of population
genetics across axes of social importance by developing teaching tools that both
increase racial representation in biology, and directly address the racist
legacies of the discipline. Furthermore, the Fellow will bridge the gap between
theory and application in population genetics by developing conference workshops
that cater to researchers without robust backgrounds in computational and
statistical analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.