* 2209563
* OAC Core: Scalable Graph ML on Distributed Heterogeneous Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Viktor Prasanna, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2025
* USD 599,727.00

Methods that employ graph machine learning (Graph ML), which is a sub-discipline
within machine learning that deals with graph data, are becoming important in
many key science and engineering domains. For example, the predictive power of
graph embedding has been effectively utilized in domains such as social media,
biology, pharmacology, and knowledge understanding. However, such methods
typically come with an expensive computational footprint, as the computations
often need to be performed in real-time on very large and highly heterogeneous
static and dynamic graphs with billions of vertices and edges of different
types. This project aims at conducting multi-pronged research to enable creation
of a cyberinfrastructure (CI) toolkit to run such complex Graph ML applications
on emerging heterogeneous distributed systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to develop high-performance Graph ML algorithms for
key graph workflows spanning multiple scientific and engineering domains
targeting distributed heterogeneous systems composed of multi-core processors,
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs), Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs),
accelerators and high bandwidth memory interconnected with cache coherent
interfaces. The project develops a scalable, deployable, and robust CI toolkit
consisting of: (1) novel graph sampling algorithms and efficient Graph ML models
for low complexity training and inference computation on static and dynamic
graphs; (2) a heterogeneity-aware hardware mapping methodology to accelerate
these algorithms and models; and (3) software and hardware libraries for
automatic design generation. The project develops proof of concept software for
the ML and Data Science communities to facilitate end-to-end deployment of
various large-scale applications. Given that graph neural networks are
increasingly becoming an important tool for analyzing data in many diverse
domains, the outcomes of this project will have a strong impact across a broad
range of disciplines, including domains that rely on edge computing, such as
autonomous vehicles and smart cities. The project has a robust plan to integrate
research into education programs and focuses on activities that promote
involvement of students from minority and economically disadvantaged backgrounds
into the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.