* 2209298
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: Defining the biochemical mechanisms of microtubule shrinking and nucleation by combining innovative experiments and simulations
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Lauren McCormick, Ammerman, Lauren
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Most cells grow, remodel and divide using the
cytoskeleton – a network of protein that function as a kind of scaffolding that
gives shape and structure to the cell interior. A critical aspect of the
cytoskeleton are small protein subunits called microtubules. Despite decades of
study, many aspects of microtubule function and behavior are poorly understood.
The Fellow will combine wet lab experiments with computational simulations to
determine how new microtubules form, and how existing microtubules shrink (two
behaviors critical for microtubule function). This award also supports the
development of a local scientific outreach
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microtubule shrinking and spontaneous assembly
(‘nucleation’) rates ultimately derive from the structural and biochemical
properties of αβ-tubulin subunits. It remains challenging to determine how
interactions between subunits less than 10 nm long determine microtubule
assembly dynamics on the μm scale. This uncertainty limits mechanistic
understanding of how microtubule behavior can change between cells in the same
organism, between different species, and even across taxa. To investigate how
microtubules shrink, the Fellow will use pioneering measurements of mixed
mutant-wild type microtubules complemented by kinetic Monte Carlo simulations.
This hybrid computational-experimental approach will test hypotheses about
mechanisms of microtubule dynamics in ways that were not previously possible. To
understand how new microtubules form spontaneously, or ‘nucleate’, the Fellow
will create new codes to simulate microtubule nucleation from unpolymerized αβ-
tubulin. With these simulations, the Fellow will define the sequence of tubulin
oligomers that leads to a new microtubule, and how the sequence depends on
biochemical properties of αβ-tubulin. Training objectives include learning new
skills in advanced microscopy, computational simulations and protein work. To
broaden participation in science, the fellow will lead a microscope-based
outreach program with a local middle school that serves a diverse student
population. Lesson plans and materials will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.