* 2209124
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Kyle Swentowsky, Swentowsky, Kyle W
* Fellowship Award
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 06/30/2025
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2022. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Dr. Kyle Swentowsky is “Developmental genetics and genomics of perennial
regrowth in Zea diploperennis”. The host institution for the fellowship is Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory and the sponsoring scientist is Dr. David
Jackson.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All plants are classified as either “annuals” that
live for only one year or “perennials” that can live for many. Staple crops such
as corn (maize), wheat, and rice are cultivated as annuals and are replanted
from seed each year. Perennials, however, recycle their energy and nutrients for
multiple growing seasons to achieve sustainable, long-term growth. Compared to
annuals, perennial plants tend to develop larger and deeper root systems during
multiple years of growth, which allow them to access more water and nutrients in
the soil. The development of perennial versions of existing crop species has the
potential to combat challenges American farmers face due to climate change.
Plant breeders have attempted to generate perennial maize lines but have so far
been unsuccessful. Careful analysis of the perennial life cycle has not yet been
performed in grass species, and a detailed understanding of this biological
process will greatly assist perennial breeding efforts. The goal of this project
is to study how a perennial species closely related to maize achieves a
perennial life cycle. This will include a description of how some plant organs
can remain dormant during the initial growth cycle and become re-activated to
achieve perenniality. Discovering how some grass species maintain a perennial
life cycle can help us develop perennial versions of existing cereal crops such
as corn, wheat, rice, and sorghum that can be grown as sustainable options to
combat the difficult growth conditions posed by climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perennial plants can regrow for multiple years and
perennial crops are efficient sustainable agriculture systems. Some progress has
been made in breeding perennial cereal crops but breeding perennial maize has
been largely unsuccessful due to our poor understanding of genes and
developmental mechanisms that control perenniality. Regrowth occurs in grasses
when dormant axillary buds become active and although this general process has
been well-studied in annual species, it is unclear how perennials coordinate
regrowth with other life cycle events. In this project, the close maize
perennial relative, Zea diploperennis, will be used to investigate how
phytohormone, sugar, flowering, and plant age signaling pathways impact
perennial regrowth. This system will be used to test the hypothesis that: (1)
the maintenance of Z. diploperennis tiller buds in a juvenile and non-flowering
state is necessary for perennial regrowth; and (2) dormant tiller buds become
reactivated through phytohormone or carbohydrate signaling after flowering to
begin the next cycle of perennial growth. Mechanisms of perennial regrowth will
be studied using state of the art imaging, genetics, and single-cell RNA-
sequencing techniques. Additionally, a previously identified QTL that controls
regrowth will be fine-mapped to identify candidate perennial genes. All
sequencing data will be deposited into the public NCBI Sequence Read Archive
(SRA; https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra) and seeds generated during this project
will be made publicly available via the Maize Genetics Cooperation Stock Center
(http://maizecoop.cropsci.uiuc.edu/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.