* 2209583
* Operation of the Telescope Array Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Charles Jui, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

The Telescope Array (TA) Observatory is the largest detector of ultra-high
energy cosmic rays (UHECRs) in the Northern Hemisphere. An upgrade to the
observatory (TAx4) is currently underway that will double the number of deployed
surface detectors (SD) over an increased total instrumented area of
approximately 1800 square-km. An array of florescence detectors (FDs) overlooks
this SD array, providing important additional information on the detected
events. This award supports the cosmic ray physics group at the University of
Utah in operating the TA Observatory complex. The award supports the team,
including managerial, engineering and technical staff, who have sole
responsibility for facility maintenance, staffing observing shifts and handling
data, and maintaining compliance with Bureau of Land Management land use
regulations. The observatory supports auxiliary and test experiments, including
recently hosting a lightning mapping array, and a public education and outreach
program coordinated through the ASPIRE project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TA data
analyses have identified a “hotspot” of UHECRs above 57 EeV in the northern sky
at 3.5 sigma significance. The observatory has also seen indications of
differences in the cosmic ray spectral shape when comparing events within the
hotspot region to those outside, as well as an apparent declination dependence
of the spectrum at the highest energies. The source of the hotspot, however,
remains unknown. Inconsistencies between the measurements of TA and the Pierre
Auger Observatory, the largest UHECR detector in the southern hemisphere, are
also apparent at the highest energies, including in the studies of the width and
shape of the Xmax distributions. The additional data collected with the
operation of the TAx4 upgrade, combined with the energy calibrations of the
recently installed FDs, will improve the sensitivity of the instrument toward
resolving these important open questions in our understanding of the highest
energy particles in the Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.