* 2209533
* WoU-MMA: Understanding the Strongest Accelerators in our Galaxy by Combining Data from the HAWC Observatory and Other Instruments
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Petra Huentemeyer, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2025
* USD 590,584.00

Observations of astrophysical gamma-rays, the highest energy form of
electromagnetic radiation, provide the ability to study the conditions and
processes in the most extreme astrophysical environments in the Universe. The
High Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC) observatory, located in the Sierra Negra in
Mexico, provides a unique view on gamma-ray emission from hundreds of GeV to
beyond 100 TeV. This award supports scientists at Michigan Technological
University performing research with HAWC. Analyses of the HAWC data will be used
to improve the understanding of cosmic ray acceleration and transport by tracing
the interactions with matter and radiation fields in the Universe that produce
gamma-rays. The team will participate in education and outreach activities,
including developing a Research Experience for Teachers program that will create
lesson plans for gamma-ray and multi-messenger astronomy for use in high school
and community college classrooms and summer youth programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HAWC observatory provides a unique view of the gamma-
ray sky, with a nearly 100% duty cycle and an instantaneous field-of-view of
about 2 steradians. With realized improvements in the sensitivity, and the image
and energy resolution of the observatory, HAWC has measured the most extensive
TeV-scale gamma-ray dataset of the northern hemisphere sky. Employing state-of-
the-art statistical methods and combining data from the observatory with multi-
messenger data has the potential to significantly improve our understanding of
extreme sources of cosmic ray origin, acceleration, and transport. At the same
time, enhancing the accessibility of HAWC data to the multi-messenger community
maximizes the science return, in particular in studies of a number of source
classes including star forming regions, supernova remnants, pulsar wind nebulae,
and binary systems. This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the
Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.