* 2209616
* IUCRC Planning Grant, Oakland University: Center for Industrial Metal Forming (CIMF)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Sergey Golovashchenko, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 06/30/2023
* USD 20,000.00

Metal forming processes are among the most efficient, economical and
environmentally-friendly high-volume manufacturing techniques, creating products
by re-shaping the input feedstock, with limited waste, and oftentimes at room
temperature. Approximately 5.8% of the U.S. GDP ($21.4 trillion in 2019) is tied
to industries such as automotive, aerospace, defense, materials, electronics and
biomedical, all extensively utilizing metal forming processes. Therefore, the
estimated economic impact of metal forming in the U.S. society is in the
hundreds of billion $. This award supports the planning phase of the proposed
Center for Industrial Metal Forming (CIMF). The mission of the Center, which is
comprised of Ohio State University (OSU), Oakland University (OU), North
Carolina State University (NCSU) and University of New Hampshire (UNH), is to
perform cutting-edge, pre-competitive fundamental research in metal forming
science and engineering and to create the next generation of industry experts.
CIMF will conduct industry-driven transformational research in novel bulk and
sheet forming processes; Integrated Computational Metal Forming (ICMF) and the
sciences that tie into it, such as plasticity and fracture; advanced equipment
and die technologies; and the application of sensors and the Industrial Internet
of Things (IIoT) in metal forming. This effort will necessitate an
interdisciplinary approach with experts from manufacturing engineering,
electrical engineering, materials science, numerical methods, data analytics and
experimental mechanics. Therefore, CIMF activities will create a highly-
competitive, diverse workforce to support the growth of U.S. industry and expand
manufacturing employment, while also contributing to the Nation’s supply chain
resilience and global market competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CIMF is
designed around integrating the core competencies of its four sites with the
industry needs identified during the extensive customer discovery. The
fundamental research at CIMF will be based on three pillars: 1) computational
and material enhancements in forming; 2) innovative forming processes; and 3)
equipment and die innovation. These pillars blend with the unique expertise of
each site: Integrated Computational Metal Forming (ICMF) for OSU; shearing
processes, IIoT in stamping and equipment and die innovation for OU; forging,
hybrid forming processes and tribology for NCSU; and material and process
modeling and flexible forming for UNH. Vertical, fundamental advances will be
achieved by employing innovative approaches in sheet metal/tube forming, forging
and extrusion processes, improving material formability, advancing methods for
virtual process design, and employing new die materials, coatings, lubricants
and metal forming equipment. Specifically, the industry-focused projects will
target process innovation (e.g., hydro-forging, flexible forming), forming
control based on IIoT, energy-efficient forming machines, enhanced performance
of Additively-Manufactured dies, etc. The results will be advancements in
material utilization, final part performance and weight reduction, industry-
friendly computational tools for process design, metal forming dies with
extended life and industrial metal forming processes of increased productivity,
across a range of advanced material systems and industries, e.g., automotive,
aerospace, and biomedical. In particular, the major directions at OU site will
be in breakthrough technologies of trimming, punching and blanking of Ultra High
Strength Steels, fundamental understanding of die coatings and lubricant
performance, innovative sensors and data processing algorithms controlling
stability of sheet metal inflow into the die cavity and distortion of sheet
metal parts after stamping in high volume production. Collaborative CIMF
projects with other sites will benefit from access to Automotive Tribology
Center, automated stamping equipment, and state-of-art electron microscopy and
nano-indentation lab. The OU site of CIMF will involve faculty with expertise in
process innovation, tribology, sensors, modeling of contact problems, data
analytics and IIoT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.