* 2209869
* IUCRC Planning Grant Ohio State University: Center for Industrial Metal Forming (CIMF)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Farhang Pourboghrat, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 06/30/2024
* USD 20,000.00

Metal forming processes are among the most efficient, economical and
environmentally-friendly high-volume manufacturing techniques, creating products
by re-shaping the input feedstock, with limited waste, and oftentimes at room
temperature. Approximately 5.8% of the U.S. GDP ($21.4 trillion in 2019) is tied
to industries such as automotive, aerospace, defense, materials, electronics and
biomedical, all extensively utilizing metal forming processes. Therefore, the
estimated economic impact of metal forming in the U.S. society is in the
hundreds of billion $. This award supports the planning phase of the proposed
Center for Industrial Metal Forming (CIMF). The mission of the Center, which is
comprised of Ohio State University (OSU), Oakland University (OU), North
Carolina State University (NCSU) and University of New Hampshire (UNH), is to
perform cutting-edge, pre-competitive fundamental research in metal forming
science and engineering and to create the next generation of industry experts.
CIMF will conduct industry-driven transformational research in novel bulk and
sheet forming processes; Integrated Computational Metal Forming (ICMF) and the
sciences that tie into it, such as plasticity and fracture; advanced equipment
and die technologies; and the application of sensors and the Industrial Internet
of Things (IIoT) in metal forming. This effort will necessitate an
interdisciplinary approach with experts from manufacturing engineering,
electrical engineering, materials science, numerical methods, data analytics and
experimental mechanics. Therefore, CIMF activities will create a highly-
competitive, diverse workforce to support the growth of U.S. industry and expand
manufacturing employment, while also contributing to the Nationâ€™s supply chain
resilience and global market competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CIMF is
designed around integrating the core competencies of its four sites with the
industry needs identified through extensive customer discovery. The fundamental
research at CIMF will be based on three pillars: 1) computational and material
enhancements in forming; 2) innovative forming processes; and 3) equipment and
die innovation. These pillars blend with the unique expertise of each site:
Integrated Computational Metal Forming (ICMF) for OSU; shearing processes, IIoT
in stamping and equipment and die innovation for OU; forging, hybrid forming
processes and tribology for NCSU; and material and process modeling and flexible
forming for UNH. Vertical, fundamental advances will be achieved by employing
innovative approaches in sheet metal/tube forming, forging and extrusion
processes, improving material formability, advancing methods for virtual process
design, and employing new die materials, coatings, lubricants and metal forming
equipment. Specifically, the industry-focused projects will target process
innovation (e.g., hydro-forging, flexible forming), forming control based on
IIoT, energy-efficient forming machines, enhanced performance of additively-
manufactured dies, etc. The results will be advancements in material
utilization, final part performance and weight reduction, industry-friendly
computational tools for process design, metal forming dies with extended life
and industrial metal forming processes of increased productivity, across a range
of advanced material systems and industries, e.g., automotive, aerospace, and
biomedical. In particular, the overarching theme of OSU contributions will be
Integrated Computational Metal Forming/ICMF, a term coined in relation to the
ICME revolution in materials engineering. The OSU site of CIMF will involve
faculty with expertise in process innovation and modeling; multiaxial testing;
constitutive modeling; data analytics and IIoT. Collaborative CIMF projects with
other sites will benefit from access to the Center for Design and Manufacturing
Excellence (CDME, a 37,600 sq.ft. facility with &gt;$13M worth of industrial
equipment), state-of-art computing resources at the Simulation Innovation and
Modeling Center (SIMCenter) and the Ohio Supercomputer Center (OSC), and state-
of-art microscopy at the Center for Electron Microscopy and Analysis
(CEMAS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.