* 2209853
* IUCRC Planning Grant Purdue University: Center for Interface Sciences for Emerging Devices &amp; Systems (CISEDS)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* David Janes, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 06/30/2023
* USD 20,000.00

Semiconductor technology is highly globalized, and its future relies on
innovations in materials and their applications in novel device structures.
Interfaces between different parts of semiconductor devices are of paramount
importance in micro-, nano-, and optoelectronics devices and heterogeneous
systems. Therefore, fundamental and applied research on semiconductor interfaces
is critical for emerging technologies that impact a wide range of industrial
sectors. This award supports the planning phase of the proposed Center for
Interface Sciences for Emerging Devices &amp; Systems (CISEDS), which is
composed of North Carolina State University and Purdue University. The mission
of CISEDS is to produce fundamental science to address electrical and thermal
interface challenges of upcoming devices in virtually all sectors of the
semiconductor industry, including low and high-power electronics, power
transmission, communications, energy, and medicine. The industry is well aware
that unresolved or undiscovered challenges related to interfaces can
significantly limit achievable device performance and reliability. The Center
aims to work with various industries to identify and address key interface
challenges that limit the performance or lifetime of the devices. The research
that will be conducted under CISEDS has the potential for high economic and
societal impact and will provide a robust educational framework to train next-
generation U.S. graduate students for the industry. The Center will endeavor to
broaden the participation of underserved and underrepresented student groups by
leveraging the existing relationships and actively building new ones with local
minority-serving institutions and organizations on the local
campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been significant progress in
semiconductor materials, devices, and manufacturing over the last couple of
decades. These advances were often made possible by inserting new materials into
mature device structures. The semiconductor industry learned that to achieve the
desired performance and device reliability, it is critically important to
understand the scientific challenges in interfacing these new materials with
those currently used in existing devices (e.g., metals, insulators, and other
semiconductors). Quite often, such interfaces share similar science. As such,
four thrust areas were selected as an initial research focus for the proposed
Center: 1) Energy Conversion Devices, 2) Flexible/Stretchable Electronics, 3) Si
&amp; (Ultra) Wide Bandgap (WBG) Materials &amp; Devices, and 4) 2D Materials
&amp; Devices. The fundamental science governing the interfaces, and the
critical impact of interfaces on semiconductor device performance, are the
backbone of the Center. The fundamental work on interfaces will enable advances
within a given material/device technology as well as integration of various
material systems into multifunctional components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.