* 2209884
* Understanding highly mobile excitons in halide perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Dong Yu, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2025
* USD 334,911.00

Nontechnical description&lt;br/&gt;A new family of materials, called halide
perovskites, have recently received much attention because of their truly
promising potentials for cost-effective applications in solar cells, as well as
light emitting devices. Light can excite an electron to higher energy, leaving
an electron vacancy or a hole in these materials. The oppositely charged
electron and hole are attracted to each other and can be bound into a pair,
often referred to as an exciton. How well these excitons move in the halide
perovskites is critical to optimize their applications but is poorly understood.
Preliminary results from the research team suggest these excitons can be highly
mobile in these materials. In this project, the principal investigator aims to
apply novel spatially and temporally resolved experimental techniques to
illustrate the physical mechanisms of the formation and transport of excitons in
halide perovskites. The project will open up new opportunities by taking
advantage of excitons in halide perovskites for novel electronic applications.
This project will also educate and train undergraduate and graduate students,
including underrepresented minority students, in the rapidly advancing nanoscale
and energy sciences. The principal investigator plans to prepare students with
the skills and knowledge to pursue research and development in novel materials
and photovoltaics with industrial partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;Excitons are often given negative connotation in solar
energy harvesting in part due to their presumed short diffusion lengths.
Contradicting this, the research team has recently demonstrated carrier
diffusion lengths up to 200 micrometers in halide perovskites, implying that
exciton transport may not limit the energy conversion process in these
materials. Based on these exciting preliminary results, the project aims to
understand highly mobile excitons as well as the strong spin-orbit coupling
effects on exciton transport, in both three-dimensional and low-dimensional
single-crystal halide perovskite nano- and micro-structures. The project will
investigate single-crystal halide perovskite field effect transistors with
comprehensive temperature-dependent spatially, energetically, and temporally
resolved optoelectronic techniques. Temperature dependent photocurrent mapping
will provide direct measurements of exciton and free carrier diffusion lengths
in various halide perovskite compounds with different excitonic binding energy
and cation electric dipoles. Pump-probe photocurrent measurements will be used
to determine exciton lifetime and diffusivity with high time resolution. Rashba-
Dresselhaus effects in halide perovskites will be investigated by circular
photogalvanic effect and surface magneto-optical Kerr effect with high spatial
resolution. Low dimensional halide perovskites with strong quantum confinement
and anisotropic optical transition will also be studied with the developed
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.