* 2209437
* WoU-MMA: Operations of VERITAS in the Epoch 2022 to 2025
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Wystan Benbow, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,451,877.00

Gamma rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation, and their
observation has proven essential to advancing our understanding of the most
extreme astrophysical processing in the Universe. Located at the Fred Lawrence
Whipple Observatory (FLWO) in Arizona, USA, the Very Energetic Radiation Imaging
Telescope Array System (VERITAS) observatory provides world-leading sensitivity
to gamma-rays for energies above 100 GeV. This award provides the funding to
continue operations of VERITAS and the prototype Schwarzschild-Couder Telescope
(pSCT). During the period of this award, the observatory will operate to provide
in-depth gamma-ray studies of a wide variety of Galactic and extragalactic very
high-energy signals, including those associated with multi-messenger and time-
domain astrophysics. The award will also support opportunities for the
professional development of early career scientists, enabling unique field work
and hard and software developments. More broadly, the award supports the VERITAS
collaboration’s efforts in Zooniverse projects, and community engagement at the
FLWO Visitor Centre.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VERITAS is an array of four 12m
diameter atmospheric Cherenkov telescopes (ACT), each with an imaging field of
view of 3.5 degrees. The pSCT employs a novel ACT dual-mirror optical system
design developed for use in the next-generation gamma-ray observatory, the
Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA). Operating in conjunction, the observatory
studies Galactic objects including supernova remnants, pulsars, binary systems,
and the Galactic Center, and extragalactic objects including active galactic
nuclei, radio galaxies, and starburst galaxies. The multi-messenger program of
the observatory includes searches for transient events from sources associated
with gamma-ray bursts, gravitational wave signal, and high-energy astrophysical
neutrinos. In addition, VERITAS observations address key questions related to
the origin of high-energy cosmic-rays, the search for dark matter, and
cosmology. This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe
Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.