* 2209335
* Quantum Transport and Hadronization in QCD Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Ralf Rapp, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2025
* USD 345,000.00

In the first few microseconds after the Big Bang, the Universe was filled with
an extremely hot substance called quark-gluon plasma (QGP). It is fascinating
that about 14 billion years later, the QGP can be recreated and studied in the
laboratory by colliding atomic nuclei at very high energies. It is of
fundamental interest to understand how the quarks and gluons transition into
bound states called hadrons, such as protons and neutrons, which are the
building blocks of the visible matter in the Universe and make up about 98% of
its mass. However, due to the very short lifetime of the QGP in the laboratory,
its properties have to be inferred from the thousands of particles that are
observed in large detectors. Thus far, the observed particle spectra indicate
that the QGP behaves like a very strongly coupled, near-perfect liquid whose
transport properties are close to universal lower bounds set by quantum
mechanics. In this project the PI, together with his team of graduate and
undergraduate students, investigates how the properties of the QGP and its
hadronization emerge from the fundamental theory of the strong nuclear force,
Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key property of the
"strongly-coupled QGP" (sQGP) are very large interaction rates between its
constituents. These interaction rates imply a very large quantum-mechanical
uncertainty in the energies of the particles, and are conjectured to be closely
related to the quantum lower bounds in the transport properties of the hot QCD
medium. The PI employs rigorous quantum many-body theory to self-consistently
calculate the spectral distributions and scattering amplitudes of the medium
particles, both for quarks and gluons in the QGP and for the composite hadrons
in the hadronic medium. He utilizes effective theories to constrain the
fundamental interactions through information from first-principles lattice-QCD
computations. In particular, he develops a framework that enables calculation of
the transition from quarks and gluons to hadrons based on their in-medium
spectral properties. His theoretical calculations are applied in transport
models for heavy charm and bottom quarks, which allow for comparisons to, and
interpretations of, experimental data from the Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collider
at Brookhaven Lab and the Large Hadron Collider in Europe. His program fosters
an inclusive scholarly environment including undergraduate research and outreach
activities to regional high-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.