* 2209492
* Searches for Physics Beyond the Standard Model through the Running of the Strong Coupling Constant in the ATLAS Experiment at the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Lee Sawyer, Louisiana Tech University
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2025
* USD 188,043.00

This award will provide support to a Louisiana Tech University group working on
the ATLAS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, a particle
physics laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. The LHC machine and ATLAS, a large
particle detector facility, were built as basic science tools using funds from
NSF and other agencies around the world. One of their primary objectives was to
find the Higgs Boson, the last particle in the historically successful "Standard
Model" (SM) that accounts for so much of the existence of, and forces between,
known particles forming the matter in the universe. This effort has been
successful. The next step in the experiments is to look for evidence for physics
Beyond the Standard Model (BSM) that might, for instance, account for the
presence of the mysterious "Dark Matter" that makes up so much of the mass of
the universe. The LHC is currently starting Run 3, at higher energy and with
significantly increased event samples. It is possible that evidence for BSM
physics could emerge at this higher energy and with the higher event statistics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analytically, Louisiana Tech is one of the leading
institutions in the US pursuing precision Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD)
measurements. In particular, the group applies novel approaches, Including using
Machine Learning techniques, to precision measurements of multi-jet final
states. Such studies are significant because the multi-jet ratios that the group
measures provide a relatively precise measurement of the strong coupling
constant, an important physical quantity, in a manner that ameliorates
systematic effects. In addition, any deviations observed in such multi-jet
parameters with respect to QCD predictions can provide a window to new physics.
In support of their work and other researchers in the field, the Louisiana Tech
group has created fast software programs that allow researchers to make fast
perturbative QCD predictions of observables in hadronic processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the broader context, the LHC provides an excellent
platform for providing outreach and communication about basic science to K-12
students and the general public and serves as a recruiting tool for physics
majors to Louisiana Tech from the north Louisiana area. As part of this effort,
the Louisiana Tech group will partner with local high schools to provide
International Masterclasses for physics students that will give them an
opportunity to visit the university and its facilities and allow them to perform
real analyses using LHC data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the NSF Physics Division Elementary Particle Physics Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.