* 2209484
* Precision Studies in Subatomic Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Dinko Pocanic, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

This award supports a program of experimental research by the University of
Virginia group to explore the limits of our knowledge of certain subatomic
particles and of their interactions at the smallest length scale. The project
investigates three systems: the pi meson, the muon (a more massive "cousin" of
the electron), and the neutron. The research program is focused on the intrinsic
low-energy properties of each of them, properties that are sensitive to some of
the basic components of the Standard Model (SM). The SM describes all known (to
date) elementary particles and their basic characteristics. Determining these
properties precisely enough to establish whether they differ from SM predictions
has the potential to uncover new physical processes and particles. The project
aims to advance basic science in nuclear and elementary particle physics,
contribute to building the nation's STEM talent by educating members of the new
generation of the STEM workforce, by focusing on its diversity, and tapping the
broadest available talent pool. Finally, the project aims to develop new tools
in fundamental research with possible broader
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research continues an ongoing
program of study of the electroweak and strong interactions at low energies. The
immediate goals of the project are: (a) carrying out the measurements of the Nab
experiment, a program of precise measurements of the neutron beta decay
parameters at the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS), Oak Ridge National
Laboratory; (b) taking part in the new precise measurement and data analysis of
the muon gyromagnetic ratio, the Muon g-2 experiment at Fermilab, and (c)
conclusion of the data analysis for the PEN experiment, a precise measurement of
the electronic and radiative electronic rare decays of the pion. Nab is a high-
rate unpolarized measurement of the electron-antineutrino correlation parameter
"a" with accuracy of a few parts in 1000, and a precise measurement of the
neutron decay parameter "b", the Fierz interference term. Nab aims to resolve
the persistent inconsistencies in the determination of the nucleon axial vector
form factor and, consequently, of the Vud term in the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa
quark mixing matrix. This will ultimately provide new limits on possible
extensions of the Standard Model, such as left-right symmetric models,
leptoquarks, etc., by exploiting the unique advantages of neutron decay, one of
the most basic and theoretically best understood processes in nuclear physics.
The Muon g-2 experiment is focused on the hadronic corrections to the extremely
precisely predicted electroweak processes that determine the interaction of
charged leptons with the vacuum, a research subject with one of the highest
potentials for discovery of beyond-SM physics. The Muon g-2 experiment is
projected to complete data taking during the award period, and will build on the
widely reported result from Run-1. The goal of PEN is to reach the precision of
5 parts in 10,000 for the branching ratio of the electronic decay of the pion,
which provides the most accurate experimental test of lepton universality (LU)
available. At present, precision of the pi-e2 decay measurements lags behind the
SM theoretical predictions by more than an order of magnitude. A number of
physics scenarios outside the SM would lead to LU violation. LU, and lepton
properties in general, carry added significance due to developments in neutrino
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.