* 2209588
* Precision Ultra-High Energy Neutrino Astrophysics and New Signatures Enabled by a Complete Treatment of  Birefringence in Antarctic Ice
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Amy Connolly, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 07/31/2025
* USD 384,956.00

Ultra-high energy (UHE) neutrinos with energies greater than 10^17 electronvolts
are a key missing piece in the rapidly developing field of multi-messenger
astrophysics. Their detection will prove essential in answering the century-old
question of the nature of the most extreme astrophysical sources. Experiments
employing radio techniques are amongst the most promising for measuring UHE
neutrinos, where such event interactions occurring in natural ice environments
result in detectable radio-frequency signals propagating over kilometer-scale
distances. This award supports scientists at the Ohio State University
performing research in the study of key ice parameters that directly impact the
searches for the first detections of UHE neutrinos. The awarded program will
leverage an interdisciplinary approach – spanning neutrino astrophysics, climate
science, glaciology, remote sensing, evolutionary computation, and antenna
engineering - to address the property of ice birefringence at the NSF’s
Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, Antarctica. Undergraduate researchers will
play key roles in the interdisciplinary team, including leading the GENETIS
project to assess the impact of birefringence on optimal designs of next-
generation arrays for detecting UHE neutrinos. In addition, through the ASPIRE
program, high school women will have the opportunity to gain first-hand research
experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying the birefringence parameters
(where the speed of a signal depends on its direction and polarization) in the
ice is necessary to determine the local polarization where a radio signal is
emitted in a neutrino interaction. A signal produced in the ice propagates as
two rays that travel at different speeds. If the birefringence parameters are
known, the time delay between the two rays would be a clear signature of a
signal originating from within the ice, and provides a precise measure of the
distance to the interaction necessary for the event energy reconstruction. Using
pulser measurements taken with the deployed Askaryan Radio Array (ARA) at South
Pole will provide the best fit depth-dependent parameters characterizing the ice
birefringence. These parameters may then be incorporated into a complete ice
model for detection of UHE neutrinos. Folding this information into the expected
radio emission signatures will lower previous search thresholds and enhance the
on-going search for the first detection of UHE
neutrinos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.