* 2209178
* Probing Nuclear Structure and Shape Coexistence with Fast Neutrons
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Steven Yates, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Alfredo Galindo-Uribarri
* 07/31/2025
* USD 465,891.00

The atomic nucleus is much too small to be visible with the human eye; however,
its properties and structure can be examined with methods developed at the
University of Kentucky Accelerator Laboratory (UKAL). At UKAL, the team employs
a particle accelerator to produce neutrons that are in turn used to create gamma
rays, which are characteristic of the nuclei to be studied. From these gamma
rays it is possible to develop an image of the nucleus and gain an understanding
of how the neutrons and protons comprising the nucleus interact within it. In
addition, students at all levels are provided with opportunities to participate
in these studies. Program participants receive hands-on experience and emerge as
well-trained nuclear scientists who are capable of important contributions to
our national energy, medical, and security needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary aim of the research program at UKAL is to address timely questions in
nuclear structure and outstanding problems in related areas of nuclear science.
This broad-based research program includes selected studies in several forefront
areas: nuclear structure relevant to neutrinoless double-beta decay; nuclei
undergoing shape transitions; nuclear shape coexistence. A unique advantage of
the laboratory is the capability of producing high-quality, time-bunched mono-
energetic fast neutrons for inelastic scattering experiments to investigate low-
energy collective modes in nuclei. With the scattering reaction, it is possible
to obtain information which is not accessible at other facilities. Experimental
innovations in the laboratory include the development of capabilities for
measuring lifetimes in heavy nuclei with the Doppler-shift attenuation method
following the inelastic scattering of the fast neutrons. These advances have
made it possible to address important questions and make meaningful
contributions in nuclear structure physics and related areas. The team has also
opened other areas of study and engaged in complementary experiments with
collaborators at other nuclear accelerator laboratories. Education at all levels
continues to be an emphasis in these laboratory activities, and research at a
small accelerator laboratory permits the mentoring of young scientists
daily.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.