* 2209488
* Neutrino Research at Syracuse University
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Denver Whittington, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Kaushik De
* 06/30/2025
* USD 723,862.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently exists
leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has and why there is no
antimatter in the universe. One of the primary areas to search for answers to
these and other open questions about the universe, how it came to be and why it
is the way it is, is to focus on a study of the properties of neutrinos and to
use what we know and can learn about neutrinos as probes of science beyond the
Standard Model. Neutrinos are those elementary particles that interact with
practically nothing else in the universe. They have no electric charge and were
once thought to be massless. We now know there are three kinds of neutrinos that
are distinguishable through the different interactions that they undergo
whenever there is an interaction. We also know that neutrinos do have a mass and
because they do, they can actually change from one type to another. Detailed
measurements of these changes, along with other current neutrino experiments,
form one of the most promising ways to probe for new physics beyond the Standard
Model. Such measurements lie at the heart of this project which include
activities of the Syracuse University neutrino group on the MicroBooNE, NOvA,
SBND, and DUNE experiments. These activities include measurements with NOvA’s
test beam that will impact the experiment’s ability to resolve the neutrino mass
hierarchy; on the MicroBooNE experiment, analyses of low-energy activity that
has relevance for supernova physics and basic neutrino interaction studies, and
on the DUNE experiment the group will make significant contributions to the
construction of the anode plane assemblies needed to realize this enormous
detector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is currently a large interest in
experimental particle physics in Liquid Argon Time Projection Chambers (LArTPC)
spurred in part by the DUNE project at Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
(FNAL) and in neutrino physics in general. This award supports work that refines
LArTPC technology, using a test beam and at the MicroBooNE experiment at FNAL.
LArTPC detector technology is scalable to the very large masses (perhaps 10
kiloTons) needed by next generation neutrino experiments and is capable of
recording three-dimensional digital images of particle trajectories. MicroBooNE
is making a variety of interesting physics measurements, as well as serving as a
proving ground for new hardware techniques relevant for future experiments.
Another aspect of the work in this award is the analysis of data from a large
LArTPC detector at CERN called ProtoDUNE. The lessons learned here will inform
the future DUNE detector design. The broader impact of this work will involve
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers, all of whom
will receive valuable experience and training in experimental research that will
be applicable in their future career trajectories. The Syracuse group will
continue with several outreach efforts as part of this award. The public will be
informed about the exciting research in particle physics via the hosting of in-
person Masterclass activities. Finally, the group will take advantage of
Syracuse University’s unique commitment to the education of veterans of the U.S.
armed services and engage this population of students in the DUNE hardware
efforts on campus, providing valuable technical and scientific
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.