* 2209445
* WoU-MMA: IceCube Data Analysis in the U.S. 2022-2025
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Francis Halzen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2025
* USD 8,500,000.00

This award provides funding for U.S. scientists to perform the scientific
analysis of data taken with the IceCube Neutrino Observatory (ICNO) located at
the U.S. Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station. The ICNO transformed one cubic
kilometer of natural ice (at the depth from 1.4 to 2.4 km) into a giant particle
detector, thus creating the world's largest neutrino detector. Since its
completion in 2010, the ICNO has detected neutrinos with energies spanning more
than six orders of magnitude, from 10 GeV to beyond 10 PeV, identifying for the
first time neutrinos reaching us from outside the solar system. (GeV = one
billion electron volts; TeV = one trillion electron volts; and PeV = one
quadrillion electron volts.) In 2017, the ICNO detected a neutrino with an
energy of 290 TeV and its origin was pinpointed (again for the first time) to a
supermassive black hole at a distance of about 3.5 million light years. This
detection triggered an extensive campaign involving some twenty space- and
ground-based telescopes that launched a new era in multi-messenger detection.
With a decade of data ICNO is producing strong evidence that the origin of
cosmic rays is associated with the supermassive black holes at the centers of
active galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mystique of the South Pole environment
and the compelling science of IceCube are an alluring mix. Besides its extensive
coverage in newspapers and publications popularizing science, IceCube has a
significant presence on social media and the World Wide Web. In the next three
years, focused projects include the continued development of a virtual reality
experience, an activity that has reached the beta stage for Zooniverse, and
content for their successful high school MasterClasses. These activities will
also contribute to the training of the next generation of scientists by
integrating graduate and undergraduate education with the IceCube technology
development, astrophysical observations, and scientific analyses of the ICNO
data. Recently, we have released a decade of IceCube neutrino observations to
the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. groups have established a solid and
successful record of analyzing data from IceCube. This award will enable a
unified analysis program which will maximize the impact of increasingly
interconnected efforts. The synthesis of information from multiple astrophysical
messengers is now providing a powerful new tool for probing the Universe.
Neutrinos have revealed themselves as a powerful component of multimessenger
astronomy by revealing the first sites where the highest energy messengers so
far detected from the Universe are born and accelerated to extreme energies
powered by the supermassive black holes lurking at the center of active
galaxies. Thus, this award addresses and advances the science objectives and
goals of the NSF's "Windows on the Universe: The Era of Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics" program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.