* 2209605
* WoU-MMA: High-Energy Astrophysics with VERITAS and Towards Realization of CTA
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Rene Ong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,249,826.00

Imaging atmospheric Cherenkov telescopes (IACTs), like the Very Energetic
Radiation Imaging Telescope Array System (VERITAS) at the Fred Lawrence Whipple
Observatory in Arizona, USA, have revolutionized our understanding of high-
energy phenomena in the Universe over the last decade. The catalog of sources of
very high-energy gamma radiation discovered and studied by these instruments has
grown from a handful to nearly 250 over that period and cover a wide variety of
astrophysical environments. In addition to elucidating acceleration mechanisms
and explosive phenomena in Galactic sources that give rise to cosmic rays, the
workings of active galactic nuclei, and the strength of the intergalactic
magnetic field that gave rise to the magnetic fields of galaxies and stars, the
instruments have demonstrated excellent instantaneous sensitivity for rapid
transient events enabling the study of time-domain very high-energy astrophysics
and the new science enabled by coordinated multi-messenger observations. This
award supports scientists at the University of California-Los Angeles performing
research with VERTIAS. The award program will provide improved understanding of
populations of the Galactic sources of PeV-scale cosmic rays, studies of
extended sources (supernova remnants, pulsar wind nebulae and the Galactic
Center region), and utilizing extreme blazars as probes of the weak
intergalactic magnetic field. The award will support the training and mentoring
of graduate student and postdoctoral researchers, provide outreach and education
to local high school students, and includes enhancements to the Muon Hunter
Citizen Science program. The team will also provide continued recognized
leadership for the next generation IACTS, including the prototype Schwarzschild-
Couder Telescope and the Cherenkov Telescope Array.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VERITAS is an array of four 12m diameter atmospheric
Cherenkov telescopes, each with an imaging field of view of 3.5 degrees. The
stereoscopic viewing technique employed by VERITAS achieves a low-energy
threshold of 80 GeV, strong background rejection, and excellent angular
resolution and good energy resolution. The development of wide-field and high
angular resolution observation capabilities has made it possible to probe
complex morphology in potential PeV-scale accelerating regions of astrophysical
environments likely to produce hadronic interactions (cosmic rays and high-
energy neutrinos) and where multi-messenger observations are essential to source
studies. In addition, dedicated observations of the Galactic Centre region will
provide improved knowledge of: the spectrum of the central source that enhance
the development of acceleration models, and; the search for dark matter self-
annihilation in the Galactic Center halo where the gamma-ray contamination from
conventional astrophysical sources is low. This project advances the goals of
the NSF Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.