* 2209991
* Probing Fundamental Physics on Cosmological Scales
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Matias Zaldarriaga, Institute For Advanced Study
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 270,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Matias Zaldarriaga at the
Institute for Advanced Study, in Princeton, New Jersey.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cosmology, the science devoted to understanding the
history of our Universe as well as the physical laws that govern its evolution,
is experiencing a revolution thanks to the healthy interplay between advances in
fundamental physics and astrophysics and the availability of a vast amount of
new data. In the next decades large surveys of the location of galaxies will
play a central role as sources of new information. The work of Professor
Zaldarriaga aims to improve our theoretical understanding of the physical
processes responsible for the development of the structure that these surveys
map. These surveys will also help to develop new modeling and analysis tools for
such surveys and improve cosmological constraints derived from these
observational studies. Research in this area thus advances the national interest
by promoting the progress of one of the most fundamental areas of science: the
discovery and characterization of the physical laws that describe the history of
our Universe. The funded work is also expected to have significant broader
impacts. Astronomy and cosmology are subjects of broad appeal to the public.
Previous efforts by the PI to disseminate the research in a form accessible to
non-scientists will be continued and expanded. These include periodic public
lectures both for adults and in primary and middle schools, interviews in the
media, including those targeted to Hispanic audiences, and a lecture series at a
senior citizens center. The funded research will also contribute to the
education of students and postdoctoral fellows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
technically, the work of Professor Zaldarriaga will combine two state-of-the-art
techniques: analytical effective field theory ideas that provide theoretical
control with computational, and statistical techniques that confront theory with
observations in an efficient and statistically principled way. The aim is to use
these new techniques to harness previously inaccessible information about
cosmological initial conditions and the non-linear physics that relates them to
the observations, and thereby provide a unique and potentially transformative
contribution to the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.