* 2209393
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Hybridization and the dynamics of morphological and genetic differentiation during evolutionary radiation
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Isaac Lichter Marck, Lichter Marck, Isaac H
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/28/2026
* USD 207,000.00

Fellow's name: Isaac Lichter Marck &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
2209393&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research title: Hybridization and the dynamics of
morphological and genetic differentiation during evolutionary
radiation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sponsoring scientist(s) and host institution(s):
Dr. Felipe Zapata, University of California, Los Angeles &amp; Dr. Rosita
Scherson, University of Chile&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This action funds an NSF
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2022, Integrative Research
Investigating the Rules of Life Governing Interactions Between Genomes,
Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship supports research and training of the
fellow that will contribute to the area of Rules of Life in innovative ways.
Variation is the raw material for the process of evolution by natural selection,
but where does natural variation come from? One hypothesis is that gene exchange
between different species, or hybridization, could bring foreign genes into the
gene pool and boost the variation available for evolution. This research will
test the role of hybridization in providing the raw material for evolution in a
diverse tribe of sunflowers called the rock daisies (Perityleae) found in
mountains, islands, and deserts in North and South America. The research will
develop statistical tools to understand when hybrids have formed during the
recent radiation of the rock daisies using genetics, morphology, and ecology. In
documenting the mechanisms generating diversity in this group, the fellow will
gain valuable training in hybridization studies and bioinformatics as well as
developing teaching modules for free dissemination about how we can better
preserve biodiversity for future generations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hybridization may play a fundamental role during
evolutionary radiations through two pathways: by seeding variation via
hybridization at the onset (the hybrid origins hypothesis) and by generating
variability through reticulation among members of a radiating clade (the
syngameon hypothesis). The fellow will test these hypotheses during the
radiation of the rock daisies at three scales in which shifts into new adaptive
zones occurred. At the sub genome level, the fellow will test whether
hybridization arose prior to trans-oceanic dispersal to Guadalupe Island in an
allopolyploid island endemic plant (Nesothamnus incanus). At the population
level, the fellow will investigate whether hybrid origins of South American rock
daisies boosted variation prior to long-distance dispersal, facilitating
intercontinental invasion success. In a diverse clade of interest, the fellow
will integrate microevolutionary and macroevolutionary data from 57 taxa in the
genus Laphamia into a time calibrated framework to reconstruct the dynamics of
hybridization, genetic differentiation, and morphological disparification during
a biome shift into the North American Deserts. The fellow will gain valuable
training in phylogenetic methods and international interdisciplinary
collaboration. To broaden participation in science, the fellow will
undergraduates, develop bilingual teaching modules in English and Spanish, and
distribute novel tools to fellow researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.