* 2209997
* Theoretical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Simone Giombi, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 920,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Igor Klebanov, Simone
Giombi, and Herman Verlinde at Princeton University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
unification of Quantum Mechanics and Special Relativity has produced the
powerful apparatus of Quantum Field Theory. It has applications in a variety of
fields of physics, ranging from elementary particles to critical phenomena. A
much more difficult problem is Quantum Gravity, the unification of Quantum
Mechanics with General Relativity, which is important for addressing the
mysteries of black-hole physics. Remarkably, there are precise relations between
Quantum Gravity and Quantum Field Theory, and deepening our fundamental
understanding of these theories is one of the key goals of this research.
Another goal is the application of these theories to specific models and
exploration of their connections with Quantum Information theory. This research
is therefore in the national interest in that it helps to advance fundamental
scientific progress in the United States. Postdocs and students will be very
important for carrying out this research program; educating and mentoring such
students thus constitutes its key broader impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a more
technical level, the research will aim to shed new light on the conformal field
theories in various spacetime dimensions. This includes non-unitary models which
sometimes have simple formulations in statistical mechanics. Via the Anti-de
Sitter/Conformal Field Theory duality, the models with a large number of degrees
of freedom can teach us more about the quantum theory of gravity, including the
higher-spin fields. The project also includes the exploration of Quantum Field
Theories in the presence of boundaries and defects, such as the study of Wilson
loops in gauge theory and of theories with boundary interactions. The research
on Quantum Gravity in model black-hole, wormhole and cosmological spacetimes
will aim to address some of the deep mysteries in fundamental physics. This
research also offers prospects of cross-fertilization with condensed-matter
physics and Quantum Information theory through the exploration of lattice
Hamiltonians for interacting qubits. Of particular interest are the quantum
many-body scar states that can avoid thermalization and decoherence; in some
models they can be constructed using the methods of Group
Theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.