* 2209871
* CAREER: Environmentally Stable Electrically Pumped Perovskite Laser
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Qing Gu, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 03/31/2025
* USD 444,350.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photonic integrated circuits
(ICs) have enabled many applications such as optical communication, bio-sensing,
and quantum communication. To utilize the full functionality of photonic ICs,
integrated electronic-photonic circuits are demanded, an essential component of
which is an economical, silicon-compatible, and electronically addressable laser
in the photonic IC. In the visible wavelengths, although epitaxially grown III-N
semiconductors are the main gain medium candidate for on-chip lasers, they lack
silicon-compatibility and is expensive. This proposal explores solution-
processed metal-halide perovskites as alternative gain media and develops
perovskite laser diodes on the silicon platform. By judiciously engineering the
gain medium composition and band alignment of carrier transport layers with
perovskite gain, employing defect-passivation, and designing for low-threshold
laser cavities, environmentally stable perovskite laser diodes can be realized.
The family of perovskite lasers developed in this program will enable efficient
and low-cost integrated photonic solutions for confocal microscopy, on-chip
fluorescent sensing, and flow cytometry in the bio-photonics area, as well as
visible light communication and on-chip quantum emitters in the optical
communication area. It will also help closing the “green gap” where conventional
epitaxially grown inorganic semiconductors suffer from low efficiencies, and
advance the field of solution-processed semiconductor lasers. The educational
portion of the program aims to increase public awareness of photonics and to
pipeline qualified students to help advance the U.S. photonics
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
crucial yet unavailable component in high-performance visible-wavelength
photonic ICs and other chip-scale photonic systems is a silicon-compatible on-
chip laser that is efficient, stable, economical, and electronically
addressable. So far, III-N lasers are the main candidates, but their material
platform requires complex epitaxial growth and lattice constant matching to the
silicon substrate. Although solution-processed metal-halide perovskites have
been suggested as alternative gain media, and many perovskite lasers have been
demonstrated so far, all perovskite lasers to date are optically pumped.
Additionally, they operate under ultrafast pulsed pumping and/or at cryogenic
temperatures and have a short lifetime. This program starts by developing
economical, environmentally stable and silicon-compatible perovskite lasers that
operate under continuous wave optical pumping at room temperature. This can be
achieved by directly patterning perovskite into high-Q laser resonators with the
manufacturing friendly nanoimprint lithography, then defect-passivating the
perovskite with polycarbonate. This program further aims to demonstrate
electrically pumped perovskite lasers through band alignment tailoring of
carrier transport layers for efficient current injection, perovskite-polymer
blending for minimal leakage current, low-loss electrode formation to reduce
wasteful non-radiative recombination at electrodes, and low-threshold laser
cavity design. This work will not only lead to the insertion of perovskite
lasers into functional photonic ICs, but also the long-sought-after realization
of solution-processed laser diodes. On a more system level, this work will
enable the connectivity between the photonic “plane” and electronic “plane” in
multi-functional adaptive photonic/electronic integrated
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.