* 2209379
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Crop yield enhancement strategies
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Reinaldo Alcalde, Alcalde, Reinaldo Enrique
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Transforming
global agriculture practices is critical to meet current and future food demands
in the face of climate change, and necessary to minimize environmental impacts
that damage terrestrial and aquatic environments, and ultimately affect human
health and well-being. Current practices used to increase crop yields rely
heavily on fertilizers that threaten the environment and weaken crop resilience.
Understanding and harnessing the diverse properties of microorganisms that live
in the soil near the roots of crops (called the rhizosphere) has the potential
to help find new, more sustainable farming strategies. This research project
seeks to understand a specific microbial process that has the potential to help
plants better access phosphorus in soil. The investigator will determine if
certain compounds released by bacteria (for example, phenazines) that liberate
mineral-bound phosphorus can make a difference to plant nutrition. The results
of this work have the potential to provide alternative strategies enabling the
reduction of synthetic fertilizer application and increased phosphorus
bioavailability for plants. This project will directly broaden participation of
groups underrepresented in biology by enabling the research of a Latinx
postdoctoral fellow in Biology who will engage other underrepresented scholars
through mentoring in the lab. The fellow will also work with the non-profit
Clean Water Science Networkâ€™s virtual mentorship program to increase the network
and mentorship skills of postdoctoral scholar participants at Caltech and around
the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will test the hypothesis that
microbially secreted phenazines can solubilize iron-mineral-adsorbed phosphate
by reductive dissolution, subsequently enhancing plant bioavailability and
uptake. Single-species and microbial community studies in a gnotobiotic plant
model will be implemented. Fluorescent microscopy techniques, reporter gene
fusions, and gene knockouts will be used to visualize and validate the proposed
gene regulation and biogeochemical process. Analytical techniques (LC-MS, ICP-
MS) will be used to quantify phenazine production and plant phosphorus content.
The fellow will gain expertise and training in microbial physiology and
genetics, plant-microbe co-culturing, microbial community design, and state-of-
the-art microcopy. Additionally, the fellow will gain mentoring experience
through research and by contributing to a virtual mentoring
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.