* 2209376
* The Nuclear Many-Body Problem: Toward a Predictive Microscopic Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Elena Litvinova, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Investigation of rare nuclear isotopes becomes the most fascinating topic in the
low-energy nuclear physics. Such studies, besides improving the understanding of
fundamental interactions, facilitate applications with direct societal impact,
including those in medicine, homeland security, and industry. The advent of
experimental facilities with beams of unstable atomic nuclei opens up new
opportunities in this area of research, such as astrophysical applications for
predicting the evolution of stars and galaxies. In this context nuclear theory
is engaged to provide missing information about exotic nuclei that is not
accessible experimentally. To this effort the project will contribute an
implementation of novel ideas on nuclear structure, which will be benchmarked
against state-of-the-art experimental data. Training graduate students by
engaging them in this research and launching their careers in academia and
industry are important components of the project. The novel results will be
employed in upgrading the relevant graduate courses, aiming at attracting young
talents to the field of nuclear physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses fundamental theoretical questions about microscopic mechanisms of
emergent collectivity in many-body quantum systems. The new theoretical method
will be developed to derive the collective effects from the underlying nuclear
forces. The method will be implemented numerically for the description of
nuclear spectra studied at major nuclear physics facilities, such as the
National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) / Facility for Rare Isotope
Beams (FRIB) at Michigan State University and the Institute of Physical and
Chemical Research (RIKEN) in Tokyo. Burning issues in the description of nuclear
masses and radii will be addressed as well. Upon benchmarking to data, the
implementations will be extended to finite temperatures to model the behavior of
medium-mass nuclei in stellar environments. This will allow one to obtain a
high-quality description of the nuclear reaction rates, which serve as an input
for astrophysical modeling of neutron star mergers and supernova explosions.
Part of the project will be devoted to quantum computation of prototype systems
and search for efficient quantum-classical algorithms for computing atomic
nuclei.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.