* 2209429
* Windows on the Universe: Nuclear Astrophysics at FRIB
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Hendrik Schatz, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfredo Galindo-Uribarri
* 07/31/2025
* USD 2,000,000.00

The nuclear astrophysics group at the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB)
will use accelerator facilities to address the long-standing question about the
origin of the elements in the Universe, and how new elements continue to be
produced in various astrophysical sites. The goal is to restage in the
laboratory the same nuclear reactions that produce new elements in nova and
supernova explosions, merging neutron stars, accreting neutron stars, and other
extreme astrophysical environments. The reacting atomic nuclei are unstable and
need to be produced at a rare isotope facility, like FRIB, or other world-
leading laboratories. Reaction experiments are carried out, where the relevant
isotopes can be produced and detected within fractions of a second.
Alternatively, the properties of the exotic nuclei that participate in the
astrophysical reactions are studied to infer how they would react with other
nuclei. The new nuclear information will be implemented in computer models that
are then confronted with multi-messenger astronomical observations using
infrared, visible light, gamma rays, gravitational waves, neutrinos, and
stardust from various astrophysical sites. Only in combination with the relevant
nuclear data do these observations become truly “Windows on the Universe” and
reveal what elements are created in different astrophysical environments. The
proposed program of studies at the intersection of nuclear physics and
astrophysics will attract a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as postdocs to nuclear science, taking advantage of the
compelling science of the NSF Big Idea "Windows on the Universe". Students and
postdocs will receive broad interdisciplinary training taking advantage of the
synergistic connections nationally and internationally within the IReNA network
and also locally at Michigan State University with the Astronomy group and the
new Department of Computational Mathematics Science and Engineering. This will
continue the excellent educational track record of the group in preparing
students and postdocs for successful careers in academia, industry and US
national laboratories and will thus contribute to the workforce with nuclear
science expertise that is critical for the nation. To further increase interest
in STEM careers in general, and nuclear-science careers specifically, especially
among women and minorities, the PI team will continue to organize the very
successful annual Nuclear Science Summer School (NS3). NS3 provides
undergraduate students access to nuclear science education that is not available
at their home institutions and takes advantage of the compelling science in this
proposal to attract and educate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the era of
multi-messenger astronomy the interpretation of astronomical observations using
light, gamma-rays, gravitational waves, and neutrinos requires an understanding
of the nuclear processes that create these various messengers. We propose to
continue the experimental nuclear astrophysics program at FRIB and other
facilities to provide this important nuclear physics input. We will carry out a
synergistic and interconnected experimental program using stable and rare
isotope beams that employs a wide variety of existing experimental equipment,
and continued development of key experimental capabilities. The proposed
experiments either measure astrophysical reactions directly as they occur in
nova and supernova explosions, neutron star mergers, accreting neutron stars,
and other astrophysical sites, or provide indirect constraints on such
reactions. The program takes advantage of the unique capabilities of FRIB and
other current facilities around the world in a complementary way. Interpreting
multi-messenger observations with accurate nuclear physics obtained in the
proposed program will open a new window on the universe providing insight into
element synthesis and nuclear matter in extreme astrophysical environments. This
provides the opportunity to address long standing questions in nuclear science
identified in the NP2010 National Academy study and the 2015 nuclear science
long rage plan, including the questions the awardees aim to address here “Where
do the chemical elements come from, and how did they evolve?”, “How does
structure arise in the universe and how is it related to the emergence of the
elements in stars and explosive processes?”, and “What is the nature of matter
at extreme temperatures and densities?” These questions will be addressed by
advancing our knowledge of stellar nuclear processes through laboratory
experiments in close collaboration with nuclear theorists and astrophysicists.
The group will perform experiments providing new data on nuclear processes in
Novae, X-ray bursts, and Supernovae, will measure a range of nuclear properties
needed to understand the synthesis of heavy elements by rapid and intermediate
neutron capture, and will study weak interactions in supernovae and neutron
stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the objectives of "Windows on
the Universe: the Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas
for Future NSF Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.