* 2209150
* NSF PRFB FY 2022: Uncovering the Influence of Hormone Signaling in Reptile Reproductive Development: Using CRISPR to Link Genotype, Phenotype, and Fitness
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Bonnie Kircher, Kircher, Bonnie Katherine
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 02/28/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Hormones regulate many basic biological
processes during development and adult life. Disruption of hormone actions at
almost any stage of development and/or adult life leads to physiological
alterations in many animals. Though hormones are well studied in some vertebrate
species (e.g. mammals), little is known about their action in other vertebrate
species. Lizards and snakes make up one of the most diverse vertebrate groups
and have been well studied in the fields of evolution and ecology. Studies of
reproductive organ formation in these animals have been neglected. This research
leverages a novel gene manipulation technique in lizards to understand the role
of hormones in male and female reptile biology and reproduction. Outreach
collaborations with local organizations will provide resources for local
communities to engage with reptile biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
reproductive systems of vertebrates, although morphologically diverse, retain a
fundamental organization and function across species, constrained by the
pressure to reproduce. Studies in mice has demonstrated that the female and male
reproductive system have a stereotypical intraspecific morphology, including the
ovary, oviduct, uterus, and vagina in females and the testes, epididymis and vas
deferens in males. The reproductive system in other vertebrate lineages has not
been studied in a larger comparative context, limiting the ability to draw
conclusions about reproductive organ homology. Steroid hormones, including
androgens and estrogens regulate many aspects of development and function of the
reproductive organs. The fellow will use recent advances in genome manipulation
techniques (CRISPR/Cas) to generate estrogen and androgen receptor mutant brown
anole lizards (Anolis sagrei). Morphological, 3D imaging, immunohistochemistry,
and genomic methods will be used to assess anatomical and physiological
differences between wild-type and mutant lizards. In addition, breeding assays
will be used to determine the reproductive consequences of preventing steroid
hormone signaling. These studies should lead to an understanding of conserved
and diverse roles for this hormone action in vertebrates. Training and
collaboration with students and faculty at the home institution along with a
modern contribution of museums specimens for Anolis sagrei will ensure broad
impact of this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.