* 2209581
* Quantum Capacitance Detectors with meV Resolution for Astroparticle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Karthik Ramanathan, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 09/30/2024
* USD 226,838.00

Determining the nature of dark matter, a mysterious ‘missing mass’ in the
universe only presently observable by its large-scale gravitational effects, is
crucial to furthering our understanding of both cosmology and fundamental forces
and particles. One new well-motivated area to probe is in the ‘light’ dark
matter regime, with particle masses roughly below that of a proton. This new
regime necessitates new and sensitive techniques to detect potential
interactions induced by these candidates in deep underground detectors. One such
promising technology is Quantum Capacitance Detectors (QCDs), which are
superconducting quantum mechanical circuitry that have heritage in the quantum
computing world. This award will support a group at the California Institute of
Technology to investigate this novel class of ‘qubit’ inspired particle
detectors, Which have previously been demonstrated for other use cases.
Additionally, the award will be used to broaden the participation of under-
represented groups by targeted recruitment of undergraduate and high-school
students to work on scientifically relevant projects, with an eye to producing
open-access educational video-content in the process.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
dark matter community considers the advancement of meV to eV energy scale
particle detectors a critical requirement for future progress in the field.
Specifically then, this award funds the development of detectors coupling
interaction induced athermal phonon generation in crystalline silicon with a
superconducting Cooper-pair box sensor. The latter is sensitive to the number
parity of quasiparticles (broken Cooper-pair electrons) within its absorbing
element. Such a scheme enables the literal counting of quasiparticles produced
by single meV phonons and thus reach to the sub-GeV mass dark matter regime. The
scope of the award includes for the design, fabrication, and testing of multiple
generations of QCDs over a two-year pilot phase, with a roadmap of demonstrating
eV and subsequently lower energy resolution on deposited energy within the
crystalline substrate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.