* 2209711
* Frameworks: Large Scale Atmospheric Research Using an Integrated WRF Modeling, Visualization, and Verification Container Framework (I-WRF)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Sara Pryor, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,073,372.00

The Cornell University and National Center for Atmospheric Research I-WRF
Project is developing and deploying an integrated multi-container framework for
the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model to enable multi-node
containerized simulations complete with verification and visualization
capabilities. I-WRF lowers the bar for multidisciplinary researchers who wish to
use WRF in parallel on multiple platforms, ranging from desktops to clouds and
supercomputers. By enabling easier and more effective use of this set of
applications, I-WRF makes atmospheric modeling accessible to a broader range of
researchers (atmospheric scientists, civil engineers, agricultural scientists,
etc.) who no longer must set up and maintain a complex suite of software
applications on their own. The portability, traceability, and ease of deploying
the multi-node containerized framework supports the urgent need for more and
better simulations of possible future climate states signaled by the UN Climate
Change Conference and the establishment of the NSF Engineering Research
Visioning Alliance on The Role of Engineering in Addressing Climate
Change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;I-WRF application containers incorporate software
tools developed mainly at NCAR. These include the WRF model and Model Evaluation
Tools (METplus), as well as visualization and analysis tools that are enhanced
for interactive investigations. I-WRF containers are optimized to run on
multiple platforms and to enable parallel analysis of large domains with a high
level of spatial discretization. They will be freely available at a container
repository and discoverable with common tools. Adopters can use the I-WRF
container components to build and modify their own containers, thus saving time
and increasing overall container availability and sharing within and between
scientific communities. To prove container validity, scaling studies will be
performed on a range of use cases. These include examining the evolution of
renewable energy generation in a changing climate, the effect of land use and
climate change on severe weather events, and the relation between air quality
and human morbidity and mortality. Three postdocs will engage in the use case
studies. The ability to run I-WRF multi-node simulations on desktops will
overcome current obstacles in training students to use WRF at NCAR and in
university course curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp;
Information Science &amp; Engineering and the Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.