* 2209038
* Students, Diversity Events, and a Systems Workshop at the 2022 Summer Biomechanics, Bioengineering, and Biotransport Conference (SB3C); Cambridge, Maryland; 20-23 June 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Alisa Morss Clyne, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 05/31/2024
* USD 45,083.00

This award will provide support for Students, Diversity Events, and a Systems
Workshop at the annual Summer Biomechanics, Bioengineering, and Biotransport
Conference (SB3C). The conference will take place in Cambridge, Maryland, June
20-23, 2022. The goal of the conference is to promote research collaboration in
bioengineering, specifically the impact of forces and flows on biology and
disease. The conference also showcases student research and provides
opportunities for students to network with experienced researchers. Funding will
be used to offset registration costs for students from groups traditionally
underrepresented in biomechanics (including women) to attend the conference.
Funding will also be used to pay the full registration cost for students who are
selected to participate in a research competition. Finally, funding will be used
to support a mentoring event for the aforementioned students, an educational
event about African Americans in STEM fields, and a professional writer to
disseminate conference outcomes with the larger community. This will be in
addition to the publicly-available conference
proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the 2022 SB3C is to
promote state-of-the-art research, collaboration, and scientific discourse in
bioengineering with a focus on biomechanics, fluid mechanics, biotransport,
mechanobiology, tissue engineering, and rehabilitation and design. The second
objective of SB3C is to showcase research from students and trainees, as well as
provide essential networking and mentoring opportunities. The third objective of
SB3C is to broaden participation in biomechanics, bioengineering, and
biotransport research. The intellectual merit of the 2022 SB3C lies in advancing
knowledge in how to apply concepts from systems biology to biomechanics and
mechanobiology. This will be achieved through the plenary talk, research
sessions, and workshops. This knowledge will then be disseminated to the larger
biomechanics community by publishing a paper in the Journal of Biomechanical
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.