* 2209218
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology: Development, Evolution, and Genetic Mechanisms of Regionalization within the Axial Column: Aves (Birds) as a Model System
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Grace Musser, Musser, Grace
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research addresses fundamental questions
in biology; namely, how new anatomical traits evolve and how living things
diversify. Although developmental differences in the structure and
regionalization of the axial column (the spine, shoulders and hips) determine
much of diversity in vertebrates, the function, structure, evolution and
development of these differences remains largely unknown. This comparative study
of how regions of fused vertebrae develop and evolve in birds is thus critical
to better understand the genetics behind these processes, how the skeleton
develops, and how vertebrates evolve. New collections will be produced for the
Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History (NMNH), which will support future
research in vertebrate evolution, and will provide the fellow with training
necessary to pursue cutting-edge interdisciplinary research across paleontology
and biology. This research will provide mentorship and training to undergraduate
interns. The fellow will use this research as a springboard to contribute to
NMNH public and educational programs as well as complete 36 classroom visits to
minoritized middle and high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fellow will use
genetic, developmental, morphological, and evolutionary approaches to study the
evolution of the axial skeleton of birds in a phylogenetic and functional
context, describe and track the development of vertebral column fusion across
five bird species, and study gene expression associated with these fusions
across these species. Birds provide an excellent study system in which to study
trait evolution in the vertebral column, as their spine presents a natural
experimental system with three regions of bone fusion, each with a separate
evolutionary history. Few studies regarding the axial column have focused on
birds, and those that have largely examine only one study species. The fellow
will conduct fieldwork and work with breeders to collect avian embryos and
chicks and will use phylogenetic analysis and fossil calibration, specimen
imaging and dissection, creation of ontogenetic series, and transcriptome
extraction and analysis to investigate evolutionary and ecological,
developmental, and gene expression rules regarding the axial column. The fellow
will receive training in these methods, and broader impacts will focus on
broadening participation of the public, undergraduates and minoritized students
in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.