* 2209546
* IUCRC Phase I University of Michigan Ann Arbor: Center for Data-Driven Drug Development and Treatment Assessment (DATA)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2027
* H Jagadish, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 07/31/2027
* USD 300,000.00

Drug development and assessment present major challenges, in particular: 1) In
the early stages of drug discovery, it is costly and time-consuming to screen
thousands of possible drugs. 2) When healthcare providers use the drug for
treatment, it is highly important to assess their efficacy as well as potential
adverse effects. Novel computational approaches, such as machine learning (ML)
and artificial intelligence (AI), present solutions not only for drug design but
also for personalized treatments. The Center for Data-Driven Drug Development
and Treatment Assessment (DATA), through collaboration with its industry
partners, intends to promote such computational solutions within precompetitive
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years AI and ML methods have impacted
many aspects of society; DATA will develop and apply novel AI/ML methods for
several aspects of drug design and assessment such as screening/detecting
interactions between drugs and targets, and treatment customization considering
preexisting conditions. DATA’s mathematical algorithms and methodologies can
result in tools and solutions to address major obstacles throughout the
lifecycle of drug design and treatment monitoring. The Center also develops
large databases by integrating and curating new/existing public and proprietary
healthcare/pharmaceutical datasets, allowing new resources for modeling,
development, and assessment of new drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DATA will develop
programs to educate the next generation of data scientists, especially those
from underrepresented groups. DATA will form new collaborations beyond academia
to translate data science applications into impactful products/services, thereby
reducing drug development costs while optimizing treatments and improving
overall patient health. This in turn reduces the financial/societal burden on
patients and providers alike. DATA will enable direct interactions between
trainees and pharmaceutical/healthcare industry leaders, providing trainees with
invaluable insight into real-world needs. DATA will address the urgent need for
additional graduates with combined expertise in data science, drug design, and
treatment assessment by directly training this future
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data integration, curation and storage
processes are intended to continue beyond the scope and duration of the Phase I
(and Phase II, if applicable). DATA intends to continue collecting, curating,
integrating, and pre-processing databases shared by the current and future
members of DATA as well as publicly available databases. A subset of these
integrated databases, some of which will be encrypted through our Fully
Homomorphic Encryption approach, can be shared with external entities under the
guidelines set by the Center’s bylaws. Databases and software tools will be
shared by the partners through a dedicated and secure website with
documentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.