* 2209443
* Particle Physics at the High Energy Frontier: Run-3 to HL-LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* James Alexander, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Kaushik De
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,270,000.00

This research project aims to better understand the Universe at the smallest
scales by probing nature's basic symmetries and their relation to the origin of
mass. The 2012 discovery of a Higgs boson with mass close to 125 GeV represents
both the crowning achievement of the Standard Model of particle physics and a
hint beyond it - how can a light Higgs boson possibly survive huge,
destabilizing quantum effects without new, undiscovered physics? Furthermore,
dark matter is known to exist from astronomical observations; however, the
particle properties of dark matter remain shrouded in mystery. The combined
activities of the Cornell University group address such basic questions puzzling
science - the origin of mass and the particle nature of dark matter - and have
the potential for surprising discoveries that may change the way we understand
our physical world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide support
Cornell's work on the CMS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN,
a particle physics laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. During the three-year
timeframe of this award, CMS will complete instrumentation upgrades and resume
data taking. Additionally during this period, the upgrades of CMS for high
luminosity HL-LHC operation will be in full gear. The Cornell group serves as a
project leader of the broader HL-LHC effort of the US groups on CMS, and has its
own specific interests, including in the upgrade of the forward pixel tracking
detector and track-triggering for the experiment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among
the notable broader impacts activities of the Cornell group, many include
significant outreach to students and the public in the upstate New York region
through the outreach office of the Cornell Laboratory for Accelerator-based
Sciences and Education (CLASSE). The group will develop a significant number of
teaching units and science kits for a "Lending Library" that can be taken to
schools or used in after-school programs to bring exciting hands-on activities
to hundreds of local children. The requests for teacher training in support of
such activities have far outnumbered the availability of training opportunities.
To increase the reach of this valuable program, the Cornell group will produce
videos to further expand upon the materials that are available to support the
Lending Library. This work and content development will be done in close
coordination with the CLASSE professional staff, to identify topic, length and
target audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.