* 2209700
* Topics in String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Eric D'Hoker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 840,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Eric D'Hoker, Michael
Gutperle, and Per Kraus at the University of California, Los
Angeles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum field theory, which governs the laws of
elementary particles, and Einstein's theory of General Relativity, which
formulates gravity in terms of spacetime curvature, are known to accurately
describe almost all observed physical phenomena from collider physics to
cosmology. String theory is a compelling framework for incorporating these
principles in a unified framework, yet despite decades of effort the fundamental
structure of string theory remains poorly understood. A key ingredient is
believed to be the holographic principle, relating quantum field theories to
string theory in one higher dimension. The research of Professors D'Hoker,
Gutperle, and Kraus is aimed at deepening our understanding of string theory, as
well as developing its connection to quantum field theory through holography.
Their research will have applications to such diverse physical systems as black
holes and condensed matter as well as to pure mathematics, thereby serving the
national interest by further the progress of basic science in the United States.
This project will also have significant broader impact. Professors D'Hoker,
Gutperle, and Kraus will be conducting research in a highly collaborative manner
involving graduate students and postdocs, thereby providing critical training
for physicists in the early stages of their research careers. They also plan to
disseminate the results of their research by presenting seminars, colloquia, and
public lectures, including at high schools and summer schools. Additionally,
they are involved in advancing education, outreach, and interdisciplinary
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the following problems
will be addressed. Two-loop scattering amplitudes of strings will be studied and
applied to the determination of low-energy effective interactions and to color-
kinematics duality. Other aspects of string theory to be studied include a
bootstrap approach and the worldsheet definition of the spacetime action. New
asymptotically AdS solutions to supergravity theories will be constructed, with
applications to the physics of defects, interfaces, and superconformal field
theories. Further solutions relevant to foundational issues in quantum gravity
and AdS/CFT, including wormholes and islands, will also be obtained. Finally,
pure gravity with fixed metric boundary conditions on a finite surface will be
developed; quantum observables to be computed include the energy spectrum and
correlation functions of the boundary stress tensor, both of which will be
compared against analogous results from conformal field theories deformed by an
irrelevant operator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.