* 2209354
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology: Effects of Rapid Evolution on Alternative Community States at Multiple Spatial Scales
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Lucas Nell, Nell                    Lucas
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2024
* USD 138,000.00

Fellow's name: Lucas Nell&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
2209354&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research title: Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology: Effects of Rapid Evolution on Alternative Community States at Multiple
Spatial Scales&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sponsoring scientist(s) and host
institution(s): Tadashi Fukami, Stanford University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2022,
Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing Interactions
Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of Rules of Life in
innovative ways. This project will study how rapid evolution affects patterns of
alternative ecological community states through space. Alternative community
states are the different outcomes that are possible for a particular ecological
community, and they arise as a result of chance events that occur while
communities are forming. By using both laboratory experiments and mathematical
models, this research will help understand how evolution affects the historical
contingency that makes predicting community outcomes notoriously difficult.
Additionally, it has clear implications for understanding other microbial
communities such as those in the human gut. The fellow will also help broaden
the participation of underrepresented groups through (1) mentorship of an
undergraduate research team and (2) a paid internship program for formerly
incarcerated research scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will study
how rapid evolution alters alternative community states at both single-community
and metacommunity (a network of interconnected communities) scales. Microbes in
sticky monkey-flower nectar are an ideal study system because they can be easily
used to replicate the process of community assembly in the laboratory and
because the constituent species can rapidly evolve ecological traits. The
research will address two main questions: (1) How does rapid trait evolution
affect the compositions of alternative community states and their prevalence
across a metacommunity? In laboratory microcosm experiments, the initial
standing variation for traits affecting alternative community states will be
manipulated, and the patterns of community states through space will be compared
for low-variation (i.e., weaker evolution) and high-variation treatments. (2)
Under what conditions do rapid evolution and immigration alter how alternative
metacommunity states affect species coexistence? A mathematical model will be
developed to simulate the ecological and evolutionary dynamics of microbe
communities in sticky monkey-flower nectar. Simulations will be used to assess
how metacommunity-level coexistence among species can be maintained despite
alternative states that should inhibit coexistence. In addressing both
questions, the fellow will develop new skills in building a system-specific
model from the ground up, fitting experimental data to a mechanistic model, and
working with microbes in the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.