* 2209145
* Window on the Universe: Equation of State of Asymmetric Nuclear Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* William Lynch, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfredo Galindo-Uribarri
* 07/31/2025
* USD 675,000.00

Windows on the Universe: Equation of state of Asymmetric Nuclear Matter
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spectacular GW170817 gravitational wave (GW)
observations of a Neutron Star (NS) merger by the LIGO-Virgo collaboration were
accompanied by the detection of gamma-rays, optical and radio signals. These
coordinated observations were the fruit of cutting-edge scientific investments
by the U.S. These investments usher in a new era of synchronous multi-messenger
astrophysics, and provide definitive links between NS mergers, kilonovae and
gamma-ray bursts, and between NS mergers and the nucleosynthesis of heavy
elements. The proposed research plan broadens these multi-messenger studies to
include relevant messages from experimental constraints on the forces within
neutron-rich matter that support the NS. It addresses questions of the 2015 Long
Range Plan for Nuclear Science concerning the nature of neutron stars and dilute
and dense nuclear matter by focusing on properties of nuclear forces that depend
on neutron-to-proton imbalance. Michigan State University and FRIB sponsor
research for under-represented physics students, which will help to attract a
diverse group of talented undergraduate students, graduate students and postdocs
to this project. These young scientists will learn about detector design and
construction, complex multi-parameter data analyses, detector simulations and
theoretical modeling, machine learning and Bayesian inference analyses. This
training prepares them for leadership roles in the future work force both in
nuclear science but also in other key areas important for technological
advancement and national security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both the GW170817
gravitational wave observations and recent messages on Neutron Star (NS) radii
from the Neutron star Interior Composition Explorer (NICER) constrain the
relationship between the total pressure and the matter density within NS.
Neither astronomical observation isolates the symmetry energy, however. The
symmetry energy is a term in the Equation of State (EoS) that arises from the
imbalance in the numbers of neutrons and protons in the matter. It plays a
dominant role regarding the stability of a NS. The symmetry energy governs the
relative numbers of neutrons and protons, and the density and pressure where the
liquid NS core ends and solid crust begins. The symmetry energy also governs
whether anti matter or strange matter exist within neutron stars. The group will
study the symmetry energy via experimental studies and isolate its role by
varying the relative numbers of neutrons and protons and also the density of the
system from Â¼ to twice normal nuclear matter density. They will perform
experiments at RIKEN in Japan, using cutting edge instrumentation and a
collaborative effort between theory and experiment to connect the findings to
emerging results from multi-messenger astronomy. By combining these new
measurements of the symmetry energy with existing experimental constraints on
the EoS of symmetric matter which contains equal numbers of neutrons and
protons, they will also obtain the EoS of pure neutron matter which is also of
fundamental interest. While the focus of the student training is on scientific
and technological advancement, they will also engage young scientists in
outreach activities to make this science more accessible to non-scientists. They
have created websites using virtual reality apps to illustrate nuclear
collisions, the detection of cosmic rays and the working principles of our time
projection chamber. By such efforts, they will endeavor to make the science more
appealing and exciting to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
advances the objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.