* 2209014
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Studying the role of sphingolipids in membrane trafficking and plasma membrane dynamics in plants
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Ariadna Gonzalez Solis, Gonzalez Solis, Ariadna
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. The plant cell
membrane functions as a platform for communication (signaling) with the outside
environment. This membrane constantly changes its molecular composition of
lipids (fats) and proteins in response to developmental and environmental
signals in a process known as membrane remodeling that is critical for plant
adaptation and survival. Sphingolipids are abundant lipids in plant membranes
that contribute to development and signaling during stress conditions such as
freezing, drought, and pathogen infection. This project will analyze how
sphingolipids participate in membrane remodeling and cell to cell communication.
Investigating how these processes occur is important to understand how plants
can adapt to stressful conditions. This knowledge is relevant for
biotechnological advances using plants and will provide insights into membrane
trafficking in other organisms. The fellow will receive training in mentoring
and science communication practices for diverse audiences. Broader impact
activities include developing a science communication workshop for plant
scientists on how to share their research with a lay
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to understand how
plant sphingolipids affect plasma membrane dynamics and trafficking processes
such as endocytosis, endosomal trafficking, and formation of extracellular
vesicles. This project examines Arabidopsis thaliana mutants with increased or
reduced levels of sphingolipids to 1) analyze the molecular basis of vesicular
trafficking and endosomal sorting of plasma membrane cargo using genetic and
molecular approaches coupled with advanced microscopy imaging, and 2) explore
the mechanisms for plasma membrane dynamics and formation of extracellular
vesicles implementing biochemistry techniques. Training activities include
building skillsets in biochemistry and advanced microscopy techniques, such as
confocal and electron microscopy, and electron tomography. Broadening
participation efforts include working with plant scientist to find creative ways
to communicate their research and to engage a broader audience in scientific
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.