* 2209257
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Identifying Olfactory Pathways that Establish Species Barriers in Cichlid Fish
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Coltan Parker, Parker, Coltan Gable
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 02/28/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research investigates how cichlid fish
sense pheromones to choose a mate. Understanding the biology of mate choice is
important because mate choice can determine whether one species will split to
become many species, or whether closely-related species will blend together to
become one. Pheromones are a key signal that many animals, from insects to fish
to primates, use to choose a mate. Cichlid fishes are the ideal model for
studying the role of pheromones in mate choice because there are hundreds of
cichlid species that live in the same environment and could interbreed, yet they
do not do so because of their mate choice decisions. This research will reveal
the genes and brain circuits that cichlid fish use to sense pheromones and
choose a mate. Outcomes of this research will be relevant to species
conservation efforts, and will advance the field of evolutionary neuroscience.
The Fellow will engage public university students (biology and non-biology
majors) from diverse backgrounds in the research process who will communicate
their findings to the wider public through biology-inspired public art
installations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Female mate choice is a major driver of
sexual selection contributing to reproductive isolation and speciation. Despite
evidence that the explosive adaptive radiation of cichlid fish is driven in part
by female mate choice, and that olfactory (pheromone) cues are essential for
female mate choice in cichlids, very little is known about the molecular or
neural mechanisms that cichlids use for olfactory mate recognition. This
research will use CRISPR-mediated genomic manipulation, single-nucleus RNA
sequencing, and automated behavior tracking to characterize the olfactory
sensory mechanisms necessary for female mate choice and reproductive isolation.
These mechanistic findings, taken in context with the wider cichlid literature
and available genomic resources, will provide a valuable model for generating
and testing hypotheses about vertebrate molecular evolution and speciation.
Through this research the Fellow will gain experience in state-of-the-art
research methods and train undergraduate mentees in the research process. The
Fellow will also gain experience in fostering cross-talk between scientists and
non-scientists throughout the research process, and practice communicating
evolutionary biology concepts to the general public through student-led public
art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.