* 2209135
* Elements: CRISPS: Cell-Centric Recursive Image Similarity Projection Searching
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2022,10/31/2022
* Jeffrey Heflin, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 10/31/2022
* USD 599,797.00

Materials scientists use microscopy to determine the structure, order, and
periodicity that affect properties. The core challenge is that only a fraction
of microscopy data is published. Thus, most of the information from these costly
experiments is lost to an abyss. CRISPS - Cell-Centric Recursive Image
Similarity Projection Searching â€“ is a computing infrastructure to make high-
value materials microscopy Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reproducible
(FAIR). CRISPS is a multitouch, interactive research "buddy" that uses
artificial intelligence to form associations like the human mind to identify
similarities between images. It has permanent, immutable recollection to search
and discover collections of scientific images based on labels and associations.
CRISPS will be made openly available and will be promoted at conferences, in
user facilities, and online to foster a community of developers and users.
Public scientific literacy will be enforced through interactive museum exhibits
that use CRISPS to explore and discover materials microscopy. The program also
supports a first summer research experience for six under-represented persons in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CRISPS is a full-stack software solution for
materials microscopy that seamlessly integrates three novel software concepts.
1. DataFed: a federated scientific database for collecting, collating, and
searching scientific data and metadata. 2. Schema-Free Search: a tool for cell-
centric indexing and searching metadata without schemas. 3. Recursive Image
Similarity Projections: a tool to interactively explore image similarity. Each
of these efforts is intellectually innovative. DataFed provides an automated,
secure, scalable generalized scientific data repository that supports metadata
schemas, searches, and provenance graphs. DataFed removes barriers to
collaborative science through trusted authentication and secure managed file
transfers using GridFTP. Schema-Free Search: an innovative index and ML-
tokenization methodology to search unstructured metadata efficiently using
ElasticSearch. Scientists will discover schemas and ontologies through an
interactive graphical user interface (GUI). Recursive Image Similarity
Projections: a collection of deep learning models to conduct automatic symmetry-
aware microscopy featurization. When coupled with manifold learning and a GUI,
this software tool will enable filtering, similarity exploration, and rapid
labeling of materials microscopy. Combining these tools will facilitate creative
inquiry into unpublished microscopy, accelerating the discovery of new materials
with novel functionalities. CRISPS will be documented and released under a non-
restrictive license which allows its reuse, modification, and commercialization.
The PIs work with stakeholders in academia and industry to implement CRISPS for
typical experiments in optical, electron, and scanning probe microscopies. It
provides public access to a 0.5 PB allocation on a DataFed server with indexing
and image similarity searching functionality through CRISPS. Interdisciplinary
concepts, including scientific data management, search ontologies, and machine
learning, are being integrated into courses in materials and computer science;
and will be broadly shared through the Lehigh Microscopy School and conference
tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal receives funds through the Office
of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Computer and Information Science and
Engineering Directorate and the Division of Materials Research in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.