* 2209109
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Characterizing the genetic mechanisms of bacteria-phage coevolution in Listeria and Salmonella
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Jordan Lewis, Lewis, Jordan A
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan for the Fellow that will
increase the participation of groups underrepresented in biology. Each year
infectious bacteria cause billions of dollars in lost revenue in the food and
agricultural industry in addition to millions of deaths globally. Historically,
antibiotics have served as the primary means to control these agents, but the
rise in antibiotic resistance threatens to undermine these methods. More
recently, bacteria-specific viruses called phages have been used as
antimicrobial control agents, but many questions remain regarding the nature of
their roles with industry relevant bacteria. Characterizing the relationship
(coevolution) between phages and bacteria, and their tendency to develop cross
infectivity and resistance, respectively, is important for the planning and use
of phages for antimicrobial control. The fellow will conduct experiments with
Listeria and Salmonella, two important foodborne bacteria, and an array of their
phages. Results will provide information about bacteria-phage coevolution using
agriculturally relevant systems while expanding the general knowledge about
phage biology. To increase participation of underrepresented groups, the fellow
will teach an undergraduate course focusing on how evolutionary biology
intersects with world issues and will develop a mentoring network for African
Americans in Ecology &amp; Evolutionary Biology (EEB).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
fellow will utilize classic serial passaging techniques combined with genomic
data to characterize the coevolution between phage and bacteria. Replicate
populations of Salmonella enterica and Listeria monocytogenes will be passaged
in monoculture paired with a specific phage. After passaging, the fellow will
utilize whole-genome sequencing and time shift assays to categorize the genetic
dynamics of coevolution and its phenotypic results. Following this initial
experiment, the final generation of each bacteria treatment will be assayed
against novel phages to determine the specificity of its evolved defenses,
before being paired with a new phage and passaged using methods identical to the
first experiment. This will examine how past coevolution impacts future
adaptability. The second experiment will also be followed by whole genome
sequencing and time shift assays. The fellow will encourage participation of
underrepresented groups in biology through the creation of a formal mentoring
network for African Americans in EEB, with the goal of supporting those seeking
PhDs and professorships in the field while fostering inclusivity within
EEB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.