* 2209186
* The SuperCDMS Operations Program
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Bernard Sadoulet, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2026
* USD 618,331.00

The nature of dark matter, which makes up nearly 27% of the mass-energy content
of the Universe, is one of the most fundamental questions of modern science. The
weakly interacting massive particle, or WIMP, is a favored dark matter candidate
sought in searches at the Large Hadron Collider accelerator in Switzerland,
indirect detection experiments, and direct detection experiments that look for
WIMP interactions with nucleons in ultra-sensitive particle detectors. The
SuperCDMS SNOLAB experiment is a direct detection dark matter search that looks
for WIMPs of lower mass with world-leading sensitivity, complementing the on-
going global efforts. This award supports the base operations of the SuperCDMS
SNOLAB experiment as it commences the first science data-taking of the completed
detector. The program includes development of accessible analysis resources that
will enhance training opportunities for training of undergraduate and graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers. In addition, computational skills will be
incorporated into a diverse outreach effort through short course modules,
research projects, and planned workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
SuperCDMS project is to directly detect galactic dark matter and thus address
the particle nature of dark matter, its astrophysical properties, and how it
relates to the Standard Model of particle physics. The construction of the
SuperCDMS detector is reaching completion in preparation for installation and
integration at the deep underground SNOLAB sited in Sudbury, Ontario, Canada.
The team will operate advanced cryogenic detectors that have unprecedented
sensitivity to dark matter particles with masses at and below the GeV/c-squared
mass scale. The advanced cryogenic detectors will provide unprecedented
sensitivity to lower mass dark matter particles, with ultimate potential
sensitivity to the dark matter-nucleon cross-section where solar neutrino-
nucleus scattering becomes significant. Extending beyond the search for dark
matter, the experiment’s phonon-mediated detectors have applications in
cosmology, astronomy and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.