* 2209018
* PRFB FY 2021: Disentangling a Genetic Paradox: Leveraging European Green Crabs to Examine Genomic and Plastic Contributions to Thermal Tolerance
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Yaamini Venkataraman, Venkataraman, Yaamini Ranjani
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 03/31/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. European green crabs (Carcinus maenas) are one
of the world’s most successful marine invasive species, due in part to their
ability to thrive across a range of temperatures. On the North American West
Coast, invasive green crabs negatively impact species important for commercial
shellfish production and tribal food sovereignty through competition with native
crabs, predation of juvenile shellfish, and destruction of nursery eelgrass
beds. In order to accurately predict and prevent further spread and damages, it
is important to understand the factors that help this species tolerate
temperature changes. This work will uncover how genetic and environmental
factors contribute to an individual crab’s temperature tolerance. The fellow
will expand on previous justice, diversity, equity, and inclusion work by
developing lessons about genetics and marine invasions for under-resourced
schools in the Greater Boston area.

West Coast C. maenas populations are characterized by substantially lower
genetic diversity than in their native range. Recent discovery of a supergene
(block of genes inherited together) with amino acid-changing mutations strongly
associated with thermal tolerance suggests a genetic basis for C. maenas
thermotolerance at a population level. While population-level differences in
thermal performance are important, they can obscure the individual variation in
phenotypically plastic traits that influences thermotolerance. The fellow will
pair whole-animal thermal physiology, transcriptomics, and metabolomics in adult
C. maenas to disentangle thermal response variation associated with acclimatory
plasticity and adaptive evolution. By leveraging the mechanistic understanding
provided by high-throughput sequencing technologies such as untargeted
transcriptomics and metabolomics, the fellow will elucidate impacts of
temperature on molecular physiology that may not be easily observed by whole-
organism response metrics alone. Molecular reprogramming identified by these
methods will demonstrate how individual-level thermotolerance contributes to
population stress responses. This research will quantify individual thermal
tolerance variation and create a framework for dissecting the mechanistic
underpinnings of plasticity-adaptation interactions. The methods can be applied
to other systems, and will expand the fellow’s research breadth. The fellow will
providing paid research opportunities for undergraduate students from
historically excluded groups in ocean sciences, thus training students in
ecophysiology and molecular biology while also developing mentorship skills
necessary for the fellow to be a successful professor.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.