* 2209917
* Elements:  RAD Discoveries for Fundamental Physics
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Isabel Ojalvo, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2025
* USD 599,292.00

This project supports a diverse team of physicists and computer scientists to
leverage recent advancements in AI and newly available particle detector
capabilities in order to develop new computationally- and energy-efficient
technology that is capable of detecting rare and unpredictable patterns in data
with unprecedented intelligence. Such technology finds wide applicability in
industry, medicine, national security, but also fundamental physics research.
The latter is a key focus of the project, where the developed infrastructure
enables new searches for yet-undiscovered physics phenomena using state-of-the-
art particle detectors at national and international particle accelerator
facilities. These searches represent a major departure from the methods that
scientists have been applying for decades in particle physics experiments to
discover new phenomena, in that they are no longer confined within an existing
and limited understanding of how the Universe works, or a prior expectation for
how rare and unpredictable patterns in data may manifest. The developed
technology allows the data itself, rather than prior knowledge, to guide new
discoveries about how Nature works at its most fundamental level, and aims to
revolutionize the way new discoveries are made.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to transform fundamental discoveries in particle and astro-particle
physics by developing new Cyberinfrastructure (CI) for real-time anomaly
detection (“RAD”). The newly developed CI enables searches that can uncover
“unknown” physics through rare, unpredictable phenomena. Traditionally,
discoveries of rare processes through particle and astro-particle experiments
have relied on scientists’ ability to accurately predict new physics phenomena,
and to subsequently selectively look for them within the data by using
algorithms trained on predicted unknowns. In a new era of scientific discovery,
driven by unprecedented data statistics and Artificial Intelligence (AI)
advances, scientists instead may now use AI-powered tools that let the data
guide expectation to selectively identify rare and unpredictable signatures that
may lie within the data itself, and which may be signatures of new fundamental
physics phenomena in nature. The project brings together physicists and computer
scientists at Columbia and Princeton, including students, post-doctoral
researchers, and CI professionals, and additional collaborators at other US
institutions and national labs, to develop anomaly detection algorithms that are
executable on resource constrained platforms, commonly employed as on-detector
data processing devices at particle physics experiments. Through targeted
developments and demonstrations at existing particle detector facilities, the
ultimate goal of this project is to develop advanced CI that is energy-
efficient, reliable, scalable, and expandable, and thus applicable to trigger
systems of current and future generation experiments in the intensity, energy,
and cosmic frontiers of particle physics. By design, the delivered CI is capable
of fundamental discoveries that are beyond what is envisioned with current
trigger frameworks, and has the potential of revolutionizing the way particle
and astro-particle physics discoveries are made. The developed CI promises to be
broadly applicable to other high-throughput data-selection applications that
require real-time, intelligent data processing for the purposes of discovering
anomalies in data. These applications can range from neuroscience, to medical
imaging, to satellite imaging, cybersecurity, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the
Physics at the Information Frontier in the Division of Physics within the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.