* 2209271
* Simultaneous Multiwavelength Imaging of Retinal Nerve Fiber Layer for Early Diagnosis of Glaucoma
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Michael Wang, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 06/30/2025
* USD 488,154.00

Glaucoma is a leading cause of blindness worldwide. Early diagnosis can permit
early medical intervention to prevent irreversible visual loss caused by damage
to the retina. To assess the glaucoma damage, non-contact optical measurement of
retina layer thickness is typically performed in clinical practice. The
available optical measurement technique is, however, not sensitive enough to
assess early signs of glaucomatous damage of the retina. Recent laboratory
studies show that the ultrastructure of the retina is damaged first before
apparent retina thickness change. The ultrastructure damage causes reflectance
decreases at different wavelengths as disease progresses. Unfortunately, there
is no available optical modality that can assess the retina spectral reflectance
in real time. This project will design and construct such an imaging device.
Completion of the project will lead to a new non-contact optical method that can
sensitively detect early glaucoma damage. The study will find the relationship
between retina spectral reflectance changes and glaucoma damage by using a rat
model of glaucoma. The gained knowledge will have significant impact to the
early diagnosis of glaucoma and related medical treatment monitoring. The
proposed research will benefit academic research and education by providing
graduate students with multidisciplinary training in biophotonics,
microelectromechanical systems, and imaging, and by supporting undergraduate
senior projects and summer research experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals
of this project are to design, construct, and explore a novel fundus
multiwavelength imaging modality for in vivo simultaneous multiwavelength
imaging of the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) and to provide a thorough
understanding of in vivo measurement of the RNFL reflectance spectrum. The work
builds on the investigators' in vitro experiments that concluded that (1) in the
glaucomatous retinas RNFL reflectance decreases prior to thinning of the RNFL
and (2) the decrease of RNFL reflectance occurs early at visible wavelength and
later at infrared wavelength. The research plan is organized under three
specific aims: (1) Design, construct, and explore a new fundus multiwavelength
imaging device; (2) Validate measurement capability of the fundus
multiwavelength imaging device by comparing the reflectance spectra of the same
RNFL measured in vivo and in vitro in the normal rat retina; and (3) Study RNFL
reflectance spectra in retinas with glaucoma damage by using a rat model of
glaucoma. The gained knowledge will have significant impact on the early
diagnosis of glaucoma, which will prevent irreversible visual loss caused by
retinal damage, and related medical treatment
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.