* 2209353
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Association of leaf traits with climate variables in California and Hawaii
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Christian Henry, Henry, Christian
* Fellowship Award
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2025
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2023, Broadening Participation of Groups under-represented in Biology. The
Fellowship supports a research and training plan to increase the participation
of groups underrepresented in biology. The goals of this project are to
investigate and catalog the leaf characteristics that native plants display in
different climate zones across California and Hawaii. This dataset will provide
evidence for whether plants with a certain leaf type are found in specific
climate regions. This information is important because it will increase the
understanding of the response of plants to changing environments. The project
will increase representation in the field of plant evolution and promote
teaching, mentoring, and collaborative research efforts with the University of
California postdoctoral community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a phylogenetic computational framework of analyses, using a multifaceted
approach to consider trait ecology and evolution. Climate and trait variables
will be mapped to detect phenotypic shifts across lineages. Current and future
projected climate data for all geo-referenced herbarium specimens and for
herbarium collections in species’ native ranges, within and beyond California
and Hawaii will be extracted from the Global Biodiversity Information Facility
(GBIF). This information will be used to determine associations of traits with
climate across species ranges. Principle component analyses will be conducted to
determine axes for climatic variation, followed by a phylogenetic ANOVA to
examine trait evolution and the relationships of traits with environmental
variables. This will test the lability of traits across environmental gradients
and allow for the mapping of climate and trait variables to detect phenotypic
shifts across lineages. In summary, the database will be a publicly available
resource that fills a gap in knowledge concerning leaf traits and provides a
foundation for future studies. This project will broaden the fellow’s
phylogenetic analysis skillset and develop the fellow’s knowledge about flora-
wide trait evolution. In addition to research the fellow will teach and support
other underrepresented STEM trainees through mentorship at the University of
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.