* 2209582
* RUI:  Quantum and Thermal Fluctuations in Monopoles, Spacetime, and Materials
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Noah Graham, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 135,000.00

This RUI award funds the research activities of Professor Noah Graham at
Middlebury College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whether we are carrying out a physics
experiment or using our eyes and ears in everyday life, we learn about the world
through the reflection of waves. Ordinarily, these waves are created by a
specific source, such as a light bulb or a sonar ping. However, even in the
absence of a source, quantum-mechanical and thermal effects will spontaneously
generate fluctuations that propagate and reflect according to the same rules of
wave scattering. At the short distance scales relevant to nanotechnology, these
fluctuations give rise to forces and interactions known as Casimir effects.
Materials and structures with unusual properties --- which can range from
"twisted" configurations that cannot unwind, to black holes from which waves
cannot escape, to nonreciprocal materials that reflect light asymmetrically from
a flat surface --- can in turn give rise to correspondingly unusual Casimir
effects. This project will develop mathematical and computational tools to
analyze such systems and predict the resulting forces and other associated
properties, such as the rate of heat transfer. As micromechanical devices move
to smaller and smaller scales, these calculations can inform possible features,
as well as potential pitfalls, of their design. This project will also have
significant broader impacts. Because scattering theory plays a fundamental role
in many areas of physics and engineering, this project will provide valuable
opportunities for undergraduate summer students to build essential skills
through computational and mathematical research. Moreover, through education and
outreach, the impact of this project will extend beyond the students directly
involved to the broader department, college, and local community as well. This
project will thus promote key national priorities, both by advancing fundamental
and applied technological research and by building the core scientific and
technical capabilities of the next generation of scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this work will focus on
calculations involving quantum and thermal fluctuations due to topological
solitons, curved spacetime backgrounds such as the Schwarzschild black hole, and
nonreciprocal materials for which the amplitudes for forward and reverse
scattering are unequal. In each of these cases, subtleties arising from gauge
symmetry and breaking of discrete symmetries, such as parity and time reversal,
can lead to unusual features in the calculation and its phenomenological
predictions. These consequences are most effectively analyzed in terms of
scattering amplitudes for both real and complex wave number, through which the
quantum field theory problem can be broken down into more familiar components
based in quantum mechanics, electromagnetism, and statistical mechanics. As a
result, this approach offers significant opportunities for meaningful
contributions by undergraduate summer research students, who at the same time
will learn broadly applicable techniques of scattering theory, wave mechanics,
and computational physics through concrete calculations and numerical
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.