* 2209507
* EAGER: DCL: SaTC: Enabling Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Adapting Economic Games to Personalize Privacy and Security Nudges
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Yan Chen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 315,997.00

Modern social communication systems, ranging from email to social media systems,
present a dizzying number of decisions for their users. Moreover, privacy and
security configurations are often hidden and opaque. Thus it is hard for
individuals to manage configurations and behaviors in ways that are consistent
with their preferences. Bad actors or adversarial agents can take advantage of
ambiguity or information leaks that result from poor settings and user
uncertainty to find attack routes for disinformation and phishing. Conversely,
socially beneficial behaviors that require data sharing are also hindered. A
better understanding of the relationships among preferences, behaviors, and
interfaces can help address these concerns. Business interests in preventing
phishing can be preserved by understanding individual preferences and their
relationship to employee behaviors. Personalized interventions can be applied
when preferences conflict with socially beneficial data behaviors. This project
synthesizes insights from behavioral economics and computing to promote
information security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team seeks to tackle this
challenge by modeling individual preferences through the use of decision- and
game- theoretic economic games to identify individual risk, ambiguity, and
information preferences. The experimental games simulate competing and
cooperating incentives and strategies, such as in the Prisoner’s Dilemma game.
The appeal of these types of games is that a comparatively small subset of them
may be useful to model a set of preferences that are predictive of a broad range
of real-world behaviors. The team is modifying these games to better align with
real-world communication tasks in a social media system. Behavioral experiments
can provide novel evidence of the predictive value of the games and validate
their use in novel contexts. The results may transform work in human-computer
interaction, security, and privacy research and design by isolating simpler
incentive-compatible instruments that model user preferences and correlate well
with behaviors. This connection enables novel interventions from personalized
interfaces to personally or socially beneficial
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.