* 2209085
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Interplay of Ploidy and the Distribution of Fitness Effects in Brassica
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Justin Conover, Conover, Justin L
* Fellowship Award
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/28/2026
* USD 216,000.00

This action funds an NSF Plant Genome Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in
Biology for FY 2022. The fellowship supports a research and training plan in a
host laboratory for the Fellow who also presents a plan to broaden participation
in biology. The title of the research and training plan for this fellowship to
Dr. Justin Conover is “Interplay of Ploidy and the Distribution of Fitness
Effects in Brassica”. The host institution for the fellowship is the University
of Arizona and the sponsoring scientists are Drs. Michael Barker and Ryan
Gutenkunst.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The domestication of wild plants to create
agricultural crops resulted in many changes in their genomes. Understanding
those changes can deepen our understanding of agricultural history and
potentially guide future crop improvements. DNA mutations can affect an
individual’s evolutionary fitness (ability to survive and reproduce), with
consequences ranging from lethality, to having no effect, to being highly
beneficial. However, our understanding of mutation fitness effects in crops is
incomplete, largely because many crops have more than two complete sets of
chromosomes, which complicates genomic analyses and may affect how mutations
change fitness. This project will develop new approaches to understand the
fitness effects of mutations in plants and apply them to multiple economically
important Brassica crops, including canola, broccoli, cauliflower, and turnips.
The tools developed and insights gained will be applicable to many other crops
including cotton, wheat, peanuts, and quinoa. Broader impacts from this project
will increase the participation of students from historically underrepresented
groups in STEM, including Alaskan Natives and Native Americans, as well as
members of the LGBTQ+ community, through paid research opportunities and free
public workshops to prepare application materials for graduate schools and
external fellowships. Training objectives include obtaining expertise in the
application of computational and statistical methods to population-level genomic
data and the analysis of gene expression data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
distribution of fitness effects (DFE) of new mutations is a fundamental concept
in population genetics that is important for understanding and predicting how
natural selection operates in populations. Considerable attention has been given
to understand how properties of the DFE can differ between populations in animal
model systems, but DFE research has been relatively neglected in plants.
Although many crop systems have undergone recent and recurrent whole genome
duplication (polyploidy) events, often accompanied by interspecific
hybridization, the ways in which shifts in ploidy levels affect the DFE in
plants are poorly understood. This project uses allopolyploid Brassica napus,
and its diploid progenitors B. rapa and B. oleracea to characterize how ancient
and recent polyploidy events influences the DFE of a population and to model
correlations in the DFE between the subgenomes of a single allopolyploid
population. The work will be achieved primarily through the use and development
of the Python package dadi (Diffusion Approximation for Demographic Inference)
and publicly available transcriptomic and whole-genome resequencing data. All
data, scripts, and methodological advances will be made available in public
repositories, and all software will be open-source and freely
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.