* 2209194
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Secure outsourced analytics in untrusted clouds
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Mayank Varia, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 765,942.00

This project designs and develops Secrecy+, a novel data analytics system that
uses secure multi-party computation (MPC) and enables data holders to perform
relational analytics on their collective private data with provable and
configurable security guarantees. The project's core novelties include a
principled optimization framework for outsourced relational MPC and a library of
parallel secure operators that scale to much larger datasets than the current
state-of-the-art. Secrecy+ targets use cases where multiple data holders are
willing to contribute their private data towards a joint analysis (e.g., for
profit, social good, or improved services), provided that the data remain siloed
from untrusted or unauthorized entities. The research is grounded in two case
studies: (i) secure cloud-based analytics on mobile health data, and (ii) secure
cross-site analytics on datacenter logs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
involves three sets of tasks that span the areas of cryptography, database query
evaluation, and distributed systems. First, the investigators define a unified
cost model for secure operations across different MPC protocols and physical
deployments. Second, they develop a relational MPC query processor that supports
parallel query execution and employs optimizations that reduce MPC costs while
retaining the full security guarantees of the cryptographic protocols. Third,
the investigators design and implement high-level user interfaces and tools for
seamless integration with existing cloud infrastructure. Project results have
the potential to fundamentally change how private datasets are used by
organizations, researchers, and policy makers in accordance with data privacy
regulations and can pave the way for new marketplaces in the
cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.