* 2209751
* IUCRC Phase III University of Texas, Arlington: Center for Energy-Smart Electronic Systems (ES2)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Bahgat Sammakia, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 08/31/2027
* USD 50,000.00

With the proliferation of automation and electronic devices throughout most
major industries, the amount of data being produced and the need to
process/manage that data continues to grow. Automated management of data
centers, addressing their emerging thermal challenges and improving their energy
efficiency form the key to addressing this demand. The Center for Energy-Smart
Electronic Systems (ES2), an NSF Industry University Cooperative Research Center
(IUCRC), was established in 2011 to address these needs for data centers. This
award provides a Phase III renewal for this 3-site IUCRC, which consists of
Binghamton University, Villanova University and University of Texas at
Arlington. ES2's vision is to develop systematic methodologies for operating
electronic systems, including data centers, as dynamic, self- sensing and
regulating systems that are predictable and verified in real time. The focus in
Phase I and Phase II has been to develop new energy-optimization and thermal
management models and designs, as well as tools and algorithms enabling
electronic data systems to operate more efficiently and securely. Phase III will
further expand on these methodologies to progress closer to a full realization
of the ES2 vision. The Center brings together computer scientists, electrical
engineers, and mechanical engineers in a synergistic multidisciplinary team to
advance industrially relevant research in this area. ES2, in promoting
significant reductions in energy consumption in electronic systems, will
contribute to the national agenda of eventually reaching net-zero carbon
emissions. Reducing energy costs in data centers will help to allow computing
services to be more deployable and accessible for a larger population segment.
ES2 continues to attract a diverse group of students at the undergraduate and
graduate levels and provides industrially relevant training in their careers
beyond graduation. ES2 has also integrated a variety of mechanisms across the
partners universities and industry members to increase participation by women
and underrepresented students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Texas at
Arlington (UTA) site has grown its facilities, specifically hardware, to support
ES2, often in collaboration with the Center’s industry members. Currently there
is a modular data center laboratory consisting of a direct/indirect evaporative
cooling unit that has been developed in collaboration with a Center partner; in
Phase III this will be augmented with a second spray-based indirect evaporative
cooling unit. In Phase III, there will be a considerable focus at UTA on
immersion cooling, an important industry sector that is predicted to experience
significant growth in the next five years. Immersion cooling applications span
high-performance computing, edge computing, and cryptocurrency mining, amongst
others. UTA has invested in significant infrastructure to support this important
area of research, including resources for a newly renovated state-of-the-art
immersion cooling lab as well as a PIV for experiments related to immersion
cooling. As such, in Phase III, UTA will be conducting both experimental and
computational immersion cooling research. The test laboratories also offer
educational value by serving as a practical demonstration of technology and heat
transfer principles for both undergraduates as well as high school students
participating in UTA’s summer programs. These facilities support the educational
and workforce development missions of ES2; the UTA site has a strong track
record of providing highly trained STEM graduates to industry, including many of
the Center’s members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.