* 2209720
* Elements: Scalable Bayesian Software for Interpreting Astronomical Images
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Camille Avestruz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

The BLISS (Bayesian Light Source Separator) Project is an interdisciplinary
research effort to develop a software tool that allows astronomers to make use
of the latest advances in machine learning. By harnessing these advances,
astronomers can rapidly analyze vast quantities of complex data to understand
the nature of our universe. This project also engages and educates a wider
audience through a workshop series that promotes technical proficiency in
software development and machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software
tool, developed as part of this project, will allow astronomers to more easily
access Bayesian statistical methods to interpret image data from astronomical
surveys. Bayesian methods excel at uncertainty quantification and data
integration, two capabilities that will be critical in analyzing the deluge of
data produced by next-generation astronomical surveys. One major barrier to the
more widespread adoption of Bayesian analysis for interpreting astronomical
images is computational: Bayesian inference is notoriously computationally
demanding. A second major barrier is social: up to now, novel Bayesian methods
have been developed in isolation by statisticians and have rarely been
integrated into astronomy workflows because it is unclear to practitioners in
either discipline how this can be accomplished. The BLISS Project addresses both
these computational and community integration challenges. To overcome the
computational challenges, BLISS leverages recent advances in Bayesian inference
methodology, including the use of deep learning, variational inference, and GPU
acceleration. To ensure immediate and sustainable community use, development of
the BLISS is guided by needs identified by domain experts, who are themselves
prepared to participate in BLISS's development and are enthusiastic about
integrating BLISS into their teams' data analysis
workflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information
Science &amp; Engineering, the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the
Division of Astronomical Sciences in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.