* 2209459
* University of Chicago Contribution to PICO-500 Engineering and Construction
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Juan Collar, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 09/30/2025
* USD 660,682.00

The problem of the identification of Dark Matter has been with us for more than
eight decades. In the interim, astronomical evidence for the existence of this
mysterious form of matter has poured in. Unable to absorb or emit light, its
presence is made evident by its gravitational pull on luminous objects such as
stars, galaxies, and larger structures. If composed of new elementary particles,
dedicated detectors housed in underground laboratories -protected there from
cosmic radiation- stand a chance of solving this long-standing riddle, now
central to particle physics, cosmology and astronomy. PICO-500 is one of these
detectors, consisting of one of the largest bubble chambers ever built and
housed more than a mile underground in the Canadian SNOLAB laboratory. It is by
design insensitive to most known sources of radiation, while highly responsive
to the characteristic interactions expected from particle dark matter. This
award will allow a US postdoc to play a central role in the construction,
commissioning, and extraction of first data from this promising dark matter
detector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superheated liquids like those used in PICO
bubble chambers provide the best discrimination of any dark matter detector
against electron recoils, the dominant environmental background limiting the
sensitivity of these searches. PICO detectors additionally feature an efficient
acoustic rejection against signals induced by ubiquitous alpha emitters. This
has resulted in a track-record of continuous increase in dark matter sensitivity
from the PICO program, as its bubble chambers have grown in size. Recent
phenomenological work has emphasized the importance of fluorine-containing PICO
targets: these are necessary for a comprehensive exploration of all possible
modes of dark matter particle interaction. The completion of the work described
in this proposal will extend the sensitivity of PICO down to spin-dependent
cross sections of 1E-42 cm^2 (an improvement of 100 beyond present limits). This
will provide an exhaustive exploration of supersymmetric dark matter via this
channel, and in particular for few GeV/c^2 particles, a mass range of much
phenomenological interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.