* 2209388
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2022: Defining a New Paradigm Linking Genetic Variation in Human Population with mRNA Stability
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Rachael Bakker, Bakker, Rachael A
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Differences in the DNA sequence of genes
between individuals are known as genetic variants. Scientists currently have
unprecedented knowledge of human genetic variants due to advances in DNA
sequencing. Genetic variants can cause the physical differences we can see
between individuals, known as phenotypes. However, the mechanisms for how they
do so are not completely understood.&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates how
genetic variants impact molecules called messenger RNAs (mRNAs). mRNAs are
instructions for making proteins that are copied from DNA and read by protein-
making machinery. Recently, scientists discovered that some gene sequences make
it harder for protein-making making machinery to read mRNAs, causing the cell to
destroy the mRNA. This research seeks to identify genetic variants in humans
that cause the mRNA to be destroyed in this way, ultimately causing phenotypes
we observe. The overall goal of this research is to understand how genetic
variants cause phenotypes by altering the properties of mRNAs. This knowledge
will increase scientistâ€™s ability to predict how genetic variants will affect
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this goal, the fellow will use a
combination of high-throughput experimental and computational approaches to
define the mechanism of missense mutations in regulating mRNA stability. Towards
this goal, the research will identify amino acid motifs that alter mRNA
stability by combining a novel massively parallel knock-in assay in cell culture
and a machine learning model. The fellow will then define critical amino acid
residues in the newly-translated protein chain and the ribosome that are
essential for ribosome stalling using systematic mutations. Finally, the fellow
will apply the predictive models and mechanistic insights to define human
genetic variants that drive phenotypic changes by altering translation and mRNA
stability. The proposed research will define a novel mechanism by which missense
variants alter gene expression and lead to molecular, cellular and organismal
phenotypes. It will provide a framework for predicting the functional relevance
of single nucleotide variants in the human genome. Additionally, the fellow will
gain training in state-of-the art techniques in DNA sequencing and machine
learning. Further, the fellow will mentor undergraduate interns, and will teach
a graduate course module in computational biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.