* 2209591
* Multiscale Experimental and Numerical Investigation of Impacts of Turbulence and Vegetation on Flow and Solute Transport in Hyporheic Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Judy Yang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 11/30/2025
* USD 553,400.00

Hyporheic zone refers to the interface between the bed and surface water in
streams, rivers, and other aquatic ecosystems. Contaminants and nutrients are
constantly being exchanged between surface and subsurface water in the hyporheic
zone, controlling water quality, the metabolism of benthic microbes, and the
associated biogeochemical cycling. Vegetation and turbulence, which are
ubiquitous in aquatic ecosystems, affect surface-subsurface exchange and, as
such, impact water quality and stream biogeochemical cycling. However, how
vegetation and turbulence impact exchange remains unclear, making it difficult
to predict contaminant transport and biogeochemical cycling in streams, lakes,
and coastal areas. The proposed study aims to combine laboratory experiments in
a water-recirculating flume, numerical simulation, and field experiments in an
outdoor stream to quantify the impacts of vegetation and turbulence on flow and
solute transport in the hyporheic zone. The results from this study will help
improve predictions of contaminant transport and biogeochemical cycling in
streams and other aquatic ecosystems, as well as help ecologists design stream
restoration projects that use vegetation to increase the retention and
degradation of contaminants in sediment. The proposed project will also train
next-generation scientists, including two graduate students and undergraduates
from underrepresented groups. Further, a demonstration hands-on activity will be
developed and used in outreach events for K-12 girls and teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to quantitatively
characterize the role of turbulence and in-channel vegetation on hyporheic
exchange and propose a multi-scale modeling framework for predicting hyporheic
exchange and solute transport in meandering channels with bedforms, turbulent
flows, and in-channel vegetation. Systematically controlled experiments with
refractive index matched sediment and vegetation, as well as fluorescent dye
imaging, will be conducted in flumes to directly visualize and quantify the
turbulence and vegetation-induced hyporheic exchange. A physics-based
theoretical model will be developed to predict hyporheic exchange as a function
of turbulent kinetic energy and vegetation stem size, volume fraction, and drag
coefficient. The theoretical model will then be incorporated into a multiscale
numerical modeling framework to investigate the combined effects of the
important drivers (including near-bed turbulence, vegetation, bedforms, and
channel meanderings) on flow and solute transport in complex meandering streams.
The modeling results will be further validated by field tracer experiments in an
outdoor meandering channel with bedforms, turbulent flows, and
vegetation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.