* 2209584
* Analysis of Data from the Telescope Array Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Charles Jui, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 09/30/2025
* USD 310,000.00

The Telescope Array (TA) Observatory is the largest detector of ultra-high
energy cosmic rays (UHECRs) in the Northern Hemisphere. An upgrade to the
observatory (TAx4) is currently underway that will double the number of deployed
surface detectors (SD) over an increased total instrumented area of
approximately 1800 square-km. An array of florescence detectors (FDs) overlooks
this SD array, providing important additional information on the detected
events. This award supports the cosmic ray physics group at the University of
Utah in analysis of data from the TA Observatory. The award includes support for
postdoctoral and graduate student researchers carrying out studies of the TA
“hot-spots” and studies of the ultra-high energy cosmic ray spectrum and
composition. Under the award, the team will continue to develop a broad outreach
program, ASPIRE, that includes online web lessons and direct interactions with
the local community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TA data analyses have identified a
“hot-spot” of UHECRs above 57 EeV in the northern sky at 3.5 sigma significance.
The observatory has also seen indications of differences in the cosmic ray
spectral shape when comparing events within the hotspot region to those outside,
as well as an apparent declination dependence of the spectrum at the highest
energies. The source of the hotspot, however, remains unknown. Inconsistencies
between the measurements of TA and the Pierre Auger Observatory, the largest
UHECR detector in the southern hemisphere, are also apparent at the highest
energies, including in the studies of the width and shape of the Xmax
distributions. The additional data collected with the TAx4 upgrade, combined
with the energy calibrations of the recently installed FDs, will improve the
sensitivity of the instrument toward resolving these important open questions in
our understanding of the highest energy particles in the
Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.