* 2209070
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: Are the Consequences of Wildlife Extirpation in Tropical Forests Reshaping the Drivers of Plant Mortality?
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Justine Lamperty, Lamperty, Justine Therese
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 06/30/2026
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Tropical forests hold more species than any
other ecosystem. Unfortunately, human activities are reducing the number of
large- and medium-sized animals in these forests, a phenomenon called
defaunation. Losing these animals eliminates their interactions with plants and
other animals, which means that defaunation can trigger a cascade of changes in
how tropical forests are functioning. One example of this is that defaunation
leads to the loss of many fruit-eating animals that disperse seeds, an important
part of forest regeneration. When taken together, changes that are occurring as
tropical forests become defaunated may alter factors determining the diversity
and survival dynamics of plants in these important and biodiverse ecosystems.
This project will investigate if, how, and to what extent defaunation may be
doing this through multiple experiments set up in defaunated and intact tropical
forests in Ecuador. Further, this project facilitates ecological and
conservation education through outreach, training, and mentoring to diverse
audiences that include high school and undergraduate students, young scientists,
and members of the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central mechanism
maintaining the unmatched plant diversity in the tropics is thought to be
negative density-dependent mortality, by which spatially aggregated plant
individuals, particularly conspecific and especially related individuals, face
heightened attacks from a suite of plant-enemies (e.g., fungal pathogens, insect
and vertebrate herbivores, and seed predators). By triggering multiple
ecological cascades, defaunation may directly and indirectly affect the impacts
these plant enemies have. For example, one consequence of defaunation is
decreased seed dispersal services resulting in lower plant genetic diversity,
potentially also reducing the diversity of genes important for mounting defenses
against pathogens. This project investigates if defaunation alters the drivers
of seed and seedling mortality, thereby reshaping what structures plant
diversity in tropical forests. This research compares multiple defaunated and
faunally-intact sites and integrates experimental manipulations (e.g.,
treatments that exclude specific groups of plant enemies) with genomics to
mechanistically understand how the relative and overall strengths of different
plant enemies change under defaunation. The Fellow will develop several new
skills including competence in genomics and bioinformatics. Broader impacts
include working with local high school students from minority backgrounds
through science internships and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.