* 2209074
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Cara Love, Love, Cara N
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2025
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The occurrence of emerging infectious diseases
and diagnosed cancer cases are increasing globally in wildlife and humans alike.
By examining patterns of natural selection in wild populations, we can provide
excellent models to understand complex biological questions such as disease
dynamics and cancer physiology. The proposed research works with gray wolves
(Canis lupus) that have experienced multigenerational exposure to environmental
ionizing radiation contamination within the Chernobyl Exclusion Zone. These data
will work to inform adaptive mitigation strategies to cancer formation and
resilience to radiation exposure, and can inform the study of cancer in humans.
Throughout the fellowship, the fellow will also expand their efforts in
providing educational and professional development opportunities to a diverse
audience through mentorship, teaching, and outreach endeavors that will
highlight the utility of model systems in addressing complex and societally
relevant questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elevated ionizing radiation exposure is
widely recognized to cause deleterious conditions though altered immune
function, increased cancer risk, and/or increased oxidative stress. This study
will explore adaptive evolution in gray wolves (Canis lupus) from a radiation
contaminated region, the Chernobyl Exclusion Zone, as a model system for
examining adaptive innovation of resilience to chronic oncogenic stress. By
combining a variety of genomic and epigenetic techniques, this project will shed
light on how pathogen infection, immune function, and mutagenic responses
functionally modulate adaptive resilience to oncogenic stress. Collectively
these findings will inform evolutionary effects of multigenerational radiation
exposure in oncogenesis and immune response and may directly inform the study of
cancer physiology and treatments in humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.