* 2209783
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Discrete Simulation of Flexible Structures and Soft Robots
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Andrew Sabelhaus, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 11/30/2025
* USD 141,690.00

From carbon nanotubes to human-size soft robots, flexible and deformable
structures are present throughout the next generation of promising engineering
disciplines. However, simulation of these mechanical systems is often slow, and
simulation software is challenging to use. In addition, there is little support
for simulating flexible structures in common robotics research and education
software, limiting the use of intelligent soft robots to experts only. On the
other hand, the computer graphics community has developed advanced software for
simulating flexible structures like hair and fur. Recent research has shown
these computer graphics approaches can accurately simulate soft robots and
flexible structures faster than real-time. This project develops an easy-to-use
open-source software platform for these fast physics-based simulations of
flexible structures, and incorporates the software into the national
cyberinfrastructure ecosystem. This software, DiSMech, can be used by
researchers of all ages to investigate the mechanics of slender structures,
autonomy for soft robots, and breakthrough designs for deformable
machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this work is to develop a
discrete differential geometry (DDG) simulation environment into a widely-
available software package capable of modeling soft and flexible structures. The
DDG approach enables low-dimensional modeling of slender rods and flexible
shells combined into arbitrary shapes, establishing a practical but still
physically accurate contrast to computationally expensive finite element
analysis (FEA) techniques. This work first develops a core software package for
DiSMech that adapts prior work to meet the standard for national
cyberinfrastructure: maintainable, extensible, and with a robust user interface.
Next, a virtual testbed for a wide class of soft and flexible robots is built by
incorporating DiSMech into an existing robotics software suite. The project team
will use the combined software framework with a machine learning approach to
develop a locomotion strategy for example soft robots. Finally, add-ons to
DiSMech will incorporate machine learning alongside the DDG-based physics models
for even faster simulations, demonstrating the research potential for this
software in uncovering underlying physical phenomena. By advancing DDG-based
physics simulations to capture a wide range of soft and flexible structures,
with a computational speed sufficient for learned robot control, all in an easy-
to-use interface, DiSMech addresses an important gap in the national
cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp;
Information Science &amp; Engineering and the Divisions of Civil, Mechanical and
Manufacturing Innovation and Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems in the
Directorate of Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.