* 2209745
* Elements: Software Infrastructure for Programming and Architectural Exploration of Neuromorphic Computing Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Anup Das, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2025
* USD 571,654.00

Machine learning has proved to be immensely successful across a range of social
domains such as healthcare, environment, education, infrastructure, and
cybersecurity. Computing platforms currently used to run machine-learning tasks
have a high carbon footprint associated with them. Neuromorphic computing
systems, which mimic biological neurons and synapses can implement these tasks
in a highly energy-efficient fashion. Major challenges for neuromorphic
computing, however, lie in its adoption by users and from a system developer's
perspective, to cope with faster time-to-market pressure for new neuromorphic
chip designs. This project develops a software infrastructure called
NeuroXplorer, which helps both end-users as well as developers of neuromorphic
systems: it allows for machine-learning tasks to be mapped onto neuromorphic
chips in the most efficient way possible; and provides analysis, simulation, and
synthesis tools that can be used to explore new chip designs to meet the needs
of emerging machine-learning workloads. NeuroXplorer is distributed under an
open-source license to promote the adoption of neuromorphic computing as well as
the development and commercialization of neuromorphic systems in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the project lie in the
development of compiler backends within NeuroXplorer to generate executable code
for neuromorphic chips such as Loihi, Dynamic Neurormorphic Asynchronous
Processor, and Microbrain from a high-level specification of the machine-
learning task; development of mapping and synthesis tools to execute machine-
learning tasks on novel neuromorphic architectures built using Field-
Programmable Gate Array (FPGA); and development of high-performance software for
hardware/software design-space exploration of new neuromorphic architectures.
NeuroXplorer is built to be modular and extensible such that developers can
easily contribute new features to the software. The capabilities of NeuroXplorer
are accessible over the Internet. The end-user trains the machine-learning model
using a standard workflow and uploads it, upon which the appropriate code is
automatically generated and executed on neuromorphic architecture. The
neuromorphic program and bitstream files for the final FPGA design can be freely
downloaded. Design-space exploration tools within NeuroXplorer efficiently
tackle the growing complexity of neuromorphic systems and challenges in
integrating emerging design technologies into these systems. From an educational
perspective, the project involves both graduate and undergraduate students at
Drexel University in the development of the software. Collaborators from
academia and industry deliver guest lectures on current developments in
neuromorphic hardware, system software, and applications, with these lectures
being integrated within relevant courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.