* 2209421
* RUI:Probing Subatomic Physics via Lepton Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Kevin Giovanetti, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfredo Galindo-Uribarri
* 08/31/2025
* USD 165,341.00

The research program of the James Madison University Particle and Nuclear
Physics Group (JMU--PNP) is focused on developing an accurate, 3D picture of the
nucleon and on measuring fundamental quantities essential to our understanding
of the subatomic world such as the charge radius of the proton and the anomalous
muon magnetic moment. The latter holds the promise of probing physics beyond the
Standard Model. Given the minuscule size of the nucleon, roughly a millionth of
a billionth of a meter, these are not trivial tasks, as they require custom-
built detectors, innovative techniques, and in-house developed software. The
JMU-PNP group has a long record of excellence in these areas. Through immersion
in this state-of-the-art research in intermediate energy nuclear physics, the
PIs offer an outstanding educational experience for undergraduate students.
Developing solutions for the hardware, software, and big data challenges
associated with this research constitute great teaching tools in the formation
of undergraduate students, promoting science and educating beyond the
university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;JMU-PNP group members have a robust presence
at Jefferson Lab (experiments in Hall A, B, and C). For the duration of this
award the group’s activities aimed at completing the 3D picture of the nucleon
include Machine Learning-based structure function and generalized parton
distribution studies, and the study of open strangeness production and hadron
formation mechanisms (experiment E12-06-117 in Hall B, with group members among
the spokespeople). As part of the effort of solving the “proton charge radius
puzzle”, the group has joined the PRad-II collaboration, and a group member
plays a key role in the effort to secure funding for building this detector. To
support future nuclear physics experiments JMU-PNP research will continue to
have a strong hardware and software development component. This includes
assemble and test the JMU-designed voltage dividers for the SBS ECAL
calorimeter; procure and characterize the PMTs for the PRad-II calorimeter and
perform long-overdue maintenance and modernization work on several software
packages (simulation, charge symmetric background, radiative corrections)
essential in the data analysis workflow. The group will also maintain a
significant presence in the Fermilab g-2 experiment, which holds the promise of
uncovering physics Beyond the Standard Model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.