* 2209348
* Studies of the Structure of the Nucleon
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Ronald Ransome, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,050,000.00

This award to the Rutgers University Intermediate Energy Nuclear Physics group
enables Profs. Gilman and Ransome and their graduate and undergraduate students
to study the structure of the nucleon. The focus is on the shape of the proton -
how the proton's charge is distributed. It includes the study of a high-profile
puzzle: whether the proton size is the same when measured with two types of
particles, electrons and muons. Muons are particles with the same
characteristics as electrons but with more mass. In addition to the direct
scientific goals of the project, the experiments provide undergraduate and
graduate students and other early career scientists experience and training in
working in international collaborations of modern scientific experiments, with
state-of-the-art technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will support the
continuation of the experimental nuclear physics research program of the
intermediate energy experimental nuclear physics group at Rutgers University.
The focus of the activities is MUSE, a measurement of the scattering cross
sections of both positively and negatively charged electrons and muons from a
liquid hydrogen target, performed at the PiM1 beam line of the Paul Scherrer
Institute in Switzerland. During this grant period the group will continue
taking production data and begin the analysis phase. The scattering cross
sections are used to determine the proton form factors, from which the proton
charge radius can be extracted. The group will compare scattering of positively
and negatively charged particles to determine two-photon exchange corrections,
and compare scattering of muons to electrons to determine if the proton radius
is the same when determined by the two particles. In addition to the new
measurements of MUSE, the group will continue to be involved at a lower level in
the analysis and publication of results of experiments run previously. The
broader impact of the group has been primarily in the training of
undergraduates, graduates, and postdocs. Students and post-docs who have worked
with the group have gone on to careers in a variety of areas, including medical
physics, national security, and financial systems, in addition to continued work
in fundamental physics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.