* 2209662
* IUCRC Planning Grant Virginia Tech: Center for Wireless Innovation towards Secure, Pervasive, Efficient and Resilient Next G Networks (WISPER)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Jeffrey Reed, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 07/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

The proposed Center for Wireless Innovation towards Secure, Pervasive,
Efficient, and Resilient Next Generation Networks (WISPER) will coordinate
academia, industry, and government to pioneer transformative next generation
(NextG) wireless technologies for key industry verticals. Our missions include:
(1) growing the U.S. innovation capacity in the next-generation wireless
networks; (2) catalyzing breakthrough pre-competitive research for enabling
NextG wireless communications; (3) contributing to the emerging North American
vision for the next generation wireless networks; (4) providing guidance to
standardization bodies and cooperation partners; and (5) producing a workforce
prepared to tackle complex next-generation wireless
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Virginia Tech WISPER team will drive
research and innovation into NextG systems by defining problems and solutions
that yield immediate and forward-looking impact. The team will explore a range
of potential research directions into NextG systems that span security, network
autonomy and intelligence, and new and coming technologies, such as non-
terrestrial networking, joint communication and sensing, and quantum networking.
The team will seek to showcase its NextG use cases through open and secure NextG
and AI platforms and apply the project-based learning model to define workforce
development programs at the intersection of NextG systems, autonomy, and
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed WISPER Center will contribute
significantly to the country's future communication infrastructure, with broader
impacts on diversity and inclusion, workforce development, and technology
transfer. A Diversity &amp; Inclusion Committee will be formed to review the
current diversity and inclusion profile and develop specific measures and plans
for inspiring the participation of underrepresented groups. WISPER will prepare
students to become proficient in NextG techniques, leading to transformative
changes in the state of wireless workforce preparedness. WISPER will enable
seamless integration of the center's new discoveries into NextG wireless
systems, accelerating technology transfer, enhancing the competence of the
industrial members, and contributing to the Nationâ€™s leadership in NextG
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All data, software, and artifacts produced
in this project will be archived and preserved, according to standard
institutional security and privacy practices and policies, for at least five
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.