* 2209470
* Research in Relativistic Plasma under Extreme Conditions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Igor Shovkovy, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2025
* USD 270,000.00

The knowledge of fundamental properties of relativistic plasmas under extreme
conditions is the window to understanding the basic building blocks of matter,
the origins and evolution of the Universe, and the interplay of quantum and
classical phenomena. The paradigmatic examples of plasmas in question are the
hot primordial plasma in the early Universe, the quark-gluon plasma produced in
the Little Bangs of heavy-ion colliders, and the relativistic matter inside and
around neutron stars. While some physics properties are understood, there is
still much to learn about the relativistic matter. The current project, in
particular, focuses on the role of super-strong magnetic fields, which are
ubiquitous for many relativistic systems at extreme temperatures and densities.
By utilizing a range of theoretical tools and techniques, the PI will
investigate the effect of the magnetic field on observable properties and study
the possibility of novel quantum phenomena. In addition, the PI will be
mentoring undergraduate and graduate students by involving them in work on the
project. The PI will also continue organizing and hosting the international
online Theoretical Physics Colloquium that features cutting-edge research to a
broad worldwide audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to investigate the
photon polarization effects, particle emission rates, and other related physics
properties of strongly magnetized chiral plasmas. The emphasis will be on
physical systems where neither the weak-field limit nor the lowest Landau-level
approximation works well. Together with the study of anomalous properties, the
PI intends to study collective modes and attempt to generalize the chiral
kinetic theory to the case of quantizing magnetic fields. One of the goals of
the proposed research activities is to search for signature observable
consequences of the chiral anomaly, strong magnetic fields, and related
phenomena under extreme conditions. The PI will use the tools of quantum field
theory and supplement them with the chiral kinetic theory methods and anomalous
chiral hydrodynamics when suitable. The new results about the chiral plasmas in
quantizing magnetic fields will be valuable for basic and applied science. The
new knowledge will contribute to a better understanding of the physics phenomena
in heavy-ion collisions, the observable signatures of compact stars, the plasma
dynamics in the pulsar magnetospheres, as well as the evolution of the
primordial plasma in the early Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.