* 2209167
* Multi-Hadron Interactions using Lattice QCD with the Stochastic LapH Method
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Colin Morningstar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Protons and neutrons, which make up atomic nuclei, are comprised of fundamental
particles known as quarks and gluons, whose interactions are described by
quantum chromodynamics (QCD). This theory suggests that many other types of
composite particles, known as hadrons, should exist in Nature as unstable
resonances. The properties of certain hadronic resonances as predicted by QCD
will be investigated using large-scale computing resources. The proposed
research lends support to current experiments, such as the GlueX experiment in
Hall D at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (JLab). The
structure of the nucleon and scattering involving one particular hadron known as
a Delta baryon will be another focus. This scattering information will be
crucial for experiments studying neutrinos, an important elementary particle
that permeates the universe. The PI will mentor a graduate student engaged in
this research, and the graduate student will also receive training in the use of
state-of-the-art parallel computing resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physics
of hadron-hadron interactions will be studied using Monte Carlo estimates of
path integrals involving quark and gluon fields on a space-time lattice.
Nucleon-pion, nucleon-nucleon, and nucleon-hyperon scattering phase shifts will
be computed, yielding important information on hadron structure. Scattering
processes involving nucleon-pion-pion will also be considered. New computational
techniques, such as the stochastic LapH method, have made possible such
computations in lattice QCD, which involve estimating temporal correlation
matrices of multi-hadron and excited-state operators. Form factors involving the
nucleon and transitions through the Delta baryon will be a particular focus
since they are crucial to accelerated-based neutrino experiments, such as the
Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.