* 2209483
* WoU-MMA: Cosmic-Ray Physics with IceCube
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Katherine Rawlins, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,800,000.00

This award provides funding for scientists at six U.S. institutions (three of
them in EPSCoR jurisdictions) to perform scientific analysis of cosmic-ray data
from the IceCube Neutrino Observatory located at the U.S. Amundsen-Scott South
Pole Station. The IceCube detector features one cubic kilometer of natural ice
(at the depth from 1.4 to 2.4 km) that has been transformed into a giant
particle detector. This is complemented by a surface array of 162 particle
detectors called IceTop. Both the in-ice and surface array detect ultra-short
light flashes from particle cascades initiated when high-energy cosmic rays hit
the atmosphere. Complementary to IceCube’s main mission as a neutrino
observatory, this world-unique setup enables scientific progress in
understanding the origin of Galactic cosmic rays of highest energies and the
particle physics in the atmospheric cascades. In addition to research aimed at
fundamental progress in cosmic-ray physics, this award also supports scientific
broader impacts through IceCube’s cosmic-ray measurements, such as heliospheric,
solar, and atmospheric science, since stratospheric and solar events can impact
the cosmic-ray flux measured by IceCube. Thus, this award addresses and advances
the science objectives and goals of NSF's "Windows on the Universe: The Era of
Multi-Messenger Astrophysics" program as well as those of the Polar program. The
mystique of the South Pole environment and the compelling science of IceCube are
an alluring mix. Besides its extensive coverage in newspapers and publications
popularizing science, IceCube has a significant presence on social media and the
World Wide Web. Through successful high school MasterClasses as well as student
engagement in the scientific research, this project contributes to the education
of a diverse STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With its three-dimensional
layout, the IceTop surface array above the cubic-kilometer deep optical grid,
the IceCube Neutrino Observatory is also an excellent detector for cosmic-ray
air showers. The combination of electromagnetic particles and low-energy muons
at the surface and TeV to PeV muons by the deep in-ice grid makes IceCube a
world-unique instrument for the most energetic Galactic cosmic rays.
Complementing IceCube’s multimessenger mission, this setup is used to measure
the cosmic-ray energy spectrum and composition in the energy range where the
still-enigmatic transition between Galactic and extragalactic cosmic rays is
presumed to occur. IceCube is also providing the first and world’s most
sensitive measurements of little understood cosmic-ray anisotropies in the
Southern Hemisphere at TeV to PeV energies. Combining data with the HAWC gamma-
ray observatory in Mexico, IceCube has also compiled the first full-sky cosmic
ray anisotropy observation at 10 TeV. Plans to provide combined observations at
higher energies and with other experiments such as LHAASO are underway. IceCube
also plays a leading role in scrutinizing hadronic interaction models of the
particle physics in air showers, in particular, the forward production of
leptons. By this, IceCube will contribute to the understanding of the muon
puzzle, a mismatch between the measured muon content of air showers and the one
predicted by state-of-the-art hadronic interaction models. To continue IceCube’s
leading role in this energy range of cosmic-ray physics, a number of
improvements in the analysis will be implemented to increase both the statistics
and accuracy of our data. The significant increase in statistics results from
additional data collection time with the complete detector, but also from
expanding the analyzable data phase space to include uncontained and more
inclined events. New event reconstructions applying machine-learning techniques
will be developed and employed to analyze the surface and deep signals. Higher
accuracy will also result from implementing a better model to account for snow
on the IceTop tanks, as well as cross-checks with prototype enhanced surface
instrumentation. These improvements will drive IceCube’s cosmic-ray mission by
providing higher sensitivity and resolution Taken together, they provide a path
to follow to continue IceCube’s contribution to understanding the physics and
origin of highest energy Galactic cosmic rays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the IceCube Research Support and Particle Astrophysics -
Cosmic Phenomenon programs in MPS's Division of Physics, the Antarctic
Astrophysics and Geospace Sciences program in GEO's Office of Polar Programs,
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the NSF
Big Ideas: Windows on the Universe - Multimessenger
Astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.