* 2209166
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY22: The Role of Migratory Behavior in Population Divergence and Speciation
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Gina Calabrese, Calabrese, Gina
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2025
* USD 207,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. The research studies how animal migration
contributes to forming new species. Many different animals—from insects to
elephants, fish, reindeer, and famously birds—migrate long distances. These
journeys impact animals’ survival and can change when, where, and with whom they
reproduce and thereby mix genes. This is important because groups of animals
that were once interbreeding but are no longer doing so begin to split into new
species. This research uses the relationships among all bird species to test
whether groups that migrate have split into new species more often than groups
that do not migrate. The research also studies Barn Swallows, a bird species
that is currently in the process of splitting into multiple species, to find
genetic patterns that explain the role of migration in this splitting process.
Understanding how migration causes new species to form is important because
animals are changing their timing and routes of migration due to the changing
climate. This project will train three undergraduate students, as well as train
the fellow in new scientific skills, and will provide a database of migration
information that can be used by other scientists for further research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Migration may promote speciation at migratory divides
(populations which breed in the same location, but differ in their migratory
paths and nonbreeding sites) by precluding mating between different migratory
phenotypes, or exerting divergent selection on them. An alternative hypothesis
is that migration may impede speciation by bringing populations into contact at
breeding ranges. This proposal tests the rule of life that migration promotes
speciation at two levels of biological hierarchy. First, a comparative
phylogenetic analysis across the avian tree of life tests whether migratory
lineages have higher diversification rates than non-migratory lineages. Second,
a comparative genomic analysis within the Barn Swallow subspecies complex
leverages five replicated migratory divides on three continents to evaluate
whether patterns of genotypic and phenotypic divergence across migratory divides
are consistent and whether they are due to migratory phenotype vs. a history of
geographic isolation. This latter project also connects genomes to phenomes
through genomic mapping of migratory and male/female phenotypes to better
understand how divergent phenotypes may co-evolve. The project will train the
fellow in comparative phylogenetics and genomic analyses, and provide research
experience and professional development for three undergraduates from
underrepresented groups in biology. Research will be disseminated to a public
audience through science communication organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.