* 2209019
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: The Eco-Evolutionary Tradeoffs of Aggregative Multicellularity
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Kayla Stoy, Stoy                    Kayla
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. This research will advance understanding of
how complex life has evolved. Many living organisms, including plants and
animals, depend on cooperative interactions between many cells that carry out
specific and important functions. These complex organisms are referred to as
multicellular. In contrast, other organisms have remained unicellular and do not
depend on cooperative cellular interactions to persist. Previous research
suggests complex multicellularity has not evolved for some organisms because
cells choose to act selfishly rather than cooperate with one another. The
conditions that favor and inhibit the evolution and persistence of cooperative
multicellular interactions remains an outstanding question in the field of
evolutionary biology. This research will address this knowledge gap by
determining the conditions under which more complex organisms evolve. Addressing
this question is important to improving our understanding of how multicellular
life arose on Earth, and why there is so much variation in multicellular
complexity across the tree of life. The Fellow will mentor students from
underrepresented groups in research as well as through public outreach
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test the hypothesis that
integration in aggregative multicellular organisms is limited by an eco-
evolutionary trade-off: unstable environments favor social generalism, which
limits the evolution of genotype-specific multicellular integration. The
research will use synthetic biology to generate a laboratory model system of
aggregative multicellularity, engineering the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae to
require obligate metabolic cross-feeding. Aggregative yeast will be
experimentally coevolved to examine how the fidelity of their mutualistic
partners affects the evolution of genotype-genotype specialization. The
ecological implications of specialization will then be assessed by testing for
fitness tradeoffs associated with specialists and generalists. These results
will be placed in a broader context by using a theoretical model to evaluate the
effect of environmental heterogeneity on the evolution of multicellularity. The
Fellow predicts that increased complexity will evolve when there are increased
opportunities for specialization between coevolved cells. Fellow training
includes metabolomics, microscopy, and mathematical modeling at Georgia Tech.
The Fellow will also broaden participation in science by mentoring first-
generation and low-income undergraduates in scientific research and by
developing hands-on scientific activities for underrepresented elementary school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.