* 2209270
* NSF PRFB 2022: A Bayesian framework for hierarchy: Do past experiences shape self-assessment of fighting ability?
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Ammon Perkes, Perkes, Ammon
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. By combining video tracking with molecular
approaches, the fellow will assess the behavioral and genetic drivers of social
dominance. Specifically, the fellow will test the effect of past social
interactions on an individual’s decisions in future dominance contests, and how
these individual behaviors drive the formation of group hierarchy. These
experiments will establish a new framework for analyzing and predicting social
behavior, increasing our understanding of what determines the structure of
social networks across animal species. The fellowship will also support the
mentoring of students at both the high school and undergraduate level to
establish opportunities for participation in science research and computational
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During social contests, prior winning often
increases the likelihood of future victories via the winner-effect, mediated by
a shift in individual aggression in subsequent contests. Bayesian updating
provides an excellent framework to model the internal processes which drive
these changes in behavior. The observed increase in aggression following a win
suggests that animals are updating their own expectations of the probability of
victory in future contests. Bayesian models allow us to predict changes at
multiple scales: from the short-term effect of single contest events on an
individual to the outcome of long-term, repeated interactions among larger
groups. The fellow will test whether the winner-effect is consistent with
Bayesian updating, by performing two experiments that test the model’s
predictions: First, by staging repeated contests with controlled outcomes, the
fellow will test whether unexpected events (e.g. a win against a larger fish)
drive a greater contrast in gene expression and behavior than changes following
expected outcomes; second, by performing long-term behavioral tracking in
controlled social environments, the fellow will test whether the stability of
the winner-effect is dependent on access to new information. This work will be
conducted using the Amazon molly (Poecilia formosa), a naturally clonal species,
limiting individual variation in biological replicates and providing increased
statistical power for testing the mechanisms of social
dominance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.