* 2209754
* IUCRC Planning Grant George Mason University: Center for Wireless Innovation Towards Secure, Pervasive, Efficient and Resilient Next G Networks (WISPER)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Brian Mark, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 07/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

The proposed Center for Wireless Innovation towards Secure, Pervasive,
Efficient, and Resilient Next Generation Networks (WISPER) will coordinate
academia, industry, and government to pioneer transformative next generation
(NextG) wireless technologies for key industry verticals. Our missions include:
(1) growing the U.S. innovation capacity in the next-generation wireless
networks; (2) catalyzing breakthrough pre-competitive research for enabling
NextG wireless communications; (3) contributing to the emerging North American
vision for the next generation wireless networks; (4) providing guidance to
standardization bodies and cooperation partners; and (5) producing a workforce
prepared to tackle complex next-generation wireless
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WISPER will focus on developing transformative
wireless innovations. Areas of research include but are not limited to: (1)
exploration of Dynamic Spectrum Sharing and Resource Allocation algorithms in
NextG considering performance, efficiency, resilience, and security and privacy;
(2) Secure mmWave Communications with Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces; (3)
Reliable mmWave wireless LANs through coordination; (4) development of advanced
trust management functionality for virtual networks, trust management and
invocation using butterfly keying schemas, trusted computing bases and post-
quantum cryptography to support NextG wireless communications; (5) resilient ML-
based RAN Slice Management in NextG; and (6) development of an industry-guided
workforce development program in the context of next-generation wireless
networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed WISPER Center will contribute
significantly to the country's future communication infrastructure, with broader
impacts on diversity and inclusion, workforce development, and technology
transfer. A Diversity &amp; Inclusion Committee will be formed to review the
current diversity and inclusion profile and develop specific measures and plans
for inspiring the participation of underrepresented groups. WISPER will prepare
students to become proficient in NextG techniques, leading to transformative
changes in the state of wireless workforce preparedness. WISPER will enable
seamless integration of the center's new discoveries into NextG wireless
systems, accelerating technology transfer, enhancing the competence of the
industrial members, and contributing to the Nationâ€™s leadership in NextG
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All data, software, and artifacts produced
in this project will be archived and preserved, according to standard
institutional security and privacy practices and policies, for at least five
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.