* 2209630
* Collaborative Research: Elements: TRAnsparency CErtified (TRACE): Trusting Computational Research Without Repeating It
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Thu-Mai Christian, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2025
* USD 99,995.00

Research communities across the natural and social sciences are increasingly
concerned about the transparency and reproducibility of results obtained by
computational means. Calls for increased transparency can be found in the
policies of peer-reviewed journals and processing pipelines employed in the
creation of research data products made available through science gateways, data
portals, and statistical agencies. These communities recognize that the
integrity of published results and data products is uncertain when it is not
possible to trace their lineage or validate their production. Verifying the
transparency or reproducibility of computational artifacts—by repeating
computations and comparing results—is expensive, time-consuming, and difficult,
and may be infeasible if the research products rely on resources that are
subject to legitimate restrictions such as the use of sensitive or proprietary
data; streaming, transient, or ephemeral data; and large-scale or specialized
computational resources available only to approved or authorized users. The
TRACE project is addressing this problem through an approach called certified
transparency - a trustworthy record of computations signed by the systems within
which they were performed. Using TRACE, system owners and operators certify the
original execution of a computational workflow that produces findings or data
products. By using a TRACE-enabled system, researchers produce transparent
computational artifacts that no longer require verification, reducing burden on
journal editors and reviewers seeking to ensure reproducibility and transparency
of computational results. TRACE presents an innovative and efficient approach to
ensuring the transparency of research that uses computational methods, is
consistent with the vision outlined by the National Academies, and enables
evidence-based policymaking based on transparent and trustworthy
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of the TRACE project is the
development, validation, and implementation of a technical model of certified
transparency. This includes a set of infrastructure elements that can be
employed by system owners to (1) declare the dimensions of computational
transparency supported by their platforms; (2) certify that a specific
computational workflow was executed on the platform; and (3) bundle artifacts,
records of their execution, technical metadata about their contents, and certify
them for dissemination. The first phase of the project focuses on the
development of a conceptual model and technical specification that can be used
to certify the description of a system, termed a Transparency-Certified System
(TRACE system), and the aggregation of artifacts along with records of their
execution, termed Transparency-Certified Research Objects (TROs). The second
phase focuses on the development of reusable software components implementing
the TRACE model and approach. To demonstrate certified transparency, the toolkit
is used to TRACE-enable existing platforms including Whole Tale, SKOPE, and the
SLURM workload manager. These TRACE-enabled systems produce certified TROs that
can be trusted and do not need to be repeated or re-executed to verify that
results were obtained as claimed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office
of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Division of Social
and Economic Sciences within the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences; and by the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems within the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.