* 2209373
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: How have Gene-environment Interactions Shaped the Repeated Evolution of Differentiated Multicellularity?
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2024
* Dinah Davison, Davison, Dinah R
* Fellowship Award
* John Barthell
* 10/31/2024
* USD 138,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY
2022, Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing
Interactions Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship
supports research and training of the Fellow that will contribute to the area of
Rules of Life in innovative ways. Complex multicellularity has evolved multiple
times throughout the history of life. This research will examine how new types
of cells evolve and specifically how interactions between genes and the
environment shaped the repeated evolution of multicellular species with multiple
cell types. The project, which will also train the Fellow in cutting-edge
methods, is likely to substantially advance the field as it lays out a novel
framework for understanding the evolution of complex multicellularity through
interactions among genes, development, and the environment. This project will
broaden participation in the sciences by bringing new teaching materials to
underserved and highly diverse local middle schools as well as by generating new
materials for undergraduate education, and through the mentoring of
undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research aims to uncover how environmentally-regulated changes in gene
expression may have shaped the repeated evolution of cellular differentiation.
Specifically, it tests the hypothesis that the repeated evolution of a new cell
type (somatic cells) is due to the recurrent transition from environmental to
developmental-genetic regulation of cellular specialization. The project will
employ single-cell transcriptomics to understand how gene expression changes in
response to the environment, and how these changes in gene expression can
underpin developmental changes in cellular specialization. Next, the research
will use a comparative approach to examine the reorganization of gene expression
networks during the evolution of obligate somatic differentiation. Finally, the
project will integrate the developmental and phylogenetic approaches by
comparing the environmentally-induced changes in gene expression described in
one species to the evolutionary changes in gene expression characterized across
species. This research will use the volvocine algae as a model system because
cellular differentiation has evolved repeatedly in this clade and the genomes of
multiple species have been sequenced. Over the course of the project, a
postdoctoral researcher will be trained in single-cell transcriptomics,
bioinformatics, and network analysis. The researcher will also train
undergraduates from diverse backgrounds in laboratory techniques, develop
activities for undergraduate online learning, and work with local middle schools
to help them improve the teaching of evolution in the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.