* 2209547
* WOU-MMA: Understanding Cosmic Particle Accelerators with VERITAS
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Eileen Meyer, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2025
* USD 329,290.00

Accreting super-massive black holes are some of the most extreme physical
environments in the Universe. The relativistic outflows and jets from these
systems are candidate sources of energetic cosmic rays, gamma rays and
extragalactic neutrinos. These systems impact the evolution of the galaxies and
clusters, from recycling of gas in cosmic fountains to heating the inter-cluster
medium. This award supports scientists at the University of Maryland Baltimore
County (UMBC) performing research with the Very Energetic Radiation Imaging
Telescope Array System (VERITAS) at the Fred Lawrence Whipple Observatory in
Arizona, USA. Specifically, the awarded program will provide improved
understanding of the outflows from black holes and their impact on their hosts
and environments via coordinated multiwavelength observations with VERITAS. The
program will support unique training and mentoring of graduate and undergraduate
student researchers in combining astrophysical data and theoretical models. In
addition, with the UMBC Society of Physics students the program will develop
portable detectors for public observatory nights and outreach events at local
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VERITAS provides a targeted field of view with
leading sensitivity in the measurement of gamma-rays from ~50 GeV to 500 TeV. No
known astronomical sources emit solely in the very high-energy (VHE) gamma-ray
band, however, and a full understanding of the physical conditions to constrain
theoretical models of the source requires sampling of the full spectrum of
output. Pairing VERITAS observations with the Swift X-ray observatory and
ground-based optical and radio monitoring programs provides simultaneous multi-
wavelength coverage and high-resolution imaging. A multi-wavelength central data
‘hub’ provides automatically updated information on target VHE astrophysical
objects as well as their archival and planned observations for the approximate
dozen observatories used in coordination with VERITAS. This information will
prove crucial to testing long-considered models of the origin and evolution of
VHE emission in jets, including their potential role as sources of energetic
cosmic rays and high-energy neutrinos. This project advances the goals of the
NSF Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.