* 2209423
* Elements: Data Driven Autonomous Thermodynamic and Kinetic Model Builder for Microstructural Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Wenhao Sun, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Materials with improved properties can dramatically impact sustainability, human
welfare, and national prosperity. As an example, a stronger material can reduce
the weight of vehicles and can therefore reduce energy consumption and
pollution. Properties of materials frequently depend on their microstructures
(features in materials at scales of one micrometer to hundreds of micrometers).
Thermodynamic free energy (providing the driving force for evolution) and
kinetic parameters (providing how quickly the evolution can occur) together
govern how a material evolves at the microscale. This project develops
algorithms and software that automate the extraction of the thermodynamics and
kinetic information using artificial intelligence to enable simulation of
microstructure evolution for complex mixtures of metals. The AI-enabled
Microstructure Model BuildER (AMMBER) harvests and harnesses data ranging from
first-principles calculations, experimental micrographs and associated natural
language text, and thermodynamic databases, as well as custom user input. It
then produces input to microstructure evolution models that facilitate the
fundamental understanding needed to gain control of the microstructure and
resulting material properties. The demonstration of its capability is planned
for commercially important alloys (nickel-aluminum-based and aluminum-copper-
based alloys), as well as the corresponding high-entropy alloys (alloys with
five or more components with near equimolar fractions). AMMBER contributes to
the software infrastructure for simulation-based material discovery and
development within the context of the Material Genome Initiative. Training
activities, including training workshops for the community to learn about the
software and the theory behind it and integration into the undergraduate and
graduate thermodynamics and kinetics courses, provide opportunities for
education and professional development. Nickel-aluminum-based and aluminum-
copper-based alloys are key materials in the aerospace and automobile
industries, and thus the results are expected to have a direct impact on
manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop an artificial intelligence framework for the autonomous determination of
input parameters for phase-field models based on a variety of data sources to
establish constraints on the model parameters. The AI-enabled Microstructure
Model BuildER (AMMBER) leverages automated data-stream pipelines to collect,
curate, and tabulate disparate data sources spanning first-principles
calculations, experimental micrographs, and associated natural language text,
thermodynamic databases, and custom user input. Then, advanced optimization
algorithms iteratively optimize phase-field parameters such that the resulting
models reproduce known microstructural characteristics (e.g., the phase fraction
and characteristic length scale as a function of time). These models can then be
used to simulate the microstructural evolution of materials over a range of
conditions that are relevant to engineering and manufacturing. The demonstration
of AMMBER involves commercially important Ni-Al-based and Al-Cu-based alloys,
some of which contain more than five components, leading to a complicated high-
dimensional parameter space in which thermodynamic and kinetic model parameters
must be optimized. The application to high-entropy alloys, which contain near
equimolar amounts of five or more components, provides a ground for new
scientific discoveries. By automating the time-consuming initial model
parameterization, AMMBER reduces the human bottleneck of materials modeling and
paves the way to increased throughput of phase-field simulations. AMMBER
complements existing Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) efforts, and it leverages
and integrates into existing computational materials research communities built
around tools such as open-source phase-field software (PRISMS-PF, MOOSE), an
integrated computational materials engineering framework (PRISMS), CALPHAD tools
(ESPEI, Thermo-Calc), and a dissemination platform (nanoHUB). The training
workshops and integration of the computational tools and research findings into
classrooms facilitate community interaction and engagement. Ni-Al-based and Al-
Cu-based alloys are key materials in the aerospace and automobile industries,
and thus the results are expected to have a direct impact on
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal receives funds through the
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Computer and Information Science
and Engineering Directorate and the Division of Materials Research in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.