* 2209052
* Collaborative Research: Combining Self-organized Maps and Idealized Storm-scale Simulations to Investigate the Effect of Future Climate Change on Severe Convective Storms
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Daniel Dawson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 06/30/2025
* USD 450,135.00

Severe thunderstorms and tornadoes cause significant damage and loss of life
each year worldwide. It remains unclear whether future climate change will make
this type of extreme weather worse. This project applies a new methodology to
examine how severe thunderstorms and tornadoes may change in a future, warmer
climate. This topic is difficult because climate change is a global phenomenon,
yet thunderstorms are small â€“ typically less than a few miles in diameter.
Different types of computer models can be used to understand future climate
change (climate models) and to simulate thunderstorms (storm models). However,
one model cannot do both at the same time because of limits on computer power.
To overcome this barrier, this project first uses data-based methods to examine
how the environments that typically generate severe thunderstorms may change in
climate model simulations. The effect of these changes on severe thunderstorms
and tornadoes is then tested in simulations using a storm model. The results of
both steps can be combined together to examine how severe thunderstorms may
change in the future, which will help society better plan and adapt.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Recent research suggests that future climate change may enhance the
frequency and/or severity of severe convective storms (SCS), including severe
thunderstorms and tornadoes. However, studies to date have focused principally
on the large-scale environments favorable for SCS activity while neglecting
potential changes in storm-scale dynamics. This project integrates climate
models, machine learning, and idealized storm-scale ensemble simulations to
understand how SCS activity may change in a future warmer climate. This is the
first effort to examine future changes in SCS activity by simultaneously
accounting for both changes in large-scale environments and storm-scale
dynamics. The project has three objectives: 1. Use self-organized maps to
quantify changes in structure and variability in SCS soundings in a future
warmer climate; 2. Use idealized storm-scale simulations to examine how these
changes in SCS soundings will alter probabilities of SCS activity and hazards;
3. Combine results to investigate how SCS activity and hazards may shift
geographically and seasonally in a future warmer climate, and understand the
underlying environmental vs. storm-scale drivers. This novel approach greatly
reduces the high complexity of this problem at both large and small scales
across climate states. The outcomes of the project will be compared to prior
approaches to this problem to yield a more comprehensive understanding of how
SCS activity may change in a future warmer climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.