* 2209587
* Elucidation of Anomalous Domain Growth in Brush Particle Blends
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Michael Bockstaller, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2025
* USD 436,084.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer nanocomposites are materials
that are comprised of inorganic nanomaterials dispersed within a polymer matrix.
Polymer nanocomposites display unique physical properties that have rendered
them a platform for innovative material technologies in areas such as energy
storage and generation, transportation or biomedical. The realization of these
technologies is contingent on the ability to control the material’s structure
and, thus, its properties. This is hindered by the current lack of understanding
of the interactions between the polymer and nanomaterial constituents and their
effect on material behavior. The goal of this project is to develop novel
methods to control the interactions between polymer and nanomaterial
constituents and to harness these interactions to enable polymer nanocomposite
materials in which structure and properties can be deliberately controlled to
optimize performance. This will promote the development of scalable and economic
fabrication processes for materials with improved properties. The program will
support the teaching of two new courses on polymer science and engineering and
provide training for one graduate student and several undergraduate student
researchers. Collaborations with educators at minority serving institutions will
be leveraged to support the participation of minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modification of particle surfaces with polymer
chains facilitates control of the interactions and assembly behavior of
nanoparticle-based materials. The resulting brush particles have thus emerged as
model systems to elucidate the physics of materials that are intermediate
between the classical ‘colloidal hard sphere’ and ‘polymer coil’ limit and as a
platform for the development of functional materials in areas such as self-
healing, shape memory, high-k dielectrics, or thermoplastic elastomers. This
research project will develop fundamental understanding of the conditions that
enable polymer ligands to induce polymer-like phase behavior in
(nano)particulate materials. The research will test the hypothesis that the
constraining effect of the slow particle diffusion gives rise to the splitting
of domain growth kinetics into two regimes: an early ‘anomalous’ regime
dominated by the dynamics of grafted chains and a subsequent ‘regular’ growth
regime that is governed by particle diffusion. The research plan is organized
into three research thrusts that focus on the synthesis of brush particle model
systems with systematically varied particle size, degree of polymerization, and
density of grafted chains; the characterization of structure evolution of LCST
brush particle blend systems in the thin film state as a function of molecular
architecture, composition, quench depth and annealing time; and the elucidation
of structure evolution of brush particle blend systems in the bulk state using
X-ray and neutron scattering analysis. The program provides cross-disciplinary
training for one graduate and several undergraduate students in the critical
areas of polymer and nanoscale materials as well as self-assembly processes.
Collaboration with researchers at minority serving institutions will promote the
participation of minority students and underrepresented groups. The program will
support the teaching of two new courses on polymer science and engineering as
well as a summer course that is offered to high school students visiting
Carnegie Mellon University as part of its AP/EA
program.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.