* 2209232
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology: The Evolution of an Avian Color Palette: The Roles of Genes, Environment, and Life History Underlying Egg and Feather Color in Weaver Birds
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Jackie Childers, Childers, Jackie Lynn
* Fellowship Award
* Daniel Marenda
* 03/31/2025
* USD 138,000.00

Fellow's name: Jackie Childers&lt;br/&gt;Proposal number:
2209232&lt;br/&gt;Research title: The evolution of an avian color palette:
understanding the roles of genes, environment, and life history underlying egg
and feather color in weaver birds (Ploceidae)&lt;br/&gt;Sponsoring scientist(s)
and host institution(s): Dr. Allison J. Shultz, Assistant Curator, Ornithology
Department, Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County (NHMLAC)&lt;br/&gt;Co-
Sponsoring scientist: Dr. Linnea Hall, Executive Director/Avian Conservation
Biologist, Western Foundation of Vertebrate Zoology (WFVZ)&lt;br/&gt;This action
funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biology for FY 2022,
Integrative Research Investigating the Rules of Life Governing Interactions
Between Genomes, Environment and Phenotypes. The fellowship supports research
and training of the fellow that will contribute to the area of Rules of Life in
innovative ways. The vibrant colors of bird feathers and eggs have long
fascinated biologists who have largely focused on their importance in social
signals. However, variation in plumage and egg color among bird species is often
associated with habitat and ecological differences, suggesting that the
environment plays a strong role in driving the evolution of avian color traits.
The project focuses on the weaver family (Ploceidae), which includes more than
100 species found in a wide variety of habitats throughout sub-Saharan Africa
and Southeast Asia, with individual species exhibiting unique combinations of
feather and egg colors. The fellow will integrate color, environmental, and
genetic data and use a novel approach to study evolutionary patterns of egg and
plumage color in tandem. In doing so, the research will expand the fields of
ecology and evolution by considering the role that coloration plays in allowing
species to adapt to their environments and determine whether eggs and feathers
evolve together. The fellowship will facilitate research and professional
development opportunities for students from universities and colleges in the
greater Los Angeles area, many of which are primarily minority serving.
&lt;br/&gt;Within a biological context, coloration is a mediator between an
organism and its environment and can play important roles in factors such as
social signaling, thermoregulation, and antipredator defense. Comparative
studies of avian coloration have demonstrated that it is subject to natural
(e.g., camouflage) and sexual selection (e.g., prezygotic barrier). However, how
various selective pressures interact with genes and the environment to produce
color diversity remains poorly understood. The project will combine: 1)
phenotypic data from eggs and plumage collected from museum specimens of weaver
species; 2) georeferenced occurrence data of weaver species from which
environmental variables will be extracted; and 3) whole genomes generated during
the fellowâ€™s Ph.D. which will be used to conduct comparative phylogenomic
analyses of egg and feather color traits. Using digital imaging techniques, the
project will also be the first family-level study to compare feather
microstructures among species, potentially leading to the discovery of new
color-generating mechanisms in feathers beyond pigments. To broaden the impact
of the research the fellow will: 1) provide research opportunities for
undergraduates related to the project; 2) participate in museum outreach events;
3) run Leadership in STEM summer workshop series geared towards early-career
scientists. These combined activities seek to increase public engagement and
retention of students in STEM fields from diverse backgrounds and highlight the
critical role that museums play in acting as an interface between scientists and
the local community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.