* 2209957
* OAC Core: Transpass: Transpiling Parallel Task Graph Programming Models for Scientific Software
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Tsung-Wei Huang, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 06/30/2025
* USD 488,675.00

Task graph programming model (TGPM) is an essential component in many machine
learning systems because it allows top-down optimization of parallelism that
governs macroscale performance. Due to the distinct performance constraints
exhibited by each TGPM when computing a specific machine learning workload, no
single TGPM can guarantee optimal performance for all. Assisting researchers in
transforming machine learning task graphs between different TGPMs is thus
extremely beneficial for advancing the utilization of acceleration hardware for
many of today’s machine learning-centric scientific software. Unfortunately,
insufficient systems to streamline the transformation process has resulted in a
significant turnaround time that prevents researchers from quickly optimizing
the performance of machine learning algorithms on different computing platforms.
This project creates a novel open-source system that 1) enables an automatic
transformation of machine learning task graphs between different TGPMs and 2)
establishes an open platform for a diverse group of researchers to contribute to
program transformation research and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project establishes Transpass, a novel task graph-based programming environment
to streamline the transformation of a program between different TGPMs with a
specific focus on machine learning task graphs. Transpass introduces a new
intermediate representation called control taskflow graph to represent end-to-
end parallelism in a single task graph with in-graph control flow. Atop this
intermediate representation, Transpass introduces a new source-to-source
compiler (“transpiler”) to enable multidirectional transformations of programs
between different TGPMs through transformed control taskflow graph. To support
efficient execution of transformed graphs, Transpass introduces a new learning-
based runtime that learns complex scheduling parameters in the given software
and hardware environment. Technical contributions of this project span a
multidisciplinary research community, including high-performance computing,
program transformation, and machine learning. Transpass will be open-source to
facilitate generalizability to many programming models and promote widespread
contributions in the computing community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.