* 2209318
* Dynamics and Thermodynamics of Neutron-Rich Nuclear Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Jeremy Holt, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2025
* USD 301,062.00

A major long-term effort within the domain of nuclear science is to understand
the properties of matter under extreme conditions of temperature and pressure
found in exotic stellar environments such as neutron stars, core-collapse
supernovae, and neutron star mergers. The strong nuclear force plays a crucial
role in shaping the structure, evolution, and observable emissions of these
high-energy astrophysical systems. To support this effort, research to develop
improved modeling of hot and dense matter based on state-of-the-art theories of
the strong force are under development. The research takes advantage of the
tremendous progress that has been achieved in the field of machine learning to
facilitate the theoretical modeling. This research enables more reliable
predictions for the electromagnetic, neutrino, and gravitational wave signals
from supernovae and neutron star mergers that may be observed with space-based
x-ray telescopes, ground-based neutrino detectors, and gravitational wave
detectors. The results are also being used to improve our understanding of the
strong nuclear force from astronomical observations of neutron stars,
supernovae, and neutron star mergers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Current numerical
simulations of core-collapse supernovae and neutron star mergers largely rely on
nuclear equations of state built from phenomenological mean field models. While
phenomenological nuclear forces provide a computationally efficient framework
for calculating the pressure of hot and dense matter, the systematic
uncertainties associated with missing physics can be difficult to fully assess.
An alternative but more computationally demanding approach is to develop
fundamental theories that include realistic nuclear microphysics and more robust
uncertainty quantification. This is an immediate priority in low-energy nuclear
physics, given that accurate multi-dimensional modeling of supernovae and
neutron star mergers relies on quality nuclear theory inputs, including the
equation of state and neutrino reaction rates. This research utilizes new
machine learning methods that enable the calculation of high-order many-body
perturbation theory corrections to the finite temperature nuclear equation of
state. The research is also developing a new matrix inversion method to compute
nuclear matter response functions in the random phase approximation using high-
precision chiral nuclear forces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the
objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.