* 2209717
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Interoperable High-Performance Classical, Machine Learning and Quantum Free Energy Methods in AMBER
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2027
* Kenneth Merz, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,264,054.00

With support from the Office of Advanced Infrastructure and the Division of
Chemistry at NSF, Professor Merz and his group will work on molecular simulation
cyberinfrastructure. Molecular simulations have become an invaluable tool for
research and technology development in chemical, pharmaceutical, and materials
sciences. With the availability of specialized hardware such as graphics
processing units (GPUs), molecular dynamics simulations using classical or
molecular mechanical force fields have reached the spatial and temporal scales
needed to address important real-world problems in the chemical and biological
sciences. Free energy simulations are a particularly important and challenging
class of molecular simulations that are critical to gain a predictive
understanding of chemical processes. For example, free energy methods can
predict the barrier height and rates for chemical reactions, whether a reaction
will occur, or how tightly a drug binds to a target. These predictions are
extremely valuable for the design of new catalytic agents or drugs. However, the
predictive capability of free energy simulations is sensitive to the underlying
model that describes the inter-atomic potential energy and forces. Accurate free
energy simulations of chemical processes require potential energy models that
capture the essential physics and can respond to changes in the chemical
environment, but conventional force field models are unsuitable for many
processes involving bond breaking and formation as seen, for example, in
catalyst design. Consequently, there is great need to extend the scope of free
energy methods by enabling the use of a broader range of potential energy models
that are more accurate as well as reactive and/or capable of quantum mechanical
many-body polarization and charge transfer. The cyberinfrastructure created by
this project allows for the routine application of free energy methods, using
quantum mechanics, machine learning, reactive and classical potentials to a
myriad of important problems that advance the state-of-the art in the biological
and chemical sciences. The tools can be applied by a range of scientists to
address fundamental problems of national interest, for example, in the design of
drugs against zoonotic diseases (e.g., COVID-19), the design of materials with
novel functions and in the design of improved batteries. Given the
sophistication of the methods employed, education of a diverse pool of chemical,
biological and computer scientists to advance this field is essential and is
addressed in this project, thereby training the next generation of computational
scientists that will form the backbone of the work force of the
future.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project develops accurate and efficient free
energy software within a powerful new multiscale modeling framework in the AMBER
suite of programs for applications in chemistry, biology, and materials science.
The multiscale framework enables the design and use of new classes of mixed-
method force fields that involve interoperability between several existing and
emerging reactive, machine learning and quantum many-body potentials. These
potentials have enhanced accuracy, robustness, and predictive capability
compared to classical molecular mechanical force fields and enable the study of
chemical reactions and catalysis. The cyberinfrastructure supports innovative
multi-layered hybrid potentials that can be customized to meet the needs of
complex applications in biotechnology development, enzyme design and drug
discovery. A robust endpoint "book-ending" approach that leverages the GPU-
accelerated capability of the AMBER molecular dynamics engine is used to reach
these goals. Specifically, the open-source high-performance software for free
energy simulations is designed for multi-layered hybrid potentials using
combinations of linear-scaling many-body quantum mechanical methods via the GPU-
accelerated QUICK package, scalable reactive ReaxFF force fields via the PuReMD
package, as well as the recently developed DeepMD-SE, ANAKIN-ME (ANI) and AP-Net
families of machine learning potentials. The cyberinfrastructure is built upon
the existing high-performance CUDA MD engine in AMBER and extends it to a broad
range of GPU-accelerated architectures using industry-standard programming
models. Scalability is ensured using innovative parallel algorithms. High impact
is achieved by leveraging AMBER's broad user base to expand the scope and
success of FE applications. In this way, the project leverages existing
recognized capabilities and actively engages a diverse team of collaborators and
the broader molecular simulations community. The cyberinfrastructure delivered
by the project enables a wide range of new and enhanced applications for a broad
community of users in academia, industry, and national laboratories. These
applications include drug discovery, enzyme catalysis, and biomaterials design.
The AMBER suite of programs has a long-standing extensive worldwide userbase,
and is widely used on national production cyberinfrastructure. The enhancement
of AMBER as an established, proven sustainable, and widely used package will
ensure that the software has a broad impact well beyond the end of the project.
The project will also train a diverse population of students and researchers in
theory, programming, computational chemistry/biology, computer science,
scientific writing, and communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Division of
Chemistry within the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.