* 2209139
* Focused CoPe: Enhancing Resilience and Equity in Urban Coastal Communities through the Co-Generation of Community Capitals
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Jonathan Goodall, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2027
* USD 5,000,000.00

2209139 (Goodall). The overarching goal of this project is to create
transferable methods for enhancing resilience and equity in urban coastal
communities. While the goal is to produce transferable methods, the project
focuses on communities in Hampton Roads region of Virginia — one of the most
vulnerable populations to sea level rise in the United States — as community
partners. The hub structure of the project emphasizes the co-generation of
community capitals among a diverse team of researchers in partnership with
community stakeholders. Community capitals is a term inclusive of both natural-
built capitals, such as sea walls, living shorelines, and green stormwater
infrastructure, and human-social capitals, such as health, well-being, agency,
and empowerment. The overarching hypothesis is that both forms of community
capitals must be advanced in synergy in order to have resilient and equitable
urban coastal communities. The research plan operates on two spatial scales,
regional and local, because both scales are critical for building community
capitals. On the regional scale, the research tasks are to create a geospatial
data inventory, a system-wide flood model, and equitable policies for regional
climate resilience in urban communities. On the local scale, the research tasks
are to empower and engage communities that have been historically marginalized
in the climate resilience conversation, build community capital through
workshops that result in co-designed stormwater infrastructure, and measure the
co-benefits of green stormwater infrastructure for mental health and well-being.
Work across the two scales is connected through shared resources and feedback
between the local community and broader-scale regional efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key intellectual feature of this research is the
synergistic advancement of community capitals for climate resilience. Many
projects focus on one of these community capitals, but few seek to advance both
in synergy with one another. To advance the human-social capital like well-
being, empowerment, and agency critical to fostering equitable and resilient
communities, this project advances equitable public policies that can have a
lasting impact on how coastal urban cities approach the challenge of addressing
climate resilience. For example, the concept of co-designed green stormwater
interventions that can be implemented by community members can contribute to
both enhancing natural-built capital and social-human capital. To encourage
inclusion, the project also has a strong focus on removing barriers to
participation facing underrepresented and marginalized communities in the
coastal resilience conversations and activities. To strengthen how natural-built
capitals can be assessed and strengthened, the research advances the state of
art for modeling complex urban stormwater systems at a regional scale. The
strategy is to build from widely used models for engineering design, so that
products of the research can be more easily adopted by coastal communities, and
to integrate them into a more holistic modeling system. Lastly, the hub
structure of this project provides the opportunity to foster convergence across
the project team’s expertise that ranges from hydrologic engineering and ocean
science, to architecture and landscape design, to environmental justice and
environmental psychology, to social work and community engagement. The project
has three primary broader impact goals. The first is to broaden participation in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM). To achieve this goal, the
project team will provide opportunities for eight undergraduate students and one
graduate student at Norfolk State University (NSU) — a historically Black
university located in Norfolk, Virginia — a partner community for the project.
The project aims to create a long-term partnership between NSU and the
University of Virginia to capitalize on their shared interest in climate
resilience, and to create authentic and meaningful connections with the local
community. The second broader impact goal is outreach and education. The project
team will strengthen existing efforts in STEM education to reach public K-12
students: a Learning Barge co-developed between UVA and the Elizabeth River
Project (ERP) and the Schoolyard-Long Term Ecological Research (SLTER), a
project that leverages NSF support to teach students living on Virginia’s coast
about climate resilience. The third broader impact goal of the project is to
have a positive effect on the well-being of the local partner communities. One
way this will be assessed is through studying mental health and well-being co-
benefits of green infrastructure interventions co-designed and implemented
through the project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.