* 2209726
* Elements: Making Ice Penetrating Radar More Accessible: A tool for finding, downloading and visualizing georeferenced radargrams within the QGIS ecosystem
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Laura Lindzey, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 06/30/2025
* USD 330,713.00

Ice penetrating radar is one of the primary tools that researchers use to study
ice sheets and glaciers. With radar, it is possible to see a cross-section of
the ice, revealing internal layers and the shape of the rocks under the ice.
Among other things, this is important for calculating how much potential sea
level change is locked up in the polar ice sheets, and how stable the ice sheets
are likely to be in a warming world. This type of data is logistically
challenging and expensive to collect. Historically, individual research groups
have obtained funding to collect these data sets, and then the data largely
stayed within that institution. There has been a recent push to make more and
more data openly available, enabling the same datasets to be used by multiple
research groups. However, it is still difficult to figure out what data is
available because there is no centralized index. Additionally, each group
releases data in a different format, which creates an additional hurdle to its
use. This project addresses both of those challenges to data reuse by providing
a unified tool for discovering where ice penetrating radar data already exists,
then allowing the researcher to download and visualize the data. It is
integrated into open-source mapping software that many in the research community
already use, and makes it possible for non-experts to explore these datasets.
This is particularly valuable for early-career researchers and for enabling
interdisciplinary work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US alone has spent
many tens of millions of dollars on direct grants to enable the acquisition and
analysis of polar ice penetrating radar data, and even more on the associated
infrastructure and support costs. Unfortunately, much of these data is not
publicly released, and even the data that has been released is not easily
accessible. There is significant technical work involved in figuring out how to
locate, download and view the data. This project is developing a tool that will
both lower the barrier to entry for using this data and improve the workflows of
existing users. &lt;br/&gt;Quantarctica and QGreenland have rapidly become
indispensable tools for the polar research community, making diverse data sets
readily available to researchers. However, ice penetrating radar is a major
category of data that is not currently supported â€“ it is possible to see the
locations of existing survey lines, and the ice thickness maps that have been
interpreted from their data, but it is not readily possible to see the
radargrams themselves in context with all of the other information. This
capability is important because there is far more visual information contained
in a radargram than simply its interpreted basal elevation or ice thickness.
This project is developing software that will enable researchers to to view
radargram images and interpreted surface and basal horizons in context with the
existing map-view datasets in Quantarctica and QGreenland. A data layer shows
the locations of all known ice penetrating radar surveys, color-coded based on
availability. This layer enables data discovery and browsing. The plugin itself
interacts with the data layer, first to download selected data, then to
visualize the radargrams along with a cursor that moves simultaneously along the
radargram and along the map view, making it straightforward to determine the
precise geolocation of radar features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.