* 2209638
* Authentic Learning Modules for DevOps Security Education
* EDU,DGE
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Md Abdullah Khan, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* ChunSheng Xin
* 05/31/2025
* USD 125,880.00

Information technology (IT) organizations use development and operations
(DevOps) to deliver software-based services rapidly to end-users. During
software development, various documents are often created. These materials,
referred to as software artifacts, may include design documents, source code,
risk assessments, and other project plans or documentation. Software artifacts
used in DevOps yield tremendous benefits for IT organizations. However, without
the secure development of these artifacts, deployed software can contain
security vulnerabilities which malicious users can exploit to cause serious
consequences for organizations. Therefore, students who are poised to become
next-generation professionals need to be educated on (i) the consequences of
security weaknesses that are commonplace in DevOps artifacts and (ii) how
security weaknesses can be mitigated through secure development. This project
aims to create an engaging and motivating learning environment that encourages
all computer science students to learn cybersecurity integration into artifacts
used for DevOps. The project has the potential to transform computer science
education in the cross-cutting areas of software engineering and cybersecurity
and grow a cybersecurity workforce that is well-versed in secure software
development practices and techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal
investigators from Tennessee Tech University, Kennesaw State University, and
Tuskegee University will collaborate on developing and deploying authentic
learning-based modules for DevOps security education (ALAMOSE). The ALAMOSE
project will leverage authentic learning, which provides students with practical
knowledge to solve real-world problems. Pre-lab content dissemination, hands-on
exercise, and post-lab activities will be included. The modules will be deployed
in existing cybersecurity, software engineering, and IT system security courses
across the three institutions, potentially impacting students from diverse
backgrounds. Faculty workshops and outreach webinars will be employed to promote
the adoption of the modules and to gather and present lessons learned and
experiential feedback. In addition, the modules will be available to educators
nationwide through code and container sharing platforms, such as GitHub and
DockerHub. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds proposals that address
cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case specifically cybersecurity
education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and
Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect
and preserve the growing social and economic benefits of cyber systems while
ensuring security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.