* 2210977
* Collaborative Research: Wavelength-Scalable, Room-Temperature Mid-Infrared Photodetectors Based on Multiphoton-Assisted Tunneling
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Pai-Yen Chen, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Title: Collaborative Research: Wavelength-Scalable, Room-Temperature Mid-
Infrared Photodetectors Based on Multiphoton-Assisted
Tunneling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detection of mid-infrared (MIR)
electromagnetic radiation is of central importance in both fundamental sciences
and applied technologies. It finds widespread applications ranging from free-
space communication, night vision, nondestructive testing, environmental
monitoring, medical diagnostics, spectroscopy, and astronomy research, to the
sensitive detection of biomolecular and chemical signals. However, current MIR
photodetectors based on narrow-bandgap semiconductors typically suffer from
several inherent drawbacks, such as slow response time, high cost, low
sensitivity, and most critically, the need for cryogenic cooling that
practically prohibits them from portable applications. This collaborative
research aims to study a new MIR detection mechanism based on a quantum
mechanical phenomenon referred to as multiphoton-assisted tunneling in nanoscale
metal–insulator–metal structures toward the development of new plasmo-electronic
MIR detectors, which enable ultrafast, efficient, cooling-free, and wavelength-
scalable photodetection. This interdisciplinary research interfacing quantum
mechanics, photonics, electromagnetics, nanotechnologies, and nanomaterials will
provide graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students with unique multidisciplinary
research experiences. The project tightly integrates research, education and
community outreach efforts through a series of activities, such as Women in
Engineering Program and Early Research Scholars Program, to increase the
representation of women and underrepresented minorities in the STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research aims to develop
fundamentally new plasmo-electronic nanodevices, which can enrich the functional
portfolio of plasmonics in the quantum domain and can lead to ultrafast, highly-
efficient, room-temperature, and wavelength-scalable mid-infrared (MIR)
photodetectors. We will use innovative nanophotonic and nanomaterial techniques
to significantly improve the photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of the
multiphoton-assisted tunneling (MPAT) processes occurring in
metal–insulator–metal (MIM) plasmonic heterostructures. We will first
theoretically model, experimentally characterize, and fully elucidate the
optical rectification effect associated with MPAT in the MIR and long-wavelength
regimes. Then, we will introduce (1) novel optical nanoantennas and MIM-based
optical metasurfaces to enhance the coupling efficiency and localization of
light into the MIM tunneling nanojunction, and (2) a new class of two-
dimensional (2D) transition metal oxides (TMO) serving as controllable,
ultrahigh-quality atomic-scale tunnel barriers. The strong optical
nonlinearities induced by tunneling plasmons and the plasmonically-enhanced
field localization in these plasmo-electronic MIR photodetectors, consisting of
optical nanoantenna or metasurface structures loaded with the 2D TMO tunnel
barrier, may enable the state-of-the-art photoconversion quantum yields. The
knowledge gained from this research will help establish a new paradigm for
detecting and harvesting infrared radiation using plasmonic devices operated in
the nonlinear quantum regime, and will shed light on other plasmonically-
enhanced MPAT processes, such as high harmonic generation, nonlinear wave
mixing, and two-photon absorption, in the infrared
regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.