* 2210093
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Dating Glacier Retreat and Readvance near Mount Waesche, West Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Nelia Dunbar, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 20,926.00

Obtaining glaciological and geologic data on the size of the West Antarctic Ice
Sheet between the last two glacial periods (125,000 years ago), when global
temperatures and sea level were higher than today, provides direct constraints
on the ice sheet’s response to warmer climate. These data also provide
validation points for ice-sheet models used to project future sea level.
However, obtaining these data is difficult as the evidence for between glacial
period ice extent lies below the present ice surface. A key location for
determining this ice extent is Mount Waesche, a volcano that rises above the ice
surface near the dome of the ice sheet. In preparation for drilling through the
ice to obtain rock cores from lava flows that extend under the ice sheet, the
team previously used ground-penetrating radar to map the sub-ice topography and
internal glacial layering. These radar profiles revealed discontinuities within
the ice that represent lower ice levels that may have occurred during the last
between glacial periods. The ice-core work to be added through this award aims
to enhance the team’s rock core drilling program at Mount Waesche by dating the
discontinuities in the ice. Knowing the age of the discontinuities would provide
independent evidence for past ice levels. Similar internal glacial
discontinuities have been observed in radar profiles elsewhere in Antarctica; if
the team is successful dating them at Mount Waesche, the technique could have
wider application for constraining lower ice-sheet levels across
Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To maximize scientific return from the rock-
drilling portion of the project, the team will collect and analyze ice samples
to constrain the ages of englacial unconformities. Specifically, the team will
obtain vertical ice cores that include the englacial unconformities using the
Eclipse Drill and surface horizontal cores that sample exposed englacial tephra
stratigraphy extending back to 118,000 years before present using a horizontal
ice trencher. The team will extrapolate the resulting surface chronology to
subsurface depths using radar, providing lateral depth-age constraints of
stratigraphy. Isotopic and tephra analysis will be used to provide age
constraints on the ice cores. These data will be correlated with other, well-
dated West Antarctic ice cores to obtain a local chronology and date the
unconformities. The goal of this exploratory work is to provide data that
complement the results from subglacial rock cores to better constrain surface-
elevation change, including both retreat and readvance, since the last
interglacial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.