* 2210473
* NSF-ANR: Cytochrome nanowires: secretion, assembly and function in ultrafast electron transfer by microbial biofilms
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Victor Batista, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 12/31/2025
* USD 849,992.00

Common soil bacterium Geobacter sulfurreducens has remarkable ability to form
biofilms with high electronic conductivity rivalling those of synthetic
polymers. This conductivity enables bacteria to transport respiratory electrons
over hundreds of cell lengths to remote acceptors or partner cells. This process
is critical for global environment and for applications in bioenergy, biofuels,
and bioelectronics. It has been thought that biofilms transfer electrons via
microbial nanowires made up of type IV pili filaments. The PI recently solved
the first structure of a pilus from an organism capable of extracellular
electron transfer (EET). These pili were thought to account for filament
conductivity, but the work from the PIâ€™s lab found that their conductivity is
very low, in agreement with their structure. The aim of this project is to
decipher the physical basis of nanowire secretion, assembly, and function. This
project will characterize the G. sulfurreducens secretion machinery and the role
of this novel class of bipartite pili. This project will identify the physical
basis of pili -mediated cytochrome secretion and identify all factors essential
for their biogenesis and develop tools to characterize the physical basis of
nanowire secretion. This research will lead to a bioelectronic platform to
manufacture pili required for the secretion of living biomaterials. This project
will train users with different backgrounds in the use of multifunctional
biomaterials to prepare the next generation of trans-disciplinary scientists
trained at the interface of biology, physics, chemistry, data science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary aims of this project include
reconstitution of G. sulfurreducens pili biogenesis, assembly, and secretion
pathway in a heterologous system to dissect protein-protein interactions.
Another aim is the elucidation of the mechanism of pilus dynamics and mechanical
stability in the heterodimeric pilus assembly. The aims include determination of
the mechanism of OmcS/Z secretion by quantifying how they interact with pili,
and the characterization of the structure of the novel Geobacter pili-based
cytochrome secretion system by cryo-electron tomography. This collaborative
US/France project is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the
French Agence Nationale de la Recherche, where NSF funds the US investigator and
ANR funds the partners in France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.