* 2210907
* Statistical and Computational Tools for Analyzing High-Dimensional Heterogeneous Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Kaizheng Wang, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 07/31/2025
* USD 179,999.00

Modern technologies generate tremendous volumes of data in diverse forms. The
high throughput data come inevitably with great heterogeneity and enormous
amount of noise. For instance, a large-scale genetic study typically involves
people with various different attributes; a social network usually consists of
multiple hidden communities with denser internal connections compared to
external ones. While the raw features have high ambient dimension (for example,
thousands of genes), oftentimes the intrinsic structures exhibit low complexity
(for example, latitude and longitude of an individual’s geographic location).
Precise extraction of the latent structure paves the way for solving downstream
tasks. Faced with the significant challenges in statistics and computation, this
project aims to develop efficient methodologies for estimating and inferring
latent structures from heterogeneous data. This project will yield cutting-edge
tools for scientific study, open-source software for easy implementation, and
new mathematical theorems for theoretical analysis. The project will also
provide numerous opportunities for statistical education and research
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is structured into three parts. In
the first part, the goal is to develop a new flexible methodology for clustering
high-dimensional data. This part aims at new algorithms that can identify non-
spherical and even non-convex clusters. An in-depth analysis of mixture models
brings theoretical insights including tight finite-sample statistical error
bounds and finite-iteration convergence guarantees for computation. In the
second part, the goal is to study heterogeneous relational data that encode the
information of individual objects in their pairwise relations. This part yields
reliable methods for estimating and testing latent structures in the realistic
scenario where the partially observed data may not be uniformly sampled at
random. Finally, the third part focuses on the joint analysis of multiple
related datasets, such as social networks with high-dimensional personal
attributes. The tools developed in the first two parts of the project will
constitute fundamental building blocks to address the research goals of this
last thrust. The research finding will provide novel efficient data integration
strategies for enhanced statistical accuracy. The proposed research initiatives
include dissemination of the new methods and algorithms in a form of publicly
available software and an active agenda on enhancing interdisciplinary research
training and enhancing diversity in statistical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.