* 2210161
* Deciphering Electro-Weak Scale Physics at Particle Colliders
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Andreas Papaefstathiou, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 147,051.00

This award funds the research activities of Dr. Andreas Papaefstathiou at
Kennesaw State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our understanding of the
elementary particles of Nature and their interactions is encapsulated in the
theoretical framework known as the "Standard Model" (SM). While the SM describes
experimental outcomes extraordinarily well, it lacks the ability to explain
several important questions, such as: (i) Is our universe stable in its current
form, or will it decay into a different state in the far future?; (ii) Given
that the matter we are made of readily "vaporizes" into pure energy with its
"mirror" copy, anti-matter, how can it exist so abundantly in the universe?; and
(iii) What is the nature of the non-luminous (i.e., dark) matter that permeates
our universe? Understanding in detail the most important particle in the SM ---
the so-called Higgs boson, discovered at the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC) in
2012 --- could help explain these mysteries and elucidate their potential
connections. There have been strong arguments that this accomplishment could be
well within the reach of the LHC and future collider experiments. To this end,
in his research Professor Papaefstathiou aims to develop methods through which
the properties of the Higgs boson, and other potential new particles similar to
it, will be understood in greater depth at the LHC and future experiments,
potentially illuminating the aforementioned mysteries. This project is also
envisioned to have significant broader impacts. In particular, Dr.
Papaefstathiou will work with undergraduate research assistants to teach them
about research methods in physics. Furthermore, an educational component of the
research will consist of generating material that will allow for the
visualization of spectacular particle collisions as they occur at experiments,
designed to enhance public interest in science as well as attract a diverse
audience to the pursuit the study of STEM subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
technically, the research of Professor Papaefstathiou will: (1) develop a novel,
comprehensive phenomenological approach, accompanied by high-precision Monte-
Carlo simulation tools, to measure the properties of scalars (i.e. particles
without spin), including the Higgs boson and any new particles, leading to a
deeper understanding of the mechanism that generates mass for the matter
particles in the SM through the Higgs field, known as electroweak symmetry
breaking; (2) devise techniques that will enable colliders to discover (or
exclude) and decipher viable mechanisms that generate the observed matter-anti-
matter asymmetry of the universe; and (3) provide advanced Monte-Carlo
simulation tools and analyses for detecting topological non-perturbative
processes known as electro-weak sphalerons and instantons of quantum
chromodynamics that exist within the SM. As an additional educational objective,
material will be developed, in the form of lectures, tutorials, and
visualization programs that are interfaced with realistic Monte-Carlo event
generators, with the goal of providing an introduction to particle physics and
Monte-Carlo techniques which is aimed at undergraduate researchers and the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.