* 2210162
* Soft Microbots for in vivo Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Ning Wu, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2025
* USD 398,613.00

The field of microrobotics seeks to develop very small machines capable of
performing tasks that cannot currently be accomplished with traditional
instruments. Often targeted for biomedical applications within the body,
microrobots (microbots) could be used to deliver chemotherapeutic drugs to
specific locations to treat cancer or to break up blockages within blood vessels
as in the case of stroke or in heart diseases. Challenges remain however both in
fabricating microbots and powering them, especially when biocompatible materials
are desired. This award will study and test the use of soft liquid microbots,
created with a magnetic shell that allows directed rolling with application of
an external magnetic field. Fabricated using emulsion-based techniques, this
approach allows for easy synthesis, ready control, enhanced biocompatibility,
and efficient drug delivery. The motion of these soft microbots over surfaces is
different from their rigid counterparts. This award will investigate the
traction and movement of soft microbots over a variety of hard and soft surfaces
under the applied magnetic fields to enhance and optimize their movement for
targeted applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbot locomotion is challenging
because of the reversible nature of microscale fluid flow, a limitation that can
be overcome by breaking flow-field symmetry with a nearby surface. When
translating along an interface, rolling microbots travel faster than sliding
ones because of their significantly smaller friction coefficient. This
phenomenon has been utilized with rotating wheel-shaped microbots for targeting
occlusive clots located in small arteries, delivering drugs, and inducing lysis
via a combination of mechanical and biochemical action. Recent studies, however,
have used rigid microbots that roll inefficiently with significant slip and
difficulty navigating confined environments. Addressing these drawbacks, this
award proposes the use of soft microbots based on superparamagnetic Pickering
emulsions. They will provide enhanced biocompatibility and large drug
encapsulation capacity and can alter their shape to enhance traction by
accommodating interactions with viscoelastic in vivo environments. Soft
Pickering emulsion microbots will be fabricated and the nature of their
transport on various surfaces and in various environments will be investigated.
The ability of these soft microbots to transport and deliver drugs within
various biomimetic environments will also be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.