* 2210186
* Unconventional Electrodynamics of Nodal Semi-Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Dimitri Basov, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;A new class of materials has been named as
“topological” materials because they have unique properties that remain
unchanged under continuous deformations. This project investigates topological
metals to uncover their unusual properties. Specifically, the project will
investigate unusual optical and electronic properties of topological metals when
subjected to external perturbations. Apart from fundamental interest, the
knowledge gained from this research could impact the deployment of these
materials in the emerging discipline of quantum technology as well as novel
light harvesting and clean energy technologies, a task of significant societal
impact. The project will involve a diverse group of undergraduate students who
will receive training in cutting edge topics and techniques crucial to improving
their representation in STEM fields. Recent graduates from this research group
found employment in companies such as Google, Amazon as well as in various
universities and national laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;The project utilizes a suite of nascent nano-optical
methods to investigate novel effects in topologically non-trivial conductors
that are rooted in a combination of symmetry breaking and band-structure
geometry. This project addresses fundamental questions about the physics and
nanoscale electrodynamics of topological systems. It is enabled by novel nano-
optical experiments applied to an enigmatic class of quantum materials and will
lead to new nonlinear functionalities. The proposed experiments will create a
roadmap for future nano-optical characterization of other classes of topological
materials. The project furthermore focuses on addressing and resolving the two
overarching classes of problems which have deep implications not only for the
research in topologically nontrivial semimetals but also for technological
applications in the infrared range. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained in the area at the intersection of condensed matter physics, materials
science, scanning probe methods: a combination that is in high demand in
academia, industry, and government laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.