* 2210070
* Predicting spatial and temporal responses of herbivorous coral reef fishes to sediment runoff
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Jacob Johansen, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 01/31/2026
* USD 1,173,835.00

Tropical coral reefs are one of the world’s most biodiverse ecosystems but are
rapidly degrading due to anthropogenic threats. Sediment runoff is associated
with coral decline and algal dominance, yet we have a limited understanding of
the impacts of sediment on reef organisms, including on herbivorous fishes that
prevent uncontrolled algae growth. The investigators are examining the effects
of sedimentation on several species of herbivorous reef fish, including whether
they remain in or evacuate affected reefs. They are also characterizing the
relationship between sedimentation, herbivory rates, and coral cover. Outcomes
are informing reef management efforts by identifying critical sediment
thresholds that may preserve herbivore biomass and algal removal rates. This
project will provide research training for undergraduates, graduate students,
and a postdoctoral scientist. The investigators are promoting coral reef
education to local communities through a new partnership with the Hawai’i
Science Inquiry Education Program (SIEP), an “early admit” college course that
includes a culturally framed research experience for high school students.
Finally, results of this project are being shared widely via a TV episode on
Voice of the Sea, an established TV and online streaming series that connects
research and culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sediment runoff is associated with
coral degradation and shifts from coral- to algal-dominance. Herbivorous fishes
are critical in preventing and/or reversing phase shifts, yet recent findings
reveal extreme sensitivity of herbivorous reef fishes to sediment exposure,
which in turn may lead to rapid decline in abundance and top-down algal control.
The main goal of this project is to reveal how and to what extent sediment
exposure erodes fish function in coral reef ecosystems. The investigators are
combining field ecology, animal behavior, and mathematical modeling to address
three main objectives: 1) Assessment of spatio-temporal functional responses of
herbivorous fishes to sediment gradients in the wild; 2) Validation of
behavioral responses of herbivorous fishes to sediment exposure in-vivo; and 3)
Construction of a mechanistic framework for predicting consequences of sediment
runoff for the delivery of herbivorous fish functions and coral-algal dynamics
on vulnerable reefs. Overall, this study offers an integrated view of what
characterizes sediment exposure limits and what goes wrong when limits are
surpassed, while clarifying the mechanistic links between sedimentation,
herbivory, and the risk of ecological phase shifts. Outcomes are establishing
sublethal limits to sedimentation to inform conservation and management efforts
and are being shared with stakeholders in Hawai’i. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Biological Oceanography Program in NSF's
Division of Ocean Sciences and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.