* 2210373
* STTR Phase I:  Bioengineering lung surfactant for the treatment of respiratory disease
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2022,10/31/2023
* Russ Lehrman, BIOSUPERIOR TECHNOLOGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 10/31/2023
* USD 255,987.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to develop a synthetic lung surfactant
product for the potential treatment of serious respiratory illnesses in neonatal
patients. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia affects 10,000-15,000 pre-term infants per
year and has a high mortality rate. Exposure of immature lung tissue to air
results in inflammation and damages lungs and airways. Decreasing
bronchopulmonary dysplasia is anticipated to reduce the number of days infants
spend in the hospital, the need for supplemental oxygen, and other burdens on
the healthcare system. The average length of stay in the neonatal intensive care
unit for an infant with bronchopulmonary dysplasia is currently 103
days.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase
I project may result in the formulation of synthetic proteins for a
bioengineered lung surfactant that contains full-length critical phospholipids
and anti-inflammatory agents. Currently, bioengineered pulmonary surfactants are
not as effective as animal-derived pulmonary surfactants for the treatment of
illnesses related to bronchopulmonary dysplasia such as neonatal respiratory
distress syndrome. The synthesis of full-length, native surfactant proteins has
yet to be achieved. This research seeks to synthesize proteins which may add
significant viscoelasticity to the pulmonary surfactant. The protein will be
combined with major surfactant phospholipids and anti-inflammatory therapeutics
at defined ratios to potentially generate fully-synthetic pulmonary surfactant
preparations with anti-inflammatory properties. These surfactant formulations
will be screened in vitro and in vivo using a neonatal rat hyperoxia model of
bronchopulmonary dysplasia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.