* 2210394
* Collaborative Research: Manufacturing of Complex Optical Elements for Advanced Imaging Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Matthew Davies, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 04/30/2025
* USD 298,980.00

This grant supports research that contributes new knowledge related to an
advanced manufacturing process that is required for creating complex optical
components. It will promote the advancement of science and strengthen our
national capabilities for manufacturing of advanced optical systems. Ultra-
precision machines utilize single crystal diamond tools to manufacture optics
with dimensional accuracies that are on the order of a small fraction of the
diameter of a human hair, approximately one ten-millionth of one meter. New
ultra-precision machine technology enables the manufacture of optics of nearly
arbitrary shape, known as freeform optics. This freedom allows optics designers
to think in entirely new ways. As one of the enabling technologies for freeform
optics, ultra-precision machining is poised to play a major role in an optical
revolution. A prime application area of this technology is the manufacture of
optics for thermal imaging and night vision systems. This award supports
fundamental research needed for the cost-effective manufacture of freeform
optics. While the immediate impact area is thermal imaging, the research has
broader application to many industry sectors critical to the U.S. economic
sectors including solar energy, healthcare, biomedical, aerospace, defense and
automotive. This research crosses the disciplines of manufacturing, mechanical
engineering, materials science and optical science and the multi-disciplinary
approach is used to broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research
and positively impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this researched study is to test the hypothesis that there
is a shift in material removal mechanism at increased cutting velocities when
single point diamond machining brittle single crystal materials such as
germanium or silicon. Ultra-precision diamond machining experiments will be
performed at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte that are designed to
explore the effect of increased cutting velocities on the governing cutting
mechanics. The study will focus on 1) high speed diamond flycutting, 2) high
speed orthogonal cutting using a fast tool servo to allow rapid tool withdrawal
from the cut, and 3) ohmic contact cutting to explore the possibility of a
material phase change. High bandwidth dynamic forces, chip morphology and
changes in material phase, if any, will be quantified. The surface and
subsurface of the machined specimens will be characterized by atomic force
microscopy, channeling Rutherford backscattering spectrometry, Raman
spectroscopy and cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy to be
performed at Oklahoma State University and Los Alamos National
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.