* 2210153
* Reliability Study and Failure Analysis of Wide Bandgap GaN Vertical Power Devices: From Materials to Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Yuji Zhao, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 02/28/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Power electronic devices are at the heart of
power and energy systems that are widely used in electric/hybrid vehicles, data
centers, power grids, solar panels, and wind turbines. It is estimated that 80%
of global electricity will be processed by power devices by 2030. Compared with
the incumbent silicon devices, vertical gallium nitride (GaN) power devices are
broadly regarded as key enablers for the next-generation efficient, compact, and
robust power electronics, with the potential to transform future power
electronics technologies. Despite the high potential, the performance of
vertical GaN power devices still falls far behind their theoretical limit due to
premature device degradation and failure. The fundamental knowledge on the
device reliability and failure mechanisms of vertical GaN power devices is still
largely missing, which significantly hinders the further development and
adoption of GaN power electronics. This project aims to advance the fundamental
understanding on the reliability and failure of vertical GaN power devices, and
use a material-device co-design approach to push their performance to GaN limit.
Successful outcomes of the project will lead to transformative understanding and
new development of vertical GaN power devices at physics, materials, and devices
levels. And fundamental new knowledge will be achieved using an
interdisciplinary approach involving materials growth and characterization,
device design and fabrication, and reliability testing and failure analysis. The
intellectual merits of the project include new understandings on the degradation
and failure mechanisms of vertical GaN power devices, the development of new
material and device characterization toolsets for the GaN deviceâ€™s reliability
analysis, as well as new insights into the design and fabrication of vertical
GaN power devices to realize their full potential. To achieve broader impacts,
the project will provide workforce training for underrepresented groups with
interdisciplinary research skills in engineering, materials, and physics,
integrate educational activities for K-12 students and teachers, and promote
STEM undergraduate research in semiconductors and power
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Vertical gallium
nitride (GaN) power devices are ideal candidates for high-voltage high-power
electronic applications due to their advantages, such as lower materials defect
density, immunity to surface-related degradation and reliability concerns, and
avalanche capability, as well as smaller chip areas and better heat dissipation.
Despite these advantages, the current vertical GaN power devices still suffer
from premature failure, and their device performance is far below the GaN
material limit. There are very limited research efforts on the reliability study
and failure analysis of vertical GaN devices, and the fundamental understandings
are still missing. This project will directly address this research and
scientific gap and obtain fundamental knowledge on the failure modes and
mechanisms of vertical GaN power devices. An interdisciplinary approach will be
used to achieve material-device co-design, including materials characterizations
at failure sites, defects engineering, reliability study under current surge
events, and theoretical modeling. This project will advance the fundamental
understanding on the failure mechanisms of vertical GaN power devices,
accelerate the device development of high-power robust GaN devices, and unlock
the full potential of the GaN materials for efficient power
conversions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.