* 2210598
* NSFDEB-NERC: Subtribal classification and generic delimitation among Eastern Hemisphere ironweeds (Vernonieae, Compositae).
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Morgan Gostel, Botanical Research Institute of Texas
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 08/31/2026
* USD 830,328.00

The biodiversity crisis is among the most urgent global threats facing humanity
in the 21st century. With nearly half a million plant species on Earth,
understanding their diversity is a key priority. However, there are too many
plant species and not enough trained taxonomists to study, describe and
distribute information about them. This is especially problematic for large
plant families such as the sunflower family (Compositae), which includes more
than 30,000 species and nearly 2,000 genera. One of the hyper-diverse plant
groups within this family includes approximately 1,500 species of “ironweeds”
(Vernonieae), which has proven so challenging for botanists that it is often
referred to as the “evil tribe”. Until recently, most species of “ironweeds”
(&gt;1,000) were placed into a single, broadly defined genus, Vernonia. However,
this genus has been reduced to include only 21 species restricted to the
Americas. In the Eastern Hemisphere alone, Vernonieae is represented by more
than 700 species and more than one third of these remain in the genus Vernonia,
awaiting placement in a different genus. This project will support critical
sampling of DNA and morphological characters from ironweeds in the Eastern
Hemisphere based on field and herbarium collections. These genetic and
morphological data will clarify taxonomic boundaries in the tribe and form the
basis of comparative studies to understand evolutionary relationships among
species in this diverse and economically important group of plants. Data
collected as part of this work will be added to the newly established Global
Compositae Database (GCD), a public, online taxonomic resource. Results of this
work will be broadly distributed through the GCD, and new, integrative taxonomic
tools will be made available. This project will also provide broad support to
the global community of Compositae specialists through the GCD and inspire and
train the next generation of plant taxonomists through workshops, tutorials,
public lectures, and videos. Training will be provided to a diverse and
international community of students at various stages of their education (from
K-12 to graduate school), professionals (e.g., collections managers and
curators, postdocs, and faculty), and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes
from this project will have a significant impact on how we describe and
communicate about diversity in a large and historically challenging group of
plants (Vernonieae), which in turn is part of the most species-rich plant family
on Earth (Compositae). Botanists who specialize in the taxonomy of Vernonieae
have struggled to understand the characters that can help differentiate among
the more than 700 species in this tribe that occur in the Eastern Hemisphere.
Field work will be based in five countries (namely Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Madagascar, Mozambique, South Africa, and Thailand) and collections will
be studied from four herbaria, which hold the largest historical collections of
Vernonieae in the world. DNA data will be generated using a high-throughput
sequencing method, which has been proven to reconstruct evolutionary
relationships among species in this group. Detailed analyses will be conducted
on a set of more than 150 macro- and micromorphological characters, including
pollen. These data will be analyzed using an integrative approach to resolve
generic limits and determine the accurate placement of species of Eastern
Hemisphere Vernonieae in an evolutionary framework. Results will inform an
expansive, first-of-its-kind toolkit for the Global Compositae Database and
associated taxonomic resources to facilitate collections management, help train
the next generation of taxonomists, and advance collective knowledge regarding
diversity and evolution of these enigmatic plants. All work will be carried out
in collaboration with local botanists and students to develop local expertise
and support a growing international network of taxonomic experts, who will
advance shared goals for Compositae systematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.