* 2210475
* RUI: Pion Lagrangian for Large Scale Structure in Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Bartholomew Horn, Manhattan College
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 45,000.00

This RUI award funds the research activities of Professor Bart Horn at Manhattan
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surveys of large-scale structure in the Universe
are poised to transform the field of cosmology over the next five to ten years.
By measuring the distribution of galaxies and matter and their evolution over
time, physicists hope to measure parameters of primordial cosmology and to probe
the age, composition, and early history of the Universe to unprecedented levels
of precision. As part of his research, Professor Horn will develop some of the
new computational tools that will be required to analyze these large data sets.
In addition to supporting the progress of scientific research, this work will
further the national interest by helping to introduce a new generation of
researchers to the field. This project will also create multiple opportunities
for undergraduate students to participate in cutting-edge research. Moreover, as
an additional broader impact, this program will also support outreach to local
high schools and other venues in New York City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, Professor Horn will apply effective field theory techniques from
high-energy theoretical physics to modeling the growth and evolution of large-
scale structure in the Universe, using an effective pion Lagrangian description
for the gravitational collapse of matter in order to connect theoretical inputs
and experimental observables well into the nonlinear regime. This description
helps keep the symmetries manifest, similar to the role symmetries have played
in field theories of nuclear and particle physics, and this description may
suggest new ways of connecting the inputs of primordial physics to experimental
observables of large-scale structure. These methods will be compared against
experimental data and N-body simulations, which are computationally expensive
despite their accuracy, and it is expected that the additional efficiency
obtained will help make the field more accessible to a new generation of
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.