* 2210374
* NSF-BSF: Fast Quantum Optimal Control on Exponentially Large Spaces
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Itay Hen, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2025
* USD 212,000.00

Optimal control of quantum systems is essential to the development of quantum
computing technologies and fundamental experiments. Finding optimal control
schemes requires minimizing an objective function over an overwhelmingly large
phase space. To overcome this challenge, current techniques simply search for an
optimal scheme by heavily truncating the search space. However, this is known to
overlook faster and higher fidelity solutions. The aim of this project is to
theoretically develop and experimentally explore a novel approach for designing
optimal control schemes of quantum systems. The success of this project will
allow quantum physicists and engineers to design optimal control schemes better
than those available today, thus enhancing the capabilities of existing quantum
technologies and will boost development of high-fidelity quantum processors. In
a broader sense, enhancing quantum computation capabilities will affect our
ability to solve larger problems than currently possible in all areas of science
and engineering. In addition, the work will provide training to graduate
students who will be involved in all aspects of the project, including research,
collaboration and the dissemination of results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
approach is based on a novel technique for calculating elements of
exponentially-large matrices without the need to store prohibitive quantities of
data. The team plans to further develop this technique and adjust it to the
settings of quantum optimal control in overwhelmingly large Hilbert spaces. Such
settings arise when coupling an atom or qubit to a Bosonic mode, and are common
in leading quantum technology platforms, such as Ions, Cavity-QED, and
superconducting circuits. Specifically in the latter, a promising hardware-
efficient approach for quantum computing is to encode the quantum information in
the vast space of Bosonic modes. Searching within such a large phase space may
prove to be crucial for this approach; and the versatility of this platform may
prove crucial to understanding the theoretical scheme in a realistic
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.