* 2210860
* Integrative approaches with applications in eQTL analysis and randomized trials
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Fei Xue, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2025
* USD 40,662.00

Multisource data frequently arise in many real data applications, where
different data sources contain complementary information, but each has only
limited samples. To make the best use of the limited data from different
sources, there is a great need for integrative approaches to jointly analyze all
the datasets instead of separately analyzing every single dataset. Motivated by
this need, this project will develop new integrative statistical methods to
improve parameter estimation accuracy and hypothesis testing power. The results
of the project will empower researchers in scientific fields such as genetics,
biology, and medicine that face multisource data problems. The project will
provide a broad range of interdisciplinary training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students, especially students from underrepresented
groups. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of this project is to study
the integration of multisource data in the following three aspects. First, the
principal investigator (PI) plans to build an empirical Bayes regression model
for genotype-expression association analysis integrating data from multiple
tissues. Second, the project will improve the test of the genotype-expression
association via borrowing shared information across genes. Third, the PI will
develop a covariate-adjusted method for causal effects on high-dimensional
outcomes. The developed methods and results in this project will deepen
understanding of genetics and biology, yield a more powerful test of treatment
or drug effects on patients, and hence foster significant biological and medical
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.