* 2210447
* Quantum Measurements for Continuous-Variable States with Photon Counting
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Francisco Becerra Chavez, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

Measurement of the state of an optical field is at the center of many
technological applications across physics and engineering including optical
communications, sensing and metrology, and information processing. When the
optical state encodes information, optimal or near optimal measurements allow
for decoding this information efficiently and reliably, enhancing the
performance of different protocols in communications and information processing.
The design and optimization of measurements critically depend on the intrinsic
properties of the optical states and the available resources in the measurement
to be realized. This project will investigate optimal and near optimal quantum
measurements for optical states comprised of coherent states (light from lasers)
and state superpositions, based on photon counting measurements and optimized
coherent displacement operations. Optimized measurements for coherent states and
their superpositions can provide a new tool for protocols in all-optical quantum
information processing and long-distance quantum communications. Furthermore,
the design of efficient quantum measurements for optical quantum states is
essential for current and future developments in photonic quantum technologies,
which are the subject of many academic and industrial efforts
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum measurement theory provides a
fundamental understanding of the limits on the achievable sensitivity for
determining the states of quantum systems. This project will demonstrate
optimized quantum measurements for coherent states and their superpositions for
applications in quantum communications, information processing, and computation.
These optimized measurements are based on photon counting, coherent displacement
operations, and adaptive measurements, which will allow for the design of a wide
class of optimized quantum measurements for diverse states and measurement
problems. The proposed quantum measurements of coherent states seek to realize
complex projective and non-projective measurements with fidelities and
sensitivities for state projection and discrimination beyond the reach of
standard measurement paradigms including Gaussian measurements
(homodyne/heterodyne). The project will advance new knowledge through the
development of experimental techniques for ultrasensitive optical measurements
with high fidelity, and through theoretical methods for the design and
optimization of complex quantum measurements with finite resources. Theoretical
efforts will focus on quantum measurements of coherent states and their
superpositions based on photon counting, coherent displacements, and adaptive
strategies. Experimental efforts will focus on the demonstrations of these
strategies in tabletop experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.