* 2210349
* Particle and Quantum Field Theory Investigations
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Massimo Porrati, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 290,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors S. Dubovskiy, G.
Gabadadze, and M. Porrati at New York University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research to be pursued under this grant aims at answering some of the truly
fundamental questions in physics. How can we best determine the fundamental
constants of nature? What is the correct theory of gravity? Does gravity behave
differently over cosmic scales than over the shorter distances we encounter
within our solar system? How is the evolution of the universe constrained by
modern theories that attempt to unify the physics of the very small with the
physics of the very large, such as string theory or quantum gravity? What can we
learn by studying the fact that the universe is experiencing an accelerated
expansion? Can gravitational theories that are consistent with quantum mechanics
be solved mathematically in simple "toy model" settings? As such, research in
this field advances the national interest by furthering our understanding of
fundamental science in the United States. In this project, the PIs will work
towards answering these questions both in parallel and in collaboration,
involving postdocs and graduate students throughout the research process. They
will also give public lectures and lecture in schools for diverse audiences
ranging from research scientists to high-school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Dubovskiy will continue the study of
certain integrable deformations of two-dimensional field theory and their
relations to quantum gravity. He plans to explore the high-energy asymptotic
limit of the worldsheet theory of a single long string, and the emerging
integrability in this regime. He will also study a new approximate symmetry of
black-hole perturbations, which was identified in one of his recent works. This
symmetry provides an explanation for surprising properties of black-hole tidal
responses (``Love numbers"). Gabadadze proposes to investigate holographic dual
theories for massive five-dimensional gravitational theories and their
applications to cosmology and black-hole physics as well as study an effective
field theory of gravity, its domain of consistency, and its applications to
cosmology. He will also study the effects of wormholes in beyond-Einstein
theories of gravity as well as the consequences of these effects for rotating
black-hole solutions and for their superradiance. Porrati plans to understand
diverse aspects of quantum gravity. He plans to compute partition functions of
three-dimensional topological theories on spaces with high-genus boundaries and
use recent advances in string theory on highly-curved spaces for understanding
their holographic dual at the string-black hole transition point. He also plans
to study how electric-magnetic duality combines with infinite-dimensional
asymptotic algebras, and he will investigate certain recently discovered novel
types of supergravity theories and use them to find effective theories with
realistic features. Finally, he will investigate other aspects of supergravity
and collaborate with Prof. Dubovskiy to study certain deformations of two-
dimensional conformal field theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.