* 2210442
* Cation Exchange Pathways for Constructing Metal Chalcogenide Nanoparticle Libraries
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2026
* Raymond Schaak, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2026
* USD 328,765.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New materials drive innovation in
science and technology. Scientists are becoming better and better at predicting
new materials, but it can often be challenging to make them. In this project,
which is funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research, Professor Ray Schaak and his group at Penn State
University use simple chemical reactions to replace certain elements in a
nanoparticle material with other elements. These reactions transform simple
nanoparticles into nanoparticles that are much more complex. The researchers are
studying how these reactions occur and how they can be used to make new types of
nanoparticles that could help to advance applications in clean energy. This
project is establishing new rules for how to control the arrangements of atoms
and materials within a nanoparticle that contains various metals along with
sulfur, selenium, tellurium, and/or oxygen. The PI and his group are applying
these rules to many different materials so that they can make large collections
of nanoparticles using the same methods. This knowledge will allow researchers
to more quickly make and study new materials that are predicted but have
remained out of reach. The PI and his group are partnering with a network of
faculty and students at local colleges and are providing new educational
resources for helping students to understand how atoms arrange in solid-state
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing disconnect between the scope of
materials that can be predicted, including computationally, and those that can
be made experimentally. Many materials of interest, especially metastable phases
and complex nanoparticles, have no known pathways for synthesizing them. This
project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research, uses cation exchange reactions to modify the
compositions of nanoparticles, producing large libraries of previously
inaccessible nanoparticle materials through rational synthetic pathways. The PI
and his group are establishing when and why existing synthetic guidelines break
down and defining an expanded set of design rules that are broadly applicable
across diverse metal chalcogenide and oxychalcogenide systems, including
semiconductors having tunable band gaps. The researchers are studying how
interfaces in heterostructured nanoparticles form and evolve and how layered
intergrowth and superlattice compounds can be targeted through partial and
complete cation exchange reactions that are chemo- and regio-selective. They are
developing rational pathways to heterostructured nanoparticle megalibraries
having millions of possible members, as well as new chemical reactions that
break symmetry and introduce new structural motifs. This project is helping to
bridge the gap between materials that can be predicted and those that can be
synthesized, which will help to accelerate rational materials development. The
PI and his group are partnering with a network of faculty and students at local
colleges and are developing resources for visualizing crystal structures and
their interrelationships, which allow students to analyze materials and
understand their reactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.