* 2210293
* RESEARCH-PGR: QTL Analyses Identify Genetic Components Regulating the Interactions between Plants, Pathogens and the Environment in the Face of Climate Change
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Dahlia Nielsen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,797,107.00

An organism’s ability to respond to its environment is fundamental to its
survival. When the organism of interest is involved in a host-pathogen
interaction, “the environment” becomes complex, including includes not only
external forces, but also the conditions imposed by the interacting partner.
There are also two genomes at play, each of which affects the behavior of both
organisms. In addition, external environmental forces impose additional
pressures, and each genome can affect how both partners respond. This project
examines the role the host genome plays in altering behavior of both host and
pathogen under environmental stress. It leverages an agriculturally relevant
system, nematode infection of tomato. Parasitic nematodes are responsible for
around $125 billion in annual crop loss worldwide with yield loss upwards of 80%
for tomato. Limited control options are available, and the situation is
exacerbated by an emerging concern in agriculture: the effect of warming
nighttime temperatures (WNT). This unprecedented trend is causing critical
challenges to crops. Broader, future impacts of this work include the
development of novel approaches to examine host-pathogen interactions and how
they are affected by external conditions. This then will lead to the
identification of plant lines that are more resilient to both abiotic and biotic
stresses. Importantly, by elucidating the molecular biology behind the parasite
response to those plants under WNT, this study will go beyond merely identifying
relevant host genes to contribute new insight into the mechanisms by which those
genes alter the nematode biology. Understanding the nematode in addition to the
plant paves the way towards targeting the parasite directly for crop
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project align with an
overarching concern in genetics: to identify DNA variants that influence how
individuals respond to their environment. Here, the concept of “individuals” and
“environment” are complex. DNA variants in one species will be identified that,
in tandem with external environmental conditions, affect how another,
interacting species responds. The environmental context considered is warming
nighttime temperatures (WNT), a critical, highly relevant, and current
environmental concern. Genetically variable tomato plants derived from a cross
between a cultivated line and a wild line will be infected with a genetically
homogeneous strain of parasitic nematodes. A control experiment will also be
performed with uninfected plants. These early, late, and control experiments
will be carried out under two temperature regimes: normal nighttime temperatures
and WNT. For each treatment combination, phenotypes related to infection and
plant health will be collected, along with gene expression data for both plant
and nematode. With this design, connections between DNA variants in the tomato
genome and molecular responses of the nematode as well as the plant will be
made, and the effect of WNT on these connections will be uncovered through via a
series of genetic mapping experiments. Leveraging the connections identified in
this way, more complex genotype-expression-phenotype pathways can subsequently
be inferred, providing a detailed view of the molecular biology of the plant-
parasite interaction response to WNT. It will also pinpoint promising candidate
genes, which will be functionally validated. All project outcomes will be made
publicly accessible through publications and deposition of data and resources in
long-term repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.