* 2210722
* Collaborative Research: PIC: Slow Wave Enhanced Electrooptically Tuned Michelson Interferometer Biosensor for On-Chip Dual Polarization Interferometry
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Bibhudutta Rout, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2025
* USD 160,260.00

The COVID pandemic of 2020 demonstrated the worldwide need for low-cost, highly
sensitive, rapid&lt;br/&gt;diagnostic testing of diverse pathogens. While
silicon photonics enables such a highly multiplexed label-free&lt;br/&gt;sensing
capability with extremely high sensitivities, a handheld low-cost silicon
nanophotonic sensor&lt;br/&gt;is still missing. Fabrication imperfections have
made photonic sensor implementations difficult with a fixed&lt;br/&gt;wavelength
laser and a single detector. Photonic measurement variabilities also arise from
binding&lt;br/&gt;uncertainties in nanophotonic pillars and trenches. The
fundamental work in this proposal employs a novel&lt;br/&gt;on-chip dual
polarization interferometry technique that will reduce photonic measurement
variability, and&lt;br/&gt;novel circuit implementations to enable electrically
driven and electrically readout low-cost on-chip&lt;br/&gt;nanophotonic sensors.
The working principle of the device, and circuit implementations of the device
to&lt;br/&gt;overcome fabrication and measurement limitations have not been
previously demonstrated. The state-of-the-&lt;br/&gt;art photonic device
fabrication capabilities at a 300 mm CMOS foundry, namely AIM Photonics,
with&lt;br/&gt;monolithically integrated passive and active electrically biased
photonic components will be employed in&lt;br/&gt;this project. The project will
involve students in optics, engineering, materials science, and physics
from&lt;br/&gt;the University of Dayton and the University of North Texas who
will not only learn about cutting-edge&lt;br/&gt;STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) research but also in computer aided
design&lt;br/&gt;layouts for foundry fabrication of next-generation co-
integrated electronic-photonic devices. The project&lt;br/&gt;will also work
with students and faculty in microbiology from the Dayton Early College Academy,
and&lt;br/&gt;other middle and high school students in the greater Dayton, OH
and Denton, TX areas. The handheld&lt;br/&gt;sensors will find applications in
various domains of biological sensing for cancer diagnostics,
infectious&lt;br/&gt;disease and opioid diagnostics, and environmental pollution
monitoring as also in new drug discovery.&lt;br/&gt;The technical goals of this
project will (a) demonstrate the principle of slow light enhanced
interferometry&lt;br/&gt;on-chip; (b) investigate novel thin-film electro-optic
phase shifters on silicon chip; (c) demonstrate on-chip&lt;br/&gt;real time dual
polarization interferometry; and (d) demonstrate an unprecedented fabrication
tolerant silicon&lt;br/&gt;nanophotonic sensor operating in a compact package
with electrical drive and electrical readout. The&lt;br/&gt;program will expose
students to interdisciplinary research encompassing lithography, photonics,
electrical&lt;br/&gt;engineering, physics, biochemistry, and materials science.
The project will culminate with the development&lt;br/&gt;of a USB-powered
handheld optical biosensor kit. Project members will engage in science and
technology&lt;br/&gt;outreach targeting middle and high school students in
greater Dayton, OH and greater Denton, TX counties.&lt;br/&gt;Project activities
will outreach to broaden the participation of minority students in STEM
education and&lt;br/&gt;training. Students will be exposed to an innovation
ecosystem with hands-on science and technology&lt;br/&gt;experience. Finally,
the project will help to address the significant current need to build US-
based&lt;br/&gt;manpower in the design and manufacturing of semiconductor
chips.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.