* 2210137
* EAGER: DCL: SaTC: Enabling Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Combatting Disinformation and Racial Bias: A Deep-Learning-Assisted Investigation of Temporal Dynamics of Disinformation
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Kookjin Lee, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 05/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This project explores the diffusion of racial disinformation online and its
social impacts, particularly focusing on Asian Americans. While the hatred and
bias against Asian Americans have become notable amid the COVID-19 pandemic,
Asian-targeting disinformation has yet been fully explored. The project's
novelties are in unique multidisciplinary approaches to (1) detect Asian-
targeting disinformation and its countermeasure messages, and understand how
they are spread on the web, (2) examine how the spread of disinformation and
countermeasure messages on the web is associated with the intensity of the bias
and hate crimes against Asian Americans, and (3) develop various data-driven
computational models to help understanding the disinformation dynamics. The
project's broader significance and importance are to inform civil society,
including advocacy organizations and the general public, about how to strategize
communication efforts in battling racial disinformation, and to make the
developed tools and outcomes publicly available for broader
uses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes three-staged approaches. The main
objective of the first phase is to develop computational tools for the detection
and analysis of the temporal dynamics between Asian-targeted disinformation and
countermeasures on the Web. A specific focus is on developing automated
identification tools and deep-learning classification models by feature-
engineering unique characteristics of disinformation. The objective of the
second phase is to understand to what extent the spread of disinformation and
countermeasures online is associated with the societal trend of implicit bias
and hate crime occurrences against Asian Americans in the real-world, which can
be achieved via developing deep-learning causality models. The objective of the
third phase is to design scalable data-driven deep-learning models of
disinformation dynamics in macro and micro levels, identifying unknown dynamics
from the real-world measurements, which also enables simulations of the learned
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.