* 2210783
* Collaborative Research: EAR-Climate: Hydraulic and Hydrologic Regulation of Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Forest Soils and Trees and Detection With Radon As A Novel Tracer
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* J. Patrick Megonigal, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2025
* USD 307,497.00

The goals of this project are to better understand the role of trees in the
global water and methane cycles and to attract elementary-school age students to
environmental science through hands-on activities about water and trees. Methane
is a potent greenhouse gas, causing about 30 times as much global warming per
molecule as carbon dioxide. It is currently known that methane can be emitted
from the trunks of trees, but it is unknown if the methane originates in the
soil and is transported into the tree along with tree water uptake from below
ground, or if the methane originates inside the tree. Understanding what water
and environment factors influence methane emissions from trees can improve
climate predictions and may help people manage forests and forested wetlands
deliberately to reduce their natural methane emissions. The project will also
work with a local elementary school serving talented and gifted students
primarily from underrepresented groups (Black, Latinx). About 200 second-grade
students will visit American University, where they will learn about watersheds,
trees, and sustainability and participate in activities to develop a science
identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use radon as a tracer of the
movement of water and gases through trees. Radon is an established tool for
studying water flows and gas exchange in the ocean, estuaries, rivers, soil, and
groundwater. Radon, methane, and water fluxes from trees will be simultaneously
measured across a wetland-upland gradient to determine whether the methane
emitted from trees comes from soil water or is produced within the tree. Soil
moisture, water potential, soil methane and radon concentrations, water table
height, stomatal conductance, and sap flow will be measured concurrently to
delineate the relationships between tree physiology, water flows, and stem gas
emissions and to distinguish topographic effects. Field data will be used to
develop numerical models that simulate dynamic gas transport through the soil-
plant-atmosphere continuum, account for both dissolved gas and bubbles, and
include both daytime and nighttime transient water potential gradients and
transport. Finally, the results will be scaled up to assess how direct and
indirect effects of climate change (e.g., temperature increase, sea level rise,
changes in precipitation patterns, soil moisture, and tree water use, shift of
some coastal forests from upland to wetland) may affect tree methane
emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Hydrologic
Sciences and Instrumentation and Facilities programs in the Division of Earth
Sciences, as well as the Ecosystem Science program in the Division of
Environmental Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.