* 2210800
* Research Infrastructure: Increasing scientific capacity and educational and outreach impact of the  Cornell University Insect Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Patrick O'Grady, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2024
* USD 540,601.00

The Cornell University Insect Collection (CUIC), founded in 1871, is one of the
oldest entomological collections in the United States. The CUIC, with over 7
million specimens, represents over 200,000 species or roughly 20% of all
described species of insects from almost every country on the planet. Over the
course of this project, researchers at CUIC will move the fixed insect cabinets
to a compactor system on rails, increasing capacity for continued growth, and
expand the scientific impact of the collection through the careful curation and
digitization of several targeted areas. The compactors will allow for the
physical expansion of biological collection capacity, while the addition of new
cabinets and drawers will ensure the integrity of valuable scientific material.
Through associated digitization activities, the CUIC holdings will be made more
accessible to researchers and the public alike. In addition to these collection
management activities, the PIs will take a three-pronged approach to prepare the
next generation of entomologists and educate the public. First, an undergraduate
cohort training program will be created to ensure that the next generation of
entomologists are skilled in collections-based curation and research. Second, to
educate and provide exposure to the public, the PIs will partner with the local
natural history museum to create activities that the public can engage with to
learn about the diversity and importance of insects, including the creation of
an online insect field guide. Finally, PIs will partner with museum education
staff to create lesson plans that align with the Next-Generation Science
Standards for secondary educators for use in their classrooms, leading to a
long-lasting ripple effect both for the students and educators over many years
to come. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological collections are the foundation for
research in many disciplines. Some scientific questions can only be addressed by
using these collections to examine change through time or aspects of already
extinct species. For these reasons, no active research collection will ever stop
growing. Adding compactors will provide much needed space for the CUIC to
continue to grow. To ensure the collection is in the highest scientific quality,
all non-sealing cabinets and drawers will be replaced, and two focal areas of
the collection in significant need of rehousing, curating, and updating of
taxonomy will be assessed and improved. These focal areas include the Odonata
(dragonflies and damselflies) and nest (gall and Hymenoptera) collections, as
both are currently stored in subpar curation conditions. During this process,
human and machine-readable barcodes will be added, and associated label data and
taxonomic information will be databased. The information for these focal
collections will be shared widely with the public and research community through
online, freely available databases, including
iDigBio.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.