* 2210527
* Cryogenic Neutral Atom Arrays for Quantum Processors
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Cindy Regal, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

In less than a century, quantum physics has grown from an interesting puzzle, to
a striking reality, to a source of revolutionary computational ideas. A computer
based upon the power of quantum physics will be able to solve certain tasks at
rates unmatched by classical computers, and measurement tasks will benefit from
the ability to harness correlations between quantum particles. However,
physicists and engineers face seemingly impossible tasks in assembling these
devices. Fully isolating thousands of single quantum particles and at the same
time introducing ways for them to interact is very difficult. The fragility of
entanglement means that the disturbance of just one of those particles can be a
catastrophic event. The goal of this project is to devise techniques to advance
isolation and control of neutral atoms in ‘tweezers’ made from focused laser
beams, a potential new platform for realizing many interacting quantum
particles. By operating at temperatures achieved with liquid cryogens, 4 degrees
above absolute zero, the atoms can held in traps for longer times, and highly-
excited atomic states, known as Rydberg states, can have longer lifetimes. The
proposed work will study quantum processing with Rydberg atoms focusing on gate
fidelity advances achievable with these advances. The work will encompass
graduate student training and impact on undergraduate education.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The bottom-up assembly of arrays of single atoms, their individual
control, and entangling mechanism such as Rydberg excitation have enabled new
perspectives on scalable and addressable sets of neutral atoms for quantum
computing. However, advances could soon saturate due to limitations in multiple
aspects of quantum coherence. Neutral atom platforms should aspire to the same,
and in some areas even better, control than is currently afforded by trapped
ions. One unique path for improvement in a few of the key metrics is embedding
the neutral atoms in a cryogenic system, where atoms can potentially be stored
in microscopic traps for hours and blackbody radiation is defined by a low
temperature environment. A new cryogenic apparatus has been developed based on a
closed-cycle cryostat that retains single-atom control of 87Rb through optical
tweezers. The proposed work will deploy and study this system for quantum
processing with Rydberg atoms, focusing on two-qubit gate fidelity advances
utilizing the cryogenic apparatus and through harnessing single atom cooling and
magic trapping conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.