* 2210558
* NSF-ANR: Physics of chromosomes through mechanical perturbations
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Leonid Mirny, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 02/28/2026
* USD 192,482.00

DNA molecules are not only carriers of genetic information but are also
exceedingly long polymers. These polymers (chromosomes) are fascinating physical
systems with quenched disorder, complex topological properties, and driven far
from equilibrium by active processes. In this project the investigators will
examine the Physics of Chromosomes by integrating approaches of theoretical and
experimental biophysics of two leading groups with complementary expertise in
Physics of Living Systems. The Coulon lab, at CNRS Paris, has pioneered the use
of mechanical perturbation of chromosomes by moving a genomic locus within a
living cell by external magnetic field. Such perturbations are methodologically
novel and can provide unique information about the physical state and dynamics
of chromosomes. Gaining insights from these measurements requires development of
physical models of chromosome organization. The Mirny lab, at MIT, has been
developing polymer models of chromosomes aiming to understand principles and
mechanisms underlying chromosomes folding. The Coulon and the Mirny labs have
been collaborating on this project and have published the first paper that
provides extensive Preliminary Data in support of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current understanding of chromosome organization is
largely based on data obtained through non-perturbative experiments. The ability
to apply forces and mechanically manipulate chromosomal loci in a living cell
provide a unique handle to answer long standing –but yet unanswered– questions:
i) What is the physical nature of chromatin? ii) How strong are molecular forces
in the chromatin? iii) What mechanism underlies maintenance of chromosomal
territories? This theory-driven mechanical probing of chromosomes will allow
understanding of the material nature of chromosomes and uncovering new physical
mechanisms underlying chromosome organization and dynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will pursue outreach activities that include
Public lectures in Boston and région Île-de-France given jointly by Mirny and
Coulon; development of a children's book on physics of chromosomes and the
nucleus, jointly with Actin Art association and the ‘Esprits Curieux’ initiative
of the Institut Curie; and the involvement of high school students in research
through MIT PRIMES program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.