* 2210963
* FET:Medium: Drug discovery using quantum machine learning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Nikolay Dokholyan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

Existing drug discovery pipelines take 10-15 years from initial idea to market
approval and cost billions of dollars. Extensive time is attributed to the
expansive search space and lack of efficient search tools, whereas the cost is
primarily attributed to inferior quality drug candidates that fail in clinical
trials. High-quality search tools are required to increase the variety and
quality of drug candidates that enter optimization. While high-performance
computing assisted by Artificial Intelligence (AI) can screen a large pool of
chemical compounds quickly to narrow down candidates that possess various
desirable properties, a very large fraction of potential space for candidate
drugs still goes unexplored. Furthermore, it is computationally expensive and
inefficient in sampling the desired probability distributions in solution space
which grows exponentially with the number of molecules. Quantum AI is more
expressive, i.e., it can model a target probability distribution even with a
limited number of qubits and parameters to sample from the unexplored regions of
the search space. However, their true potential and application in drug
discovery remain unexplored. This project will fill this void by creating
Quantum Machine Learning (QML) models that will employ noisy quantum computers.
If successful, this project will unleash new computational capabilities in
discovery applications, e.g., by selecting novel lead chemical compounds versus
important target proteins to treat diseases, such as cancer, by converging
multiple disciplines. The generic and extendible QML toolset will enable the use
of quantum computing for other discovery applications, e.g., material discovery.
This project will advance quantum computing and quantum AI by addressing the
scalability issue. It will develop an integrated introduction to quantum
computing and application for K-12 teachers, including a professional
development workshop and curricular materials that address local and national-
level standards in science and engineering education. It will also develop
undergraduate coursework supported by Penn State Quantum Minor program to
prepare a quantum-ready workforce. &lt;br/&gt;Researchers will develop DrugVAE
(a quantum variational autoencoder) to search and screen ligands and QDock (a
quantum docking engine) to validate the ligands and aid in screening. Various
scalability, application-level parallelization and training approaches for
distributed computing will also be developed. Researchers will optimize and
parallelize, map, and schedule the QML workloads from DrugVAE and QDock into
target quantum computers considering architectural and hardware constraints for
performance, resilience and cost. The output features will be provided to the
classical neural network as needed. Researchers will computationally validate
QML-generated compounds against slower, traditional docking as well as
experimentally determined binding affinities. The research will provide
materials for workforce development and undergraduate curriculum. Various tasks
will be synergized through novel techniques, such as QML-specific optimization,
target-specific search and refinement of model parameters, and optimization
based on validation results. This project will cover all levels of abstractions
to meet the end goal of drug discovery, e.g., program/circuit design,
optimization, circuit-to-architecture mapping, parallelization, and
scheduling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.