* 2210827
* Mean Field Asymptotics in Statistical Inference: Variational Approach, Multiple Testing, and Predictive Inference
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Song Mei, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 149,176.00

The era of big data poses unprecedented statistical and computational challenges
in high-dimensional statistical inference. One challenge is the “dual objective”
nature of various statistical inference tasks: statisticians hope to design
procedures that achieve near-optimal statistical efficiency and satisfy desired
validity guarantees even under model misspecification. Furthermore, many
statistical inference procedures involve a Bayesian component, and performing
exact Bayesian inference on large-scale datasets is computationally challenging.
This project will address these challenges in some high dimensional statistical
inference tasks. The techniques and methods developed in the project will
further advance the interplay between a broad range of areas including high-
dimensional statistics, statistical physics, optimization, information theory,
and statistical machine learning. Results from this project are anticipated to
have applicability in computational biology, computer vision, neuroscience,
natural language processing, and multiple testing. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be exposed to these results through involvement in the project,
and the results will be incorporated in courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to resolve statistical and computational challenges in multiple
testing and predictive inference, using the mean field asymptotic theory of
statistical inference. Focusing on a few stylized problems, the program consists
of three major research thrusts: 1) analyze the non-convex landscape of
Thouless-Anderson-Palmer (TAP) variational inference objective functions and
design efficient algorithms for optimizing these functions; 2) in the task of
false discovery rate (FDR) control, design procedures that maximize the number
of discoveries when models are correctly specified while controlling the
frequentist FDR even under model misspecification; and 3) in the task of
predictive inference, design procedures that give reasonably small prediction
sets while maintaining the frequentist validity of coverage in the presence of
model misspecification. This research will develop new techniques for studying
the mean field asymptotics of high-dimensional statistical models, which will
likely be applicable beyond the specific statistical models and will be relevant
in other areas of science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.