* 2210021
* SBIR Phase I:  Endoscopic Probe for Molecular Imaging and Diagnosis of Cancerous Prostate Pathologies
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Samuel Rosenthal, OPTAVE DIAGNOSTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve outcomes for patients with
prostate cancer, which affects about one in eight men and is the second
deadliest cancer among men. The current process for diagnosing prostate cancer
is imprecise and commonly involves multiple rounds of increasingly invasive,
uncomfortable, and expensive diagnostic tests. The medical technology proposed
in this project will reduce the number of unnecessary biopsies and expensive
magnetic resonance imaging tests (MRIs) performed to confirm diagnosis, and
enable improved ongoing monitoring of suspected or recovered prostate cancer
patients. The proposed device will help hospitals save valuable time and
decrease overall costs of care. The device will be designed to address the
specific needs of clinicians to accurately diagnose prostate cancer cases at an
earlier point in the diagnostic workflow, at a lower cost to health systems.
Additionally, the technology will be developed with a focus on cost
effectiveness, to ensure increased prostate cancer diagnostic capabilities are
accessible even in low-resource settings, such as rural communities and low- and
middle-income countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will result in a prototype of a new medical device that
uses photoacoustic imaging (PAI) and novel acoustic lens technology to aid in
detection and diagnosis of prostate cancer. Existing early testing options, such
as digital rectal exams, prostate-specific antigen tests, and transrectal
ultrasounds, are often inconclusive. The PAI endoscopic probe device proposed in
this project will offer hospitals and clinicians a new method for visualizing
potentially cancerous prostate tissues, with higher imaging contrast and
resolution than existing diagnostics. It will also offer an alternative to other
testing methods with known deficiencies that often result in misdiagnosis or
missed cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.