* 2210692
* UPGRADE of existing Element2 (ICPMS) and ACQUiSITION of a Replacement Laser Ablation System at the University of Maryland, Geology
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Richard Walker, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2023
* USD 336,623.00

This award will fund the refurbishment/upgrade of a 21-year-old Thermo Element 2
ICP-MS instrument in the Plasma Laboratory in the Department of Geology,
University of Maryland. It will also fund the acquisition of a laser ablation
system (LA). The system upgrade will include replacement of the software and
some electronic and vacuum components, making the system compatible with modern
versions of the same instrument and thus serviceable. This instrument upgrade in
combination with the new laser ablation system will continue the 21-year record
of research and education in the Plasma Laboratory. This support will permit the
laboratory to continue to address current NSF-sponsored research, as well as
serve future research and educational needs. This laboratory has, and will
maintain, a rich and diverse portfolio of research programs with these
instruments that covers topics spanning from the Earth’s core and mantle to the
crust, surface processes, and ocean-atmospheric interactions. Over its 21-year
history, the Plasma Laboratory has employed and supervised 38 undergraduate
research assistants, provided hands-on experience acquiring geochemical data for
28 senior thesis research projects, and has been a teaching facility used to
train students (~53 graduate, ~63 undergraduate, 6 high school) and numerous
post-docs on analytical methods. A number of these users have gone on to
establish and run their own research laboratories. The laboratory contributions
to fundamental knowledge, and those of our “offspring” scientists, have
significantly enhanced society’s base of fundamental and applied knowledge of
geological and non-geological processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This facility we
will be critical to the analysis of samples used to understand: (1) the
compositional nature and origin of the bulk silicate Earth, core, continental
crust, and modern mantle, (2) tracing fluid-rock interactions during
metamorphism and estimating pressure-temperature-time conditions during
metamorphism, (3) volatile cycling on planets and planetesimals, including the
Earth, Moon and Mars and their precursor planetesimals, (4) isotope dilution
measurements of highly siderophile elements, (5) analysis of forensic materials
(including historic poisoning cases and nuclear materials), dinosaur bones, new
pharmaceutical materials (including drug delivery systems), superconductors, and
next generation batteries, (6) tracing the evolution of the redox state of the
Earth’s mantle, (7) controls on volcano explosivity, the generation and
evolution of planetary atmospheres, and the storage and transport of volatiles
in planetary interiors, and (8) chromatographic column calibrations and
improving yields for high-precision isotopic
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.