* 2210367
* Probing the Early Cosmological History with Dark Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Rouzbeh Allahverdi, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 135,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Rouzbeh Allahverdi at the
University of New Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We know from observations that
only 15% of the matter in the universe is described by the Standard Model of
particle physics, while 85% is made of dark matter. However, the nature and
origin of dark matter remains one of the most profound problems at the interface
of particle physics and cosmology. A whole array of dark-matter detection
experiments, combined with experiments at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), will
help us discover the dark matter and establish its particle-physics origin. The
complementary information provided by these experiments will also play a crucial
role in examining how the present-day energy density of the dark matter was
determined. The research funded by this award will combine theoretical models
and observational signatures of dark matter to probe the early cosmological
history. Research in this area thus advances the national interest by promoting
the progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery
and understanding of new physical law. The research funded by this award will
also have significant broader impacts. Professor Allahverdi will involve
graduate and undergraduate students in his research, and thereby provide
critical training to junior physicists beginning research in this field. The PI
will additionally bring his results to a broader audience through job shadowing
and mentorship of high-school students, as well as by visiting schools and
giving public lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the research
supported by this award focuses on using dark matter to probe the thermal
history of the universe when it was a tiny fraction of a second old. It includes
investigations of dark-matter models and production mechanisms having a three-
fold goal. First, the PI wishes to use particle physics experiments along with
cosmological observations to reconstruct the thermal history of the early
universe. Second, the PI wishes to constrain novel dark-matter production
mechanisms by employing their distinct observable signatures. Third, the PI
wishes to study particle-physics models that not only accommodate dark matter
but also address the matter-antimatter asymmetry of the universe, and explore
the novel testable predictions of such models. To achieve these objectives,
Professor Allahverdi will build new particle-physics models of dark matter,
study dark-matter production in alternative thermal histories before one second,
and investigate the novel predictions of different production mechanisms that
can be tested in various experiments. These investigations will help us
determine the deeper theoretical origin of the DM and its embedding within a
fundamental theory. They will also enable us to probe the thermal history of the
universe that is out of the reach of our best observational probes --- namely
the cosmic microwave background and Big Bang nucleosynthesis --- at the present
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.