* 2210805
* Spectral methods for single and multiple graph inference
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Minh Tang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2025
* USD 150,000.00

Networks provide an elegant and natural representation for describing a
collection of entities and their interactions. Network data appear prominently
in many scientific domains such as ecology (food webs), sociology (social
networks), biology (protein-protein interactions), telecommunications, and
cybersecurity (cellular and computer networks). This project addresses two
important inference problems in network science. The first is to quantify the
similarities between a collection of networks for the purpose of classifying a
network into categories such as being typical or anomalous. The second is
dimension reduction for large and complex networks; this is essential in the
development of memory and computationally efficient algorithms for analyzing
network data. The investigator will complement theoretical and methodological
investigations by developing open-source software packages for network analysis,
and mentoring graduate students in statistics and data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program has three main aims. The
first is to study efficient parameters estimation for latent position graphs.
Given a latent position graph, the investigator will derive both uniform error
bounds and normal approximations for its estimated latent positions. The second
aim is to develop valid and robust two-sample testing procedures for latent
position graphs with a particular emphasis on the setting where the link
function is an unknown radial function. Combining these two aims allows
practitioners to compare graphs while ignoring irrelevant features such as
difference in edge densities or nodes relabeling in real data. The third aim is
to conduct perturbation analysis of randomized singular value decomposition
(RSVD) when used for dimension reduction of large, noisy graphs. Viewing the
observed adjacency matrix as arising from a general “signal-plus-noise”
framework, the investigator will derive upper bounds for the spectral and two-
to-infinity-norm distances between the approximate singular vectors of the
observed matrix and the true singular vectors of the signal matrix. These upper
bounds will depend on the signal-to-noise ratio and the number of power
iterations. Finally, as part of this third aim the investigator will also derive
uniform entrywise approximation for recovery of a low-rank signal matrix using
RSVD. Results established under this third aim can be applied to general matrix-
valued data beyond graphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.