* 2210510
* Magnetization manipulation and antiferromagnetic dynamics driven by spin current in Weyl semimetals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Simranjeet Singh, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2025
* USD 330,647.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Control of the magnetic properties
in solid-state materials is key to the operation of many devices that are
extensively used in daily life. Applications of such devices include data
storage in computers, data encryption on credit cards, and high-frequency signal
generation, to name a few. Conventionally, the control of magnetic state is
obtained by using an externally applied magnetic field, but this restricts the
physical footprint and operational speed of these devices. However, the control
of the magnetic state in ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic materials by other
means, such as utilizing electric field or charge current, can overcome these
limitations, and potentially realize more advanced nanoscale devices for
generating, transmitting, and processing signals at extremely high speeds.
However, the fundamental understanding of electric current-induced control and
spin dynamics of the magnetic state in ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic
materials is still in its infancy. This project will study an emergent quantum
solid-state material platform, namely Weyl semimetals, to demonstrate control of
the magnetic state through electric charge current. In these quantum materials,
the atoms are arranged in a special configuration that gives rise to unique
properties, which in turn allow for an efficient control of magnetic state in
ferromagnetic materials and induce spin dynamics in antiferromagnetic materials.
The success of this research project will lay the foundation to build a
comprehensive understanding of electric charge current-induced spin manipulation
and dynamics in magnetic materials, which will have far reaching implications
for the emerging field of quantum spintronics. Furthermore, this research
project will provide research experience, training, and active mentorship to
undergraduate students from a collaborating minority serving institution.
Connections with middle school and high school teachers in the greater
Pittsburgh area will be established to develop physics demonstrations with
detailed lesson plans on the topics of electricity and magnetism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An energy
efficient and field-free manipulation of the magnetic order, i.e., net
magnetization of a ferromagnet or Néel vector of an antiferromagnet, using
electric field induced spin current is key to realize advanced spintronic
applications that include ultra-fast magnetic memory devices, terahertz
oscillators, and magnonic devices for generation, transmission, and detection of
high-frequency signals. On the other hand, topological materials with lower
crystal symmetries, such as Weyl semimetals, host spin-momentum locked
electronic states that can lead to an efficient charge to spin transduction and
a plethora of other novel phenomena that are highly relevant for quantum
spintronics. This research project will utilize crystalline thin films of van
der Waals based Weyl semimetals and couple them with a variety of magnetic
systems to build atomically sharp superlattices for studying spin manipulation
and spin dynamics. The scientific objectives of this research project are two-
fold: (1) To obtain a time resolved and spatially resolved view on the
underlying mechanisms of field-free spin-orbit torque switching of magnetization
in semiconducting and insulating ferromagnets. (2) To study spin-current induced
Néel vector dynamics in easy plane antiferromagnets and subsequent spin-pumping
from antiferromagnets by exploiting out-of-plane oriented spin current in Weyl
semimetals. This research objective is aimed at demonstrating the working
principle of an antiferromagnetic oscillator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.