* 2210198
* EAGER: DCL: SaTC: Enabling Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Inoculation vs. education: the role of real time alerts and end-user overconfidence
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Rakesh Verma, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,908.00

Phishing is increasingly problematic in today’s society. Phishing vulnerability
is not limited to inexperienced persons. Even those with technological training
fall victim to phishing attacks. The research question to be addressed in this
project is whether inexperienced people and experts fall victim to phishing for
different reasons, and if so, how those different sources of vulnerability might
be addressed. Uncertainty and overconfidence, respectively, may characterize the
phishing vulnerabilities of persons with less versus more computer literacy. The
project team is studying phishing vulnerabilities, testing whether they
characterize people with different expertise and confidence, and deploying
interventions designed to address differently-caused phishing vulnerabilities.
The main interventions to be evaluated include psychological inoculation,
whereby people are exposed to repeated, weakened, and harmless phishing
experiences, and educational techniques in the form of anti-phishing
instructions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The first stage in the project is testing,
through controlled experiments, whether people with varying computer literacy,
and varying confidence, differ in their approach to phishing avoidance. The next
stage is to study the impact of different interventions, including variations on
psychological inoculation and anti-phishing instructions, and test how those
interventions are associated with persons who vary in their expertise and
confidence. A third step will be to develop and evaluate alerts that could be
triggered by potential phishing attacks. The identification of at-risk people
who could benefit from inoculation training or specialized instruction has the
potential for mitigating phishing and many other kinds of attacks on people. A
diverse set of students will be involved in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.