* 2210091
* EAGER: DCL: SaTC: Enabling Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Using NLP to Identify Suspicious Transactions in Omnichannel Online C2C Marketplaces
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Gisela Bichler, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 04/30/2024
* USD 314,284.00

Increasingly, people buy and sell goods and services directly from other people
via online marketplaces. While many online marketplaces enable transactions
among reputable buyers and sellers, some platforms are vulnerable to suspicious
transactions. This project investigates whether it is possible to automate the
detection of illegal goods or services within online marketplaces. First, the
project team will analyze the text of online advertisements and marketplace
policies to identify indicators of suspicious activity. Then, the team will
adapt the findings to a specific context to locate stolen motor vehicle parts
advertised via online marketplaces. Together, the work will lead to general ways
to identify signals of illegal online sales that can be used to help people
choose trustworthy marketplaces and avoid illicit actors. This project will also
provide law enforcement agencies and online marketplaces with insights to gather
evidence on illicit goods or services on those marketplaces.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research assesses the feasibility of modeling illegal
activity in online consumer-to-consumer (C2C) platforms, using platform
characteristics, seller profiles, and advertisements to prioritize
investigations using actionable intelligence extracted from open-source
information. The project is organized around three main steps. First, the
research team will combine knowledge from computer science, criminology, and
information systems to analyze online marketplace technology platform policies
and identify platform features, policies, and terms of service that make
platforms more vulnerable to criminal activity. Second, building on the
understanding of platform vulnerabilities developed in the first step, the
researchers will generate and train deep learning-based language models to
detect illicit online commerce. Finally, to assess the generalizability of the
identified markers, the investigators will apply the models to markets for motor
vehicle parts, a licit marketplace that sometimes includes sellers offering
stolen goods. This project establishes a cross-disciplinary partnership among a
diverse group of researchers from different institutions and academic
disciplines with collaborators from law enforcement and industry to develop
practical, actionable insights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.