* 2210333
* Explorations in High Energy Theory and Machine Learning
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Fabian Ruehle, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 150,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Fabian Ruehle at
Northeastern University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;String theory has evolved into
one of the most complex theories hitherto devised by mankind. It is the leading
candidate to describe our Universe, from the smallest to the largest scales.
Perhaps the most striking prediction of string theory is the existence of extra
dimensions beyond length, width, and height. Owing to experimental results from
particle colliders and cosmological observations, we know that these extra
dimensions have to be small. Nevertheless, they encode all observable physics.
Despite tremendous progress over the years, several questions remain unanswered.
What is the geometry of these extra dimensions? Can their properties be used to
rule out theories that seem consistent from our traditional three-dimensional
point of view? What do these extra dimensions teach us about the most extreme
environments in our Universe, such as near Black Holes? In answering these
questions, scientists face two obstacles. First, advanced mathematical tools are
needed in order to decode the implications of string theory. Second, even with
these tools, some of the resulting equations are too complicated to solve with
conventional techniques. As part of his research, Professor Ruehle will tackle
these long-standing open questions by capitalizing on recent advances within
search and optimization strategies in artificial intelligence and machine
learning, paired with theoretical advances in the field. This project is also
envisioned to have extensive broader impacts. Professor Ruehle will involve
graduate students in his research, and in this way train the next generation of
junior researchers in these important fields. The benefits and impact of recent
advances of machine learning and artificial intelligence on both our everyday
lives as well as in scientific research and discovery is remarkable and
therefore in the national interest. Such research also opens up new avenues for
inter- and multi-disciplinary research and collaborations. Indeed, such research
has not only produced techniques for classifying the properties of extra
dimensions but has even led to techniques for identifying biomarkers for severe
disease progression of COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically,
Professor Ruehle will use neural networks to describe metrics of
compactification manifolds with reduced holonomy or special structure. These
metrics are needed to solve the equations of motion of string theory. They enter
in observable data (such as Yukawa couplings and massive string excitations),
but also play an important role in more mathematical questions (for example
mirror symmetry, or non-calibrated cycles), which Ruehle will explore. Moreover,
Ruehle will develop and adapt search algorithms from data science, AI, and
quantum computing to derive intelligent search strategies for combinatorial
problems arising in string theory that cannot be tackled with conventional
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.